84.	  Within one month, when we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of this Organization, we will emphasize its merits, too often ill-appreciated, recall the services that it has always rendered in spite of all its setbacks and redefine the hopes which we still place in it as a founding Member. "Patience," said a famous French moralist, "is the art of hoping".
85.	But today, as this anniversary draws near, is it not our duty to proceed to a certain examination of our consciences without hiding any truth, without masking any reality, carefully avoiding giving lessons that we are less ready to receive and especially taking
9
for our criteria not the interest of any given country no matter how legitimate but the future, the duties and the opportunities of the international community that we claim, that we want to be?
86.	If I had hesitated to choose this path, the character of the statesmen whom we have happily chosen to preside over our work after Mrs. Angie Brooks-Randolph whose competence and authority all of us greatly appreciated would have been enough to suggest it to me. This statesman not only represents the moral strength of a legal tradition; the name he bears, and I say this with emotion, is associated with the history of the founding of an international community. His father, whom I knew in my youth, was twice President of the Assembly of the League of Nations and represented Norway at the San Francisco Conference, in which you yourself, Mr. President, did take part. Finally, you remind us of the indomitable courage which earned the victory over Nazism without which the very name of the United Nations would never have found expression.
87.	What qualities do we need today, if not boldness in the face of challenge, and faithfulness to the principles of the law, so that we may justify our existence, that is, in the long run and in spite of every thing, successfully to counter violence with equilibrium? I shall try neither to cover every topic nor to mention every continent, nor to define once again the attitude of my country with regard to crises which are threatening or shaking the world, but merely to reply to the question which, as we all know, as we all feel in our hearts, and as was said by all the speakers this morning, the people, all the peoples of the world, are asking themselves and asking us as the spectacular ceremonies approach next month: Why so much disappointment in the face of so much hope? Why let us speak plainly this gnawing sensation of impotence to which none of us is resigned?
88.	I will give my three answers before I justify them. None of them grant me this at least is dictated by concern, fear or resentments special to my country or to a group of countries. In mentioning them I am referring only to the principles which, a quarter of a century ago, gave birth to the Charter.
89.	In three sentences here they are: our weakness, first of all, is the void caused by the absence from among us of a large part of mankind. Our weakness, secondly, is the inadequate effort made by the most fortunate peoples in aiding the struggle of the least favored peoples against hunger, disease, stagnation; and, lastly, our weakness is the resignation to a certain division of power which, unless we take care, will perpetuate the split in the world and, under cover of opposing blocs, condemn the majority of nations which paid so dearly to win the pride of their independence to choose one hegemony or submit to it.
90.	Must we then, in the first place, take the universality of the United Nations for an illusion? What is actually an illusion is to believe that the Organization can perform its task while remaining incomplete. Our Secretary-General, to whom I wish to pay a just tribute here, has never been more worthy of his lofty function than recently when he asked us in effect: Shall we, under the pretext that the debate on the question of China has been going on for twenty years, behave as if it could go on for another twenty years?
91.	Let us consider this carefully. On the one hand, the whole world recognizes as has just been done in Oslo in particularly felicitous terms by ti.e democracies of northern Europe, whose heartening vitality I noted once again last week in Finland that only a political solution, a negotiated solution, can bring an end to the unjust, interminable drama which has bathed South-East Asia in blood. On the other hand, everybody recognizes that this political, negotiated solution requires the participation of China. Everybody deplores the fact that the United Nations cannot bring an end to a tragedy which scandalizes the conscience and common sense of the world because the majority of those whom it concerns above all are unable to bear witness here to their suffering, their ruin and their dead.
92.	However, the debate on which, in the long run, the end of this artificial state of affairs depends is postponed from one year to the next as if it were a scholastic disputation or an oratorical joust. Avoiding the issue prevents the United Nations from assuming its responsibilities and the People's Republic of China from exercising its own.
93.	The Soviet Union and we congratulate it on this has renewed its dialog with Peking. The United States, in turn, can only feel a little more, with every passing day and year, the desire to resume the dialog. If the General Assembly encouraged them either to persist or to commit themselves more resolutely to this task, it might well be that the dynamism of peace would be released in Asia. Then the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Organization could almost do without our speeches. It would be celebrated by the gratitude of the peoples of Viet-Nam, Cambodia and Laos, beloved by France, and for whom the President of the French Republic would at last no longer have to ask for justice.
94.	But it is not in Asia alone that the service of the truth presupposes the recognition of realities.
95.	The conclusion of a non-aggression treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union  is in itself an element of detente, understanding and co-operation one of the basic steps that General de Gaulle had wanted, announced and prepared. But, at this point, we have one more reason to welcome it. It brings us closer to the day when "the whole of Europe" that Mr. Georges Pompidou spoke about at The Hague Conference  will be present here in this Assembly. Let us not say that we are still far from this, but let us rather say that we are less far.
96.	However, when we think of the United Nations as it should be, we must not divert our attention from what it is. Now, this shows up another weakness. Of course, it is not responsible for the growing disparity between the standards of living and the conditions of existence of countries which make up this Organization. On the contrary, to its credit, it has emphasized, analyzed, sometimes revealed, this increase in iniquity. One would have to mention twenty names to pay a just tribute to the intelligence, depth and generosity of the reports and studies that have made it possible to map out the problems without hiding the difficulties. This is all to the good. And now? Well, now the time has come to harness the goodwill of States. The time has come to obtain from each one of them commitments equal to its capacities. What the preliminary work shows is that it is no longer possible to mention any real reason, any acceptable excuse, to further delay this moment.
97.	As the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development forecast last month at Geneva, the "year 2000, without new collective efforts, will see the share of the developing countries in world exports drop to 10 per cent". It is easy to understand that those countries cannot, without a certain bitterness, compare this prophecy with the sentence I noted in the last annual report of the World Bank: "The work of the commission headed by Mr. Lester Pearson on joint action for the development of the third world has given rise to wide-ranging discussions in official circles."
98.	Is there anyone here who could possibly believe that the stage of discussion even wide-ranging discussions should not be over? France recently defined the objectives of her new Plan. Figures and percentages will hardly be found in it. It is a rule of conduct which will not surprise economists. But we did make one exception: whatever the circumstances, credits devoted to aid to development will remain above 1 per cent of our gross national product. More than half of these credits will be absorbed by public aid which itself comprises more than 80 per cent in grants.
99.	Those who have been associated with the work of General de Gaulle, and, primarily, the present President of the Republic, believe that decolonization itself creates obligations. That is why and I say so weighing every word they are and expect to remain attentive to all requests which reach them from Africa. That is also why they feel authorized to say to you: may common action for the development of the third world become our mutual obsession at last.
100.	But serious as they may be, the weaknesses resulting from certain absences and a certain deficiency are at least known and, most often, admitted. No one considers that the collective effort in favor of the peoples who have the right to claim it is sufficient or satisfactory. No one can regard it as normal that a quarter of mankind is outside the United Nations. On the other hand there is a third danger of which less is said but which should be squarely faced the danger that threatens the balance of responsibilities on which the Charter, and therefore the United Nations itself, is founded. I repeat: the balance of responsibilities. It would disappear if the strongest Powers shirked their own responsibilities; it would equally be upset if they pretended to assume the responsibilities of others, or if others relinquished the responsibilities which their status as Members of the United Nations gives them. Hegemony, exclusive or shared, is the surest way of preventing the United Nations from breathing and therefore from acting.
101.	Three consequences flow from this double statement. First the dialog and rapprochement of the major Powers are desirable and beneficial. Secondly, the international community cannot have guardians. Thirdly, due to the very fact that they are immune to the temptation of guardianship, a special duty falls to the countries which, though not among the highest ranking Powers, are permanent members of the Security Council.
102.	Those three principles are fully applicable to the crisis in the Middle East. All of us welcome with relief the determination seen in the leaders of the two Powers which possess the most fearful strategic weapons to replace controversy by negotiation. As for France, we find involved, on the one hand, our oldest ally and, on the other, a great friendly country with which France has developed closer and closer bonds of co-operation. The President of the French Republic, who has surely not forgotten his reception by President Nixon, was a few months ago the guest of Washington. In a few days, he will be the guest of Moscow. When, in one of the most troubled areas of the world, the movement towards peace receives a new impetus from the dialog happily re-established between Moscow and Washington, it is only natural that we should rejoice about it. That is our first point.
103.	And here is the second. The more we consider it to be indispensable, in view of reappearing and growing threats, to do everything possible to ensure respect for the cease-fire and to do away with obstacles to negotiations, the more we see that the sharing of power or influence cannot form a basis for peace. "If the situation is disturbing for the bordering countries", a high-level Arab official, the Foreign Minister of Tunisia, recently said, "it is because it makes the Mediterranean one of the centers of encounter or of confrontation of the two greatest world Powers as was Europe during the fifties which means that its destiny is not completely its own". Now is not our basic maxim precisely this: that no one, except that country itself, may decide the fate of a nation?
104.	How, then, to move away from trusteeships and guardianships, even involuntary ones, without losing the advantage of beneficial rapprochements? The third and last point gives the reply. It is necessary that recommendations be drawn up not for the advantage of one State or one ethnic group, one religion or one culture, but in order to re-establish, in a region which has already given so much to mankind, a zone of cooperation between all ethnic groups, all religions, all cultures which exist there side by side, in the respect for boundaries and the rights of all the States. It is also necessary that these recommendations be mutual. That is, far from becoming a means for one State to put pressure upon another, they should propose procedures of implementation which would be both substantial and well-balanced for all the rules laid down by the Security Council resolution [242 (1967)], whether it be a question of withdrawal from conquered lands or guarantees of peace, freedom of navigation or the rights of the Palestinian refugees.
105.	Now who can permanently defend the spirit and letter of this resolution? Who can somehow be the permanent representative of the international community, if not precisely the whole formed by the perma-nent members of the Security Council? "The area of agreement between the Four is much wider than the area of disagreement", our Secretary-General rightly said at a recent press conference. At the same time he thus reminded us that the agreement of the Four is the true way to arrive at our goal without divesting the United Nations as a whole of the irreplaceable responsibilities it assumes and should continue to assume in that part of the world.
106.	Without naming them I have just mentioned two European countries, my own and the United Kingdom. It is not by chance that I link them. The Conference of The Hague, as you know, opened up a new chapter. In making public its decision to make its work irreversible, the European Economic Community showed not once but twice that it wanted to be neither exclusive nor inward-looking. It showed this first by opening itself to all European States which accept its rules and goals Britain as well as Ireland, Norway as well as Denmark, to mention only the present candidates. It showed this also by affirming that its mission prevented it from transforming itself into a bloc confronting other blocs. It is not only for itself that it wishes to be an independent center of progress and prosperity. Today, everyone can see that the building of Europe is in fact inseparable from European detente and thus from world peace.
107.	Moreover, the bonds of solidarity which, thanks to the Yaounde Conventions,  join it to Africa are only one example of the mission which a reconciled Europe can assume in the world. It is right that, from the shores of the Mediterranean to the whole of Latin America, people should turn towards that Europe and place their hopes in it. For it is known that, fortified by its own originality, it will certainly not threaten but rather encourage the independence of others.
108.	The celebration of the awe-inspiring anniversary of which I spoke at the beginning may have started last week when a wholesome and significant unanimity was reached in the Security Council [see resolution 286 (1970)] in denouncing, in the face of a new form of premeditated violence, the hijacking of aircraft as well as any other interference with international civil air travel, and reprisals against innocent people. Respect for human rights is not an obligation only for States but also for peoples;, groups, individuals and especially those who may have cause to invoke it.
109.	The same moral strength of the collective con-science should be brought to bear to find a remedy through specific steps to the inadequacy of the international protection of basic rights. One example, among so many others, comes to mind. I am thinking of those journalists on dangerous missions who have often, by their very objectivity, contributed to the freeing and liberation of unfortunate peoples and whose fearless, professional conscience has led them to an unfair death. As long ago as 1968, the International Congress of Montecatini turned to the United Nations to ensure that these indispensable witnesses should receive legal protection suitable to their mission. Our forthcoming discussions regarding respect for human rights in times of armed conflict should make it possible for us to respond to this appeal.
110.	But the protection of human rights is indivisible. It obliges every Member of the United Nations to condemn discrimination, first and foremost racial discrimination, apartheid, whatever the pretext or method. We have not forgotten the words which the President of the Federal Republic of Cameroon used in speaking about this in the General Assembly last year [1756th meeting]. He would have proved to us, had it been necessary, that respect for the Charter and concern for its effectiveness are in the long run the true means to fight for the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
111.	In truth, these principles on which our Organization is founded have lost none of their vitality and power of attraction in twenty-five years. These principles are evoked by peoples everywhere in the world to defend their independence or to obtain, at long last, the right freely to choose their destiny. These are the principles in which today's youth, restless, boisterous and demanding, is trying to find an ideal again, as quite recently the World Youth Assembly  showed us here.
112.	May so much assembled hope give us the strength to overcome our weaknesses. The enjoyment of the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights requires, first of all, that arms be silent. This is why, on the eve of a re-examination of our consciences, we are resolved are we not? to be worthy of the trust which people put in us, by placing more clarity, wisdom and boldness in the service of peace.



110.	 Mr. President, I should like first to say how glad I am to sit under you as President in this anniversary year. It is particularly appropriate, as we pass the quarter-century mark, that our President should be the representative of a State which has contributed so much to the United Nations and to the League of Nations before it; that he should have been a delegate at San Francisco; and that he should be one who has made so great a personal contribution to the analysis of that international law of which this Organization was intended to be the prime instrument.
111.	I should also like to say what a personal pleasure it is to me, after an absence of seven years from the United Nations, to find our SecretaryGeneral still at his post. Politicians come and go; the Secretary General remains. I am bound to say that that is the right way round.
112.	In what I have to say this morning, I start again where I left off seven years ago, talking about the rule of law.
113.	The commemorative session will be the right occasion for a general review, as we look back over our achievements and our failures since 1945. Two weeks ago I did not think that I would trouble this Assembly with an assessment, in view of the fact that my Prime Minister is coming here later on. But since then the attention of the world has been captured by a horrifying series of events.
114.	They began with a week of incidents which were properly described by our SecretaryGeneral as a "return to the law of the jungle". He was right. In the jungle there is fear; the law men know does not exist. In the same way, all people in the world have been frightened and lawful Governments have been almost helpless in the face of violence and threats of violence which are alien to the civilized world.
115.	If they had been isolated criminal acts, these events would not have deserved our attention here. But as it is, they have come as a portent to us a glimpse of the forces of lawlessness and anarchy that still exist a reminder of how very thin is the veneer of civilization on which we reply. These events therefore demand attention here in this General Assembly, above all, because they epitomize a danger which threatens the aim of every State, the aim of the United Nations and that is that law should rule both men and nations.
116.	This Organization was created to maintain the peace of the world by collective measures, and to provide for the peaceful settlement of disputes between States. The authors of the Charter of our United Nations did foresee one of the dangers ahead. That danger was the interference by force in the internal affairs of one country by another. But one development which the authors of the Charter did not anticipate was that the peace should be threatened by armed forces outside their Government's control. The anarchy produced by force in that guise can be just as wrecking to peace as direct aggression.
117.	When I last spoke to the Assembly, I felt optimistic. It seemed to me that the cold war might be drawing to an end. I recalled a television broadcast which I had made in Moscow at Mr. Gromyko's invitation to the people of the Soviet Union, when I said that a renunciation by the Soviet Government of the use of war and force to impose a political doctrine was the key which would open the way to genuine coexistence.
118.	Looking back over those seven years, we can note that there have been some very serious setbacks to that optimism, but nevertheless it seems partially to have been justified. The new willingness to negotiate which we had then begun to perceive has continued, and through negotiation some of the darkest of the clouds which used to menace us have started to lift.
If the United States and the Soviet Union can reach agreement on limitations to their nuclear arsenals, that will be a long step forward. I say that, even as a European on whom the missiles will still be concentrated. But we hope for the success of the strategic arms limitation talks. It will not free us from the recurring nightmare of global destruction. That possibility will remain as long as States have access to the ultimate weapons. But such an agreement could slow down the growth of the means of destruction, and so give new life to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which has up to now been almost totally frustrated. On its ability to achieve positive results much of the happiness and, it may be, the survival of man hangs.
119.	Other negotiations are taking place on issues which have threatened peace in Europe since 1945. There is the recent treaty between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany", and the Federal Republic's negotiations with its other neighbors to the East. They hold the key to constructive coexistence in Europe.
120.	The test, of course, as always, is not in words but deeds, and in that area Berlin is still the key to real coexistence. If we cannot agree to take the humanitarian step of lowering the barriers between two halves of a city, what hope is there for two halves of the European continent to live in peace? Berlin therefore will be the touchstone of the will of the peoples of Europe to achieve detente between East and West, It was in Berlin that the ordeal of 1939 to 1945 ended for Europe; and it is in Berlin that Europe is still waiting for a release from the aftermath of war and the beginning of a peace which is real.
121.	No one should underestimate the importance of such a release. Europe cannot throw stones at others. It was in wars which spread from Europe over the whole world that this Organization and its predecessor were both conceived. But a new Western Europe is emerging now, and as Mr. Schumann said here last Friday [1842nd meeting, this Europe will inevitably be more outward-looking a more powerful center of economic growth carrying a fertilizing process far outside the borders of that particular continent. That is why our negotiations in Europe have a significance for every country represented here.
122.	We must note with honesty that all these negotiations are going on outside the framework of the United Nations. Nevertheless, their importance is fundamental to us here. When our predecessors at San Francisco framed the Charter, they based their hopes of peace on the collective determination of what were then the major Powers, and there are two ways in which these hopes have since been undermined.
123.	The first, which has already been mentioned by one or two speakers this morning, is that not all the major Powers are represented in the United Nations. This has made it undoubtedly more difficult for us to tackle effectively in this forum some of the most pressing and dangerous problems that trouble the
c Signed in Moscow on 12 August 1970.
world. I am thinking as have others, and as did Mr. Schumann of China. The Chinese are increasingly involved in those very situations around the world which engage our attention here.
124.	If the representatives of Peking were seated here their influence would be greatly felt. I cannot forecast what it would mean. They could well, by the rigidity of their political doctrine, make our tasks more difficult. But they have more than many to gain from expanding trade, from prosperity and from interdependence. They could add immensely if they chose, along with the rest of us, to real coexistence. Their intentions, in the opinion of the British Government, should be put to the proof in this assembly of nations.
125.	The second disappointment for the hopes of 1945 has, very simply, been that it has so seldom been possible for the major Powers to reach a collective view on any important issue of world politics. Until now, our collective postures have at best been negative. That is why the negotiations in Helsinki, in Vienna and in Berlin are so important for us here in the United Nations. Because if the 1960s saw the beginning of an era of negotiation, the 1970s could see at last the beginning of an era of collective action for the maintenance of peace collective action based on the common desire of the most powerful nations in the world to work together for political stability and for the settlement of disputes. That opportunity is there.
126.	The authors of the Charter assumed harmony between the leading Powers. But, of course, the ink was scarcely dry on the signatures of the Charter before that hope and trust were falsified. The lesson of the years since then is unmistakable, and it is that there can be no collective action without a collective aim and a common interest. If there does begin to emerge at last, out of all the negotiations now in progress, a common interest in peace and stability, it will transform our work in the next Twenty-five years, both in the Security Council and in the Assembly of this Organization, and that transformation would immediately be reflected in the relationship between countries in many parts of the world.
127.	There is one challenge, above all, which such determination would help us to meet. Provided a balance of strength a balance of terror, if you like is kept, the old-fashioned war of the Charter is a receding threat. States are less inclined today to pursue their political objectives through alliance and ultimatum, through mobilization and declared belligerency. To this extent, one of the ideals of San Francisco is being realized, even though this has been due in part and the admission is shameful in a civilized world at this time to the fearsome growth in the destructiveness of total war.
128.	Nevertheless, in many parts of the world today men are fighting. Victims are falling to the bullet, the shell and the grenade. All too often those victims are innocent civilian bystanders, and it is not much comfort to the widow or the orphan that no war has been declared. It is time for us in this Assembly squarely to face the fundamental, unacceptable dangers of condoning those who take the law into their own hands. We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down and once again to submit themselves to the rule of law.
129.	There is and it will be readily perceived by this Assembly and it has been touched upon by several speakers a cruel dilemma here. For force is so dreadful a weapon in modern terms that one has to add: "... lay down their arms, even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice".
130.	The Charter of the United Nations visualized this dilemma. Our predecessors insisted on the proclamation of human rights consistent with the dignity of man, of which the representatives of Gambia and Zambia both spoke just now. And it is undoubtedly our duty to do all we can by example to secure that countries practice social justice. There are today, and we have heard them mentioned, political systems where social injustice rules, and it is right that they should be exposed, whether it is suffering under communism, or suffering under apartheid, or suffering under any other of the creeds which do not square with the practices of true democracy.
131.	But the authors of the Charter perceived another and an equal truth; that if the nations tried to impose upon each other their own notions of justice and to do it by force, that would be the finish of international order. That is why an appeal to arms, except for defense against external aggression, was expressly forbidden under our rules. If that was right then, it is a hundred times more so now. For if the end can justify the means, then more and more groups of unknown men will take up arms; they will put themselves above and beyond the law and, what is more, they will put themselves above the legal Governments of countries represented here.
132.	Kidnapping and hijacking make that lesson plain and the nations must deal with them. In the case of the. hijackers, the duty of individual Governments is clear. We should all ratify the Tokyo Convention  and support the new Convention at the forthcoming Hague Conference. We should all make hijacking a crime in our own countries, and allow it to be punished by any Government in whose territory a hijacked aircraft lands. If we could agree on these and other measures which may result from the international conference now to be held, perhaps this new and dreadful illegality could be brought under control. It is, however, a most vivid and contemporary example of how force used on a small scale can spread its repercussions far and wide, and when that happens in this modem world it is almost always the innocent who are the victims.
133.	But the dangers of the overspill of force go far beyond hijacking. This week we have an example before us of how people, who act sincerely in the name of justice as they see it and take to arms, can start a bloody widespread war beyond the control of legal Governments.
134.	After Twenty- years of intolerance and bloodshed in the Middle East, the hopes of coexistence in place of belligerency began to grow. We took a British initiative, and as a result of it we have now a Security Council resolution which sets out the essential terms of a settlement. A Special Representative for the Middle East has been appointed in whom we all have full confidence. In that forum, the four Powers in New York, we in Britain are ready to play a full part. Mr. Maurice Schumann last week [ibidj gave a most penetrating analysis of this work, which was started by his Government, and so I need not repeat what he said. The world began to breathe again when, on the United States initiative which the rest of us support, a ceasefire was agreed upon.
135.	But there has been a breakdown, which could be fatal. Violations of the conditions for an end to the fighting have been alleged. I am not judging that issue today, except to say this, that the minimum basis of trust has, for the moment, been destroyed and ways must be found to repair it. Otherwise we shall get back into the situation where we were a few weeks ago, with the danger of the Middle Eastern conflict always spreading to something much wider than a battle or confrontation between Israel and Egypt.
136.	But all this ambition for the greater peace and security of the area has been overlaid by the civil war in Jordan and it is a doubly tragic development. These refugees in whose interest this Organization has worked so hard now find themselves not only in conflict with the Government of a country which has given them refuge; they are also in declared and violent opposition to a settlement whose basic elements have been endorsed by the Security Council of the United Nations.
137.	The degree of desperation to which these people have been driven is, in some way, a measure of the failure of our Organization over the years to solve this problem in which it has been so deeply engaged. But the use of force to try and solve it has already left a deep scar on Arabia.
138.	The immediate priority must be to make an end to the tragic strife in Jordan and in that context we can welcome the apparent withdrawal of foreign intervention yesterday from Jordanian soil and to ensure humanitarian treatment for all those who have been wounded or made homeless by the conflict. We are relying on the Arab Governments to achieve these minimum objectives.
139.	The larger task, though, is still before us, and the events of the past two weeks have only added to its dimensions and complexity. The surest basis for any hope of settlement in the end must still be this; that all those concerned will support our efforts here in the United Nations to achieve and guarantee a peace that will bring security and justice to those concerned.
140.	It was that consensus which so recently seemed to be bringing a settlement within our reach; it is that consensus alone which can enable the United Nations to reach any major achievement; and it is that consensus alone which can resolve the tragic history of the last generation for all the people who live in that area of violence, intolerance and hate.
141. But there is another condition which is even more fundamental and which has also been underlined this month in Jordan. The truth is, and this must be understood by the legally established Governments of the world, whether we live in Europe, or Africa, or the Americas, or Asia, that force to achieve political ends can never pay, in the modern world, a dividend in terms of justice and peace.
142. Our theme for the next Twenty-five years is fundamentally the same as the last. It is to outlaw force; it is to sustain law. And because in recent weeks we have got somewhere near to looking into the abyss of what international anarchy can mean, we must give a new sense of urgency to our counsels in the United Nations and in this Assembly.
40.	 Mr. President, I offer you our congratulations on your election as the President of the current session of the General Assembly. You represent Norway, a country which can take pride in its reputation as peaceful, just and progressive. Your personal qualifications and your family's dedication to international effort are well known. I should also like to express our appreciation of the services of your distinguished predecessor, Mrs. Angie Brooks Randolph. I would also repeat our admiration for U Thant, whose skill and dedication have won him our respect.
41.	Today is Mahatma Gandhi's one-hundred-first birthday, and we in India will take a fresh pledge to dedicate ourselves once again to the ideals for which the Mahatma lived and died, peace and nonviolence being the foremost among them. We may not fully succeed in living up to his ideals but we must continue to try.
42.	There are many developments in India which give us satisfaction. Our people are expecting a better life through our development plans. We have had a sizable increase in agricultural and industrial production. Our trade is also showing signs of improvement. India has once again demonstrated its faith in full-fledged democracy. Alongside this there is a growing desire of the common man to share more equitably in the distribution of national wealth.
43.	twenty-two days ago a great conference ended at Lusaka, and in 22 days from now we shall be celebrating the signing of the Charter of the United Nations. The Conference of Lusaka owes much of its success to the efforts and organization undertaken by the Government and people of Zambia, and once again we should like to thank them. The final declarations and resolution s of that Conference are being circulated as United Nations documents. They represent the consensus of 53 Members of the United Nations, representing about half the human race. I would urge that everyone read them.
44.	The Conference at Lusaka highlighted several key points. These are: international peace and security, peaceful coexistence and friendly relations, solution of international problems by negotiations, the value of the United Nations as a universal forum, decolonization, development, disarmament and the pursuit of the principles of nonalignment. In order to fulfill the objectives we subscribed to at Lusaka, we seek the widest support and cooperation of the Members of the United Nations.
45.	In assessing the achievements of the United Nations over the past 25 years, the major factor that strikes us is that, while another world war has been avoided, insecurity still prevails and that, while tension between the great Powers has eased and negotiations between them in certain fields have begun developments which are welcome armed conflicts are still raging in many parts of the world. This situation requires attention from the world community. A positive step in that direction that has been taken is the adoption by the Sixth Committee last week [1184th meeting] of the Declaration on Principles of international law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [A 18082, para. 8]. A further step to strengthen the edifice of peace that this Assembly could take is to adopt a declaration on the strengthening of international peace and security.
46.	Such a declaration should particularly include prohibition of the threat or use of force to settle international differences, scrupulous respect for existing international frontiers, inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by military conquest, settlement of disputes exclusively by peaceful means, regional cooperation, reduction of the gap between the developing and the developed countries, disarmament, and the right of self-determination for people under racist and colonial regimes.
47.	The developing countries particularly face innumerable threats to their independence and identity. They also face impediments in their economic development. Pressures continue from countries better organized, better developed and better equipped militarily. This has come to be known as neocolonialism and one of our efforts in the coming years should be to arrest these trends. In this context may I draw your attention to what our Prime Minister said at Lusaka about intellectual and cultural emancipation. She said:
"Those who dominated the world's political affairs and manned its economic controls also imposed a monopoly of ideas. For years we accepted their values, their image of the world and, strangely enough, even of ourselves. Whether we liked it or not, we have been pushed into postures of imitation. We have now to break away from borrowed models of development and evolve models of the worthwhile life, which is more relevant to our conditions not necessarily as a group but as individual countries with distinctive personalities."
48.	There has been a great deal of success in the United Nations program for bringing new territories and new countries to independence, but much remains to be done. Portuguese colonialism in Africa, South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia, defiance by the racist regime in Rhodesia and the continued colonial status of a large number of territories and areas remind us of how much more needs to be done.
49.	South Africa denies the fundamental rights to the majority of its citizens and its policy of apartheid poses a threat to the peace. The alliance which has emerged there between the forces of colonialism and racism in an effort to preserve "white supremacy" is an affront. We deplore the attitudes and actions of certain countries which encourage the regimes in Salisbury, Pretoria and in the Portuguese possessions.
50.	We are concerned at the declared intention of the Government of the United Kingdom to resume the sale of arms to South Africa. Any accretion to the military strength of South Africa will increase the threat not only to the neighboring countries in Africa, but also to the Indian Ocean area. We should like this area to be a zone of peace free from great Power rivalry.
51.	Much has been said about the United Nations peacemaking and peacekeeping operations. We believe that in the changing and evolving political scene of the world, the United Nations should occupy a central place. The expectation of the Charter that in the field of peace and security the great Powers would work in concert has not, unfortunately, materialized,. We hope that in the coming years this cooperation will be forthcoming for the benefit of all.
52.	We believe that in order to bring about a better atmosphere and eliminate many difficulties which persist it will be necessary to give all Members in the United Nations a feeling of participation in all decisions that may be made. Whether it be the issues of war and peace, economic development or independence and sovereignty, all Member States should participate in decision making. We welcome the cooperation among the great Powers, but are anxious that whatever decisions they may arrive at should be subject to discussion among all of us and that no decision should be implemented until it has received significant support, or consensus, if you like, of the United Nations as a whole.
53.	We regret that the universality of membership of the United Nations has not been achieved. In particular, there is a general realization that without the rightful participation of the People's Republic of China this Organization will continue to face difficulties in solving several basic problems.
54.	It is a matter of concern that the United Nations and the SecretaryGeneral have been handicapped for lack of adequate funds. We would, therefore, urge that all Members should cooperate in ensuring that the important problems in various fields undertaken by the United Nations do not suffer for paucity of funds. The Indian delegation will do whatever it can to strengthen the hands of the SecretaryGeneral in this respect. Equally, we are concerned about our procedures and methods of work. We would support any steps which may be suggested to bring about improvements in these matters. We attach great importance to suitable geographical distribution, not merely for the Organization as a whole, but in all its departments and at all levels.
55.	We consider that the Charter, if faithfully implemented, would overcome many difficulties which the Organization faces. Mr. Lester Pearson, a noted winner of the Nobel Peace Prize and a former Prime Minister of Canada, said recently that "It is the sheerest hypocrisy for Governments to flee from their own responsibilities by blaming the world Organization". We regret that it is becoming increasingly a fashion to denigrate the importance of the United Nations by what Mr. Pearson calls the tendency of Governements "to flee from their own responsibilities".
56.	India has made its contribution to the various United Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope that the differences on the initiation, control and financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations will be speedily resolved so that the United Nations can contribute more effectively to preserving peace. India accepts the principle of strengthening the machinery of peacekeeping by the United Nations and would consider concrete action after the modalities have been agreed upon.
57.	General and complete disarmament under international control is even more urgent today. The nuclear arms race and innovations in sophisticated delivery systems are making life on the planet daily more precarious. It deflects resources and energies from constructive work. It also leads to deadly competition, military blocs and spheres of influence.
58.	The Indian delegation will strive to ensure the success of the Disarmament Decade through a comprehensive program of disarmament for the next 10 years. We must concentrate our attention on general and complete disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament. We realize that it may not be possible to achieve progress all at once and that collateral measures are expedient. We are aware of the tremendous contribution which the technology of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including peaceful nuclear explosions, can make to the economy of the developing world. The benefits of this technology should be available to all States without any discrimination. At Lusaka the nonaligned nations indicated a general order of priorities which should be followed in drawing up the program for the Disarmament Decade.
59.	It is obvious that measures of nuclear disarmament such as cut off in the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes, a comprehensive test ban, reduction and destruction of stockpiles of nuclear weapons and so forth, should receive the highest priority. The next priority should be for other measures in the disarmament field, such as an agreement prohibiting the development, production and stockpiling of chemical and biological weapons and providing for their elimination from the arsenals of all nations.
60.	I should like to refer briefly to the de-nuclearization draft treaty relating to the seabed and ocean floor . The approval of the agreement on non-emplacement of weapons of mass destruction on the seabed beyond the twelve mile limit is to be welcomed, but it is only a limited disarmament measure in this field.
61.	My delegation is convinced that the seabed and the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that the potential wealth of the area and its resources should be developed and used for the benefit of mankind as a whole. I should like to appeal to all representatives to make a sincere and determined effort to define the regime of the seas and to create an international machinery to regulate it before a mad rush to expropriate the resources of this last frontier sets in.
62.	As regards the conference on the law of the sea, my delegation supports the viewpoints expressed at the nonaligned summit in favor of convening a conference on the law of the sea at an early date, after adequate preparations have been made for it by a preparatory committee. We are of the opinion that all the questions, namely, the regimes of the high seas, the continental shelf, the territorial sea and the contiguous zone, fishing and conservation of the living resources of the high seas, etc., should be dealt with at the same time in a comprehensive manner, rather than in a piecemeal fashion.
63.	On the occasion of this twenty-fifth anniversary session of the United Nations we can derive some satisfaction from the contribution of this Organization in placing economic cooperation for development on a sound, rational and dynamic basis. We have a long way to go, however, in order to realize the fundamental objectives of the Charter for creating conditions of stability and wellbeing and for ensuring a minimum standard of living necessary for human worth and dignity.
64.	The gap separating the affluent and the poor nations has been widening rapidly; this is a serious threat to the independence of the developing countries and to international peace and security. Some of the recent trends in the field of international economic cooperation indicate that there has been a retreat from the high ideals of 1950s. Despite the endeavors of the developing countries to contribute their due and rightful share in the world economic life, the process of their continuous alienation from the mainstream of the world economy remains unabated.
65.	India views with favor, and looks forward with great expectation, to the effort of the international community to adopt an international development strategy for the seventies as a basis for solving the problem of poverty in a concerted manner and on a rational and comprehensive basis. My delegation would, therefore, commend to the Assembly the strong recommendation of the nonaligned nations that the General Assembly, at its commemorative session, should adopt a declaration on international development strategy for the 1970s.
66.	Such a concept does not admit of halfhearted measures undertaken in an isolated manner. What we need is a definition of goals and objectives and time bound policy measures to achieve them. The adoption of a mere declaratory resolution by the General Assembly, launching the Second United Nations
Development Decade, would not I repeat, not represent any point of departure, and hence our plea for a strategy of development which not only would provide for policy measures to enable the developing countries to overcome their current economic difficulties, but would also be l decisive move towards the objective of restructuring international economic relations on a just and equitable basis.
67.	The primary task for the implementation of the strategy would rest on the developing countries themselves. One of the most hopeful features of the past decade has been the determination shown by the developing countries to try to achieve economic and social progress through their own efforts. At the same time they have progressed also towards broadening and diversifying economic relations among themselves, with a view to imparting strength, to their national endeavors. It is our sincere hope that, consistent with the commitments undertaken by the developed countries in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other forums, and as reflected in the draft international development strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [A',7982, para. 16] now under consideration by the General Assembly, the developed countries will assist in the implementation of concrete and specific schemes to be put forward by developing countries in the field of economic cooperation, and regional and sub regional integration among themselves.
68.	While we attempt to build the edifice of a secure peace at the United Nations we cannot overlook the conflicts that are currently raging in the world. The situation in VietNam continues to cause us deep concern. We recognize that all parties to the conflict have declared their adherence to the Geneva Agreements and their desire to achieve a peaceful solution in VietNam. The cessation of the bombing of the Democratic Republic of VietNam has been appreciated generally, as also the desire of all sides to continue the talks in Paris to find a peaceful settlement. In our view those talks can progress if there is an indication that all foreign forces will be withdrawn from VietNam. The United States Government already has withdrawn some troops, and we believe that a firm timetable, together with a date for final withdrawal, will help the negotiations in Paris. A broad based Government, comprising all elements of South VietNam, would be another factor which could contribute to the success of the negotiations.
69.	The eruption of fighting in Cambodia has increased the tension in that area. We earnestly hope that the people of Cambodia, with whom the Indian people have historic ties of culture and friendship, will be able to overcome all their internal difficulties and will be allowed to live in peace and friendship with their neighbors, without any interference from outside.
70.	In Laos the proposed negotiations between the parties are not making much headway.
71.	The conflict in the States of Indo-China has brought much distress and suffering to their people.
As a result of this series of conflicts the people of those countries have suffered grievously through death and destruction over the years. India has an abiding interest in peace and stability in that area. Everything should be done to put an end to this human misery.
72.	At present it would be difficult to discuss separately the problems of the States of Indo-China, and we believe that once the fighting in Indo-China is stopped it would be necessary to have an international conference to resolve the complex situation now gripping those States. India is prepared to join other States and interested parties in working out arrangements to ensure respect for the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and neutrality of all the States of Indo-China.
73.	West Asia is another region which is torn by bitter conflict and has not seen peace for many years. Israel continues to occupy large Arab territories seized in the 1967 conflict from which they must withdraw. The human problem of Arab refugees exiled from their homeland cannot be ignored and the just rights of the Palestinian people must be respected.
74.	The determination of the international community to take concrete steps to respect and protect the just and reasonable rights of the Palestinian people would provide the most effective and durable check against many desperate measures, including hijacking, which we all deplore and which cause much needless suffering to so many innocent people. We are glad that all the hostages have been released.
75.	The foundations of a just and lasting peace in West Asia were laid three years ago when the Security Council adopted resolution 242 (1967). This resolution must be fully implemented. My delegation hopes that the talks under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral's Special Representative will take place without further delay or procrastination. We share the general concern for peace in this area and hope that the proposed talks will result in the implementation of the Security Council resolution of 1967 and a just and lasting peace in the area.
76.	While conflict and tension continue in Asia, there have been certain positive developments in Europe which we welcome. I refer to the nonaggression Treaty recently signed between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany.  We hope that this development will open the way for further agreements to strengthen security in Europe. I should also like to express the hope that the bilateral talks between the United States and the Soviet Union on the limitation of strategic arms will bear fruit. This will not only be an important arms limitation measure but also a positive contribution to the general relaxation of tension in the world.
77.	International relations are entering a phase characterized by increasing interdependence on the one hand and the desire of States to pursue independent policies on the other. Scientific and technological innovations, rapid communication, increased commerce and ecological considerations are lowering the barriers between States and encouraging cooperation. Side by side, the international community remains separated by political, economic and racial barriers and prejudices; the weak continue to live in the shadow of the more powerful, and neither peace nor prosperity nor the right to independence and equality have yet become the integral attributes of all mankind. The United Nations is at the center of the world, attempting to restrain the aggressor, fighting greed and prejudice and promoting international cooperation on a just and equal basis.
78.	I am certain that the Heads of State and Government attending the commemorative session, beginning in a fortnight's time, will give the requisite lead to make our Organization more effective.
79.	The world today seems full of strife. Conflicts and conflagrations are unfortunately continuing. This naturally saddens us all especially when we meet to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. However, the situation is not entirely full of gloom and despair. Let us not fail to take note of the many areas in which significant progress towards peace and prosperity is being made. World peace has been maintained for a quarter of a century even though we have been unable to stop local wars. The pace of development in many parts of the world is gathering momentum. The threat of starvation has been lifted. The production of food grains in countries like India is not only matching current needs but also rising faster than the growth in the population. Each year more and more countries are throwing off the colonial yoke and declaring their determination to play their full part as independent, free nations.
80.	As the United Nations completes its twenty-fifth year, we can look to the future, not with despair and despondency but with hope and confidence.




93.	: Mr. President, your country, Norway, has a warm place in Israel's heart. Our common sacrifice drew our peoples together in the darkness of the Nazi age, and friendship has lit up every road that we have trodden ever since. Your erudition and integrity enlarge the respect which your country's name evokes across the world. In carrying out your charge you have before you the recent example of your predecessor, Mrs. Angie BrooksRandolph, who graced henPresidency with charm, originality and deep international convictions.
94.	The twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly has been chosen as a commemorative occasion. What we need most is not a festive celebration but a lucid exercise in self-criticism. The United Nations has fallen on hard days. Its resonance is diminished and its flame is burning low. It exerts no more than a marginal influence on the main issues of conflict in our times, and the central currents of international thought and action flow outside its walls. There is a sharp paradox in that turn of fortune, for there has never been a greater objective need for a unitary framework of international relations to express the common interest of mankind. For the first time in history distance has become irrelevant, and all peoples are bound together in danger and opportunity. Thus, international institutions seem to be declining in the very conditions which logically favor their success. The United Nations should be asking itself with implacable candor: "what went wrong?".
95.	The trouble lies, of course, mainly in the discordant policies of the States which compose international society. But this does not absolve the Organization from the duty to analyze its own experience and to take a rational and effective view of its priorities and procedures in the coming years. This Organization is young in relation to the immensity of the vision which it serves. Yet the rhythm of change has been so intense that the world in which the United Nations was born now belongs to receding memory. There is urgent need for Governments to determine the place which the United Nations occupies in their policies, and for the United Nations itself to modernize its concepts, structures, and its methods of operation. Only thus will the gap between the brilliant hope and the harsh reality be reduced.
96.	The main international preoccupation is now focused on the region where the Arab and Israeli nations were born and in which they must forever live side by side. In the summer of 1967 the Security Council and the General Assembly were the inactive spectators of a war that they did nothing to prevent. In recent weeks, they have watched a Member State in the Middle East pass through its most destructive and agonizing ordeal. It may be that in its present strength and condition our Organization is unable to restrain violence and ensure security as its Charter envisaged. But it need not renounce its role as the central forum from which the policies of its Members may be communicated to the opinion of the world. In that spirit I come to this rostrum to state Israel's views on the tensions which convulse our region and hang heavy on the conscience and concern of all mankind.
97.	The point of reference is still the unforgotten drama of 1967. Forty months have passed since a resolute attempt was made to bring about the destruction of Israel's peace, sovereignty and very life through the strangling grip of belligerency, blockade, encirclement and aggressive assault. Israel's policy is still dominated by the recollection of the brief moment when its extinction was a real and vivid prospect. The defeat of that attempt by its solitary effort and independent sacrifice is inscribed on Israel's unfailing memory. Beyond its place in Israel's history, that victory was a landmark in the human journey towards justice, law and peace. We still recall the relief and consolation which gripped the enlightened world when Israel tore the strangling fingers from its throat.
98.	Israel remembers. It cannot forget; it cannot forget the horror from which it barely escaped or the sense of salvation which came from its successful resistance. From then until now our national policy has been inspired by two central purposes: to build a structure of permanent peace with the neighboring States, if their policy makes that possible, and, in any case, to avoid a return to the conditions of anarchy and vulnerability out of which the war exploded.
99.	In its tense debates during 1967, the United Nations developed the contours of an international policy designed to meet the new conditions created by the 1967 war. It rejected all proposals for reproducing the situation which had led to one war and which, if renewed, would lead inevitably to another. It voted down five proposals for a return to the old armistice lines, and in November 1967 it called for the establishment of a just and lasting peace, based on the total renunciation of belligerency and war, the liquidation of maritime blockade and hostile acts, and the explicit recognition by the Arab States and Israel of each other's sovereignty, independence and national identity. It also called for the establishment of "secure and recognized boundaries". These have never existed in our region; they must be established by agreement for the first time.
100.	The simple theme of this international policy was that the structure of peace should be built by agreement between the States of the Middle East. An international representative, held in universal trust, was appointed to assist the parties in the promotion of that agreement. Moreover, a ceasefire had been proposed by the Security Council and accepted by the parties on the morrow of the war. According to its terms, the ceasefire was to be unconditional, of indefinite duration, and could not be legitimately set aside before the attainment of permanent peace.
101.	In its sessions since 1967 the General Assembly has reviewed successive attempts to bring about agreement on the establishment of a final peace Now and then a prospect has glowed briefly, only W be extinguished almost before it could be discerned. But by the summer of this year the perils were great enough to compel new thinking and new effort on many sides. In March 1969 President Nasser had unilaterally repudiated his country's agreement to maintain the ceasefire. The resultant warfare across the Suez Canal was henceforward constant, destructive and of growing intensity. And it was achieving no purpose whatever. Attempts to bring about Israel's collapse through attrition had totally failed. Israel was aware of the loss and waste inflicted on it and, still more, on Egypt by the war. But neither the artillery assaults on Israel's forces from the south, nor terrorist attacks on helpless civilians from the north and east, nor the arrogant violence and piracy of Arab terrorists in countries remote from the conflict had prevented our national enterprise from going forward in swift growth. Above all, the attacks by regular armies and terrorist groups had not dislodged us from any point along the ceasefire lines which we were resolved and internationally entitled to hold until the attainment of peace. The war of attrition brought its authors neither victory nor honor. Indeed, it exposed the Arab States to tensions, frustrations and dangers far greater than those by which Israel was afflicted.
102.	In this dilemma Arab policy faced two choices. It could acknowledge the futility of war, accept the reestablishment of the ceasefire and embark on the negotiation of a final peace; or it could appeal to forces outside the region for help to continue and intensify hostilities. The first choice would have meant to work with Israel for the establishment of peace; the second meant the pursuit of Soviet aid for maintaining the war at a higher level of intensity. Alas, it is clear that in the early months of 1970 the second choice was taken.
103.	Thereafter, the conflict was extended with every passing month beyond its regional context. It now took on a global dimension. A system of SAM2 missiles had been erected so that the artillery bombardment of Israeli forces could be carried out without fear of aerial response. The weapons were defensive only in the narrow tactical sense; they were geared to an offensive strategy, the elimination of the ceasefire and its replacement by a constant war of attrition. The missiles stand guard in order that the guns should be free to speak. When this strategy failed, through Israel's successful response, the more complex SAM3 missiles, this time manned by Soviet personnel, were introduced. And by early summer Soviet pilots were flying operational missions in the battle zone. Now, this was more ominous than anything that had gone on before. This aroused a worldwide concern. Nothing of the kind had happened anywhere since the end of the Second World War, apart from the unhappy participation of Soviet pilots in the bombardment of villages in Yemen in 1963. But Soviet involvement in the Suez Canal hostilities had far graver implications. It is bad enough that regional conflicts should rage unsolved through a rejection of the normal principles of ceasefire and negotiation. It is far worse when a great Power intervenes to aggravate a regional conflict, to widen its scope, to risk counteraction by other Powers and thus to extend the perils of a local war to all mankind. The Soviet intervention does not concern Israel alone. It has other aims. Its other aims are to win predominance in the Mediterranean; to outflank the European defense system from the south; to establish a large foreign army on African soil in contempt for the principle of African independence; and to bring about a general disturbance of the international equilibrium. Thus, President Nasser's repudiation of the ceasefire and the increasing scope of Soviet intervention have results which the world can ill afford.
104.	It was in the light of those conditions that my Government studied the United States peace initiative in June and July 1970. We knew that some Arab States and all the Palestine terrorist organizations had rejected that proposal because it spoke of peace, to which they are in principle totally opposed. We knew that Egypt and Jordan had accompanied their acceptance of the initiative by a statement of terms and conditions incompatible with its principles and with its authors' stated intentions. There were other features of the proposal which raised difficulties for us within our parliamentary and democratic system. But we saw this initiative with all its defects and complexities as an opportunity to explore the conditions of a final peace. These considerations prevailed above all the others. And so, on 4 August, the Government of Israel determined and formulated a policy to which it still adheres. We decided to designate a representative to discussions to be held under Ambassador Jarring's auspices with the United Arab Republic and Jordan.
105.	We stated that:
"Israel's position in favor of a ceasefire on the basis of reciprocity on all fronts, including the Egyptian front, in accordance with the Security Council's ceasefire resolutions remains unchanged. On the basis of clarifications given by the United States Government in this matter, Israel is prepared to reply affirmatively to the United States proposal for a ceasefire for at least three months on the Egyptian front."
We further agreed:
"to hold discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices within the framework of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) on the basis of the expression of readiness by the parties to carry out the Security Council's resolution in all its parts, in order to achieve an agreed and binding contractual peace agreement which would ensure:
"(a) Termination by Egypt and Israel of all claims or states of belligerency and respect and acknowledgment of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of each other and their right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries, free from threats or acts of force. Each of the parties to be responsible within its territory for the prevention of all hostile acts by regular military forces or paramilitary forces, including irregular forces, against the armed forces or against civilians living in the territory of the other party;
"(ft) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict to secure, recognized and agreed boundaries to be determined in the peace agreements."
That was the text to which we agreed.
106.	And, finally, we made clear that:
"Israel will not claim the prior acceptance by the other party of her positions, as Israel does not accept in advance the positions of the other parties as communicated publicly or otherwise. Each party will be free to present its proposals on the matters under discussion."
107.	The ceasefire agreement, as members will see, held a central place in our response to the United States peace initiative. The United Arab Republic had limited its acceptance of the ceasefire to a period of ninety days. That restriction raised issues which would not have existed with comparable force in an unlimited ceasefire which would have brought the military phase of the conflict to a permanent end. Instead of this we now had an explicit prospect that after three months the United Arab Republic might regard the ceasefire as having expired. And the futile but destructive war of attrition would be resumed. Since that was the United Arab Republic position, its implications had to be seriously weighed. We had to ask ourselves whether the short negotiating period would be devoted to a genuine quest for peace; or whether it would be used as a respite for the United Arab Republic, with Soviet aid, to improve its prospect for a military solution by a massive missile concentration which would be brought up without Israeli interference under cover of the ceasefire. In short, what were the ninety days designed to promote: an EgyptianIsraeli effort at peace, or a SovietEgyptian deployment for a more effective war?
108.	Decisive reassurance on this question was found for us in that part of the American peace initiative which provided for a "standstill" in an agreed area on each side of the Suez Canal ceasefire line. The purpose was to stabilize the local military balance, so that our Governments could go forward in easy mind to negotiate, without fear lest their security would be undermined during the talks. And the standstill, more than any other part of the United States peace initiative, supported our cautious hope that the United Arab Republic might be ready for an authentic peace effort, and not merely for a maneuver designed to prepare a new phase of war.
109.	In the early days of August we were informed by the United States that the United Arab Republic, with the support of the Soviet Union, had given agreement and endorsement to the following pro visions. This is the text of the standstill agreement:
"(a) Israel and the United Arab Republic will observe a ceasefire effective at 2200 hours GMT Friday 7 August;
"(ft) Both sides will stop all incursions and all firing on the ground and in the air across the ceasefire lines;
"(c) Both sides will refrain from changing the military status quo within the zones extending 50 kilometers to the east and to the west of the ceasefire line. Neither side will introduce or construct any new military installations in these zones. Activities within the zones will be limited to the maintenance of existing installations at their present sites and positions'' the maintenance of existing (installations at their present sites and positions 4 'and to the rotation and supply of forces presently within the zones;
"(d) For the purpose of verifying observance of the ceasefire, each side will rely on its own national means, including reconnaissance aircraft which will be free to operate without interference up to 10 kilometers from the ceasefire line on its own side of the line;
"(e) Each side may avail itself as appropriate of all United Nations machinery in reporting alleged violations to each other of the ceasefire and of the military standstill;
"(0 Both sides will abide by the Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War and will accept the assistance of the International Committee of the Red Cross in carrying out their obligations under that Convention."
110.	It was to this that we agreed. And I draw special attention to the phrases:
"Neither side will introduce or construct any new military installations in these zones. Activities within will be limited to the maintenance of existing installations at their present sites and positions."
111.	Not a single hour passed between Egypt's acceptance of that agreement and its violation of it. Within a few days those violations had been physically ascertained not only by Israel, but by the Government which sponsored the peace initiative. At the very time when the Israeli Cabinet was hopefully formulating its approach to the forthcoming peace talks, the missile buildup became conspicuously massive and intense. It is going forward to this very day. In the "standstill" area, which is fifty kilometers west of the Canal, but mostly within an area thirty kilometer of the Canal, at least twenty- SAM2 and SAM3 batteries, many of them operational, have been introduced. Tens of additional missiles have been advanced into that zone. This has been made possible by Israel's observance of the ceasefire. Rarely has there been a more perfidious violation of an international agreement through the exploitation of the good faith and pacific intention of the other side. I have circulated to delegations this morning, a graphic representation comparing the position which should exist under the 7 August agreement with that existing a few days ago, a situation created by headlong violation.
112.	I now come to analyze the implications of this development.
113.	First, through Israel's acceptance of the ceasefire standstill agreement the United Arab Republic has achieved a substantial and illicit change of the military situation to its advantage.
114.	Secondly, in these conditions Israel would be negotiating under the intimidating effects of a growing threat to its forces along the ceasefire line, and therefore to its national security.
115.	Thirdly, there has been a collapse of confidence in the validity of Egypt's pledge. The proposed peace talks, after all, would be designed to produce an agreement, on the strength of which Israel would withdraw on the establishment of peace to secure, recognized and agreed boundaries which are not yet determined, but which would be determined in the peace negotiations. The object of the talks would be agreement. But what would be the worth or weight of a new agreement negotiated and concluded while an existing agreement is being torn cynically to shreds. Thus, the violation of the standstill agreement has cast an anticipatory shadow on the validity of any peace agreement that we hope to conclude. This is, in the last resort, the gravest result of all. The question, what binding force will a peace agreement have, overshadows every other question affecting the Middle East in future.
116.	Fourthly, the standstill agreement was not only accepted by the United Arab Republic; it was also endorsed by the Soviet Union, which, as I have said, mans many of the missile bases. Therefore, the violation of that agreement with Soviet acquiescence is a major international event. Its repercussions go far beyond the Middle East; they affect the crucial issues of peace and security in other continents of the world. They shed a disturbing light on Soviet policy everywhere. Member States in all continents would do well to take this to heart and mind.
117.	In making a firm stand for the integrity of agreements we defend an international interest wider than our own. It is still our desire and policy to explore the terms of a final peace by discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices in accordance with our statement of 4 August. In a dialog on peace we shall have much to say and to propose for the common benefit of our region. I must add, in frankness, that even when the violations are corrected, the memory of them will not swiftly vanish from our minds and hearts. A new burden has been laid on the eventual negotiating process which, at best, will be complex, arduous and long. When we reflect on our experience with the hopes and expectations of 1957 and with this latest incident, we become fortified in our resolve to insist that all peace engagements be direct, explicit, signed and sealed in the most precise contractual form. Israel is ready to resume discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices as soon as the violations are rectified and the situation prevailing on the day of the ceasefire restored.
118.	The Egyptian violation of the ceasefire agreement is only one of the obstacles which now impede progress towards peace. Others have come into sharp relief during the hectic events of the past few days. The Palestinian Arabs on both sides of the Jordan are in urgent need of peace. They have been the primary victims of the hostile policies whereby neighboring Arab States have for twenty-two years sought to prevent the establishment of peaceful and constructive relations between Israel and the Arab States. Palestinian Arabs, west of the river Jordan, are at this very time creating new processes of coexistence and commerce between themselves and the Israeli people. Their situation in recent days has been in sharp contrast with the immense havoc which came upon their kinsmen east of the Jordan in the recent fighting. No constructive interests of Palestinian Arabs can be served by the small gangs commanded by Arafat, Habash and others whose ideology consists of nothing except the prevention of peace between Israel and the Arab States. As we watched the torrents of shells, grenades and bullets pouring from and into streets and homes across the river Jordan last week, we could not fail to reflect what the fate of every Israeli home would be if our nation's security were not maintained and defended with the utmost tenacity and zeal.
119.	Let us have a frank understanding of what every one of the Palestine terrorist organizations portends. There is no distinction between the means they use and the aims they seek. The means and the aims are equally to be condemned. What is the aim? The aim is to fulfill an exclusive fantasy under which Israel would have no existence in the Middle East as a State embodying its specific Jewish heritage and its particular national and social vocation. Their doctrine is based on the wild absurdity that there can ever be a Middle East without a State of Israel at its heart and centre. They turn away in flight from the central truth that Israel is organic to the past, the present and the future of the Middle East. The Arab nation has a very large place in the Middle Eastern region, but it has no monopoly on the right to statehood, independence, sovereignty and specific national identity. The Middle East is a concept which cannot be exhaustively understood in Arab terms alone. In 1970 Israel's statehood is not something to be explained, defended, or submitted to approval or dissent. It is something to be proclaimed as an absolute and inexorable reality, deep rooted and authentic, on a level of absolute equality with the statehood, sovereignty and national identity of any nation, great or small, old or young, represented in this hall. We do not seek what is called "recognition of Israel's right to exist", for that right is independent of any recognition of it. What we seek is a reciprocal recognition by the Arab States and Israel of each other's right to peaceful life and unreserved sovereignty. In denying this axiomatic right, the terrorist organizations commit the most disruptive heresy at work in the life of our age. There are now fourteen Arab sovereign States, with a population of a hundred million, an area of four million square miles, and unlimited wealth and opportunity. Facing them alone in the scales of equity is the small State of Israel. There is, therefore, only one nation which stands or fails in history by the way in which this conflict is resolved. By its solitude and uniqueness, Israel's secure existence is the overriding moral imperative in this dispute. International peace demands an equitable distribution not only of wealth and material resources but also of sovereignty and national freedom. To suggest a distribution whereby all Arabs must be sovereign everywhere and all Jews nowhere is to fall into an abyss of paradox and discrimination.
120.	So much for the aims of the terrorist groups. The aim is politicize the murder of a state and the method is piracy and murder. The moral quality of the struggle is illustrated by assaults on housewives in a supermarket, on students in a cafeteria, on humble citizens, Jews and Arabs, in crowded markets and bus stations, on innocent travelers in vulnerable civil aircraft. No other political movement in our days has chosen its victims so exclusively amongst defenseless, unarmed civilians in many lands. Therefore, it is a movement not of liberation but of enslavement. Its aim is not to win freedom for the Arab nation, whose freedom is amply and lavishly assured, but to liquidate the national liberation which another nation, the most ancient of nations, has already achieved. Such honourable words as "liberation", "resistance" and "commando" have no application and have never before been applied to attempts to liquidate a lawful sovereignty, to compound the Nazi assault on Jewish survival and to wage a campaign of indiscriminate attack against civilians in the Middle East and elsewhere.
121.	Having failed in their assaults on Israel, the Fatah organization, the "Palestine Liberation Organization" and other kindred groups have directed their main threat against the independence and sovereignty of Arab States. Early this year they were hard at work attempting to turn Lebanon away from its peaceful vocation and to subvert its specific national personality. Last week we saw the most recent of many attempts to bring about anarchy and disintegration in Jordan in order to shatter any hope of peace between Israel and the Arabs nations.
122.	Arab Governments which are the victims of these acts are, ironically, often the sponsors of them. The terrorist groups do not spring out of the empty air. They do not work in a vacuum. They could not exist, still less function, without the shelter, support, endorsement, financial aid, arms, training facilities and territorial base supplied to them by sovereign Arab States. Nor could they endanger life and limb outside the Middle East if certain Governments, especially in Europe, did not grant them excessive indulgence and immunity. Surely the time has come for the world community to turn in wrath not only against the specific outrage of aerial piracy but also against the other activities of the terrorist groups. All these activities, without exception, violate the principles which the signatories of the Charter, including its Arab signatories, have pledged themselves to defend. Any action which aims to destroy or violate a legitimate sovereignty is a form of international hijacking. Therefore it is important that these acts be resisted. They were successfully resisted ten days ago by those who foiled the hijacking of an El A1 aircraft by using righteous force against an odious pair of pirates. They were resisted by Jordan, which but for that resistance would have lost title to be regarded as a sovereign authority. The main adversaries of peace suffered another setback when the invasion of Jordan by regular armored units of the Syrian 
Army was repelled. The Syrian invasion of Jordan was too brief for its full implications to be seized. Here we have a member of the Security Council violating an international frontier in order to impose its will and policy upon a neighboring State. A Syrian representative at the United Nations, attempting publicly to justify this aggression, has taken refuge in a doctrine which denies the international character of boundaries between States of kindred cultures.
123.	The General Assembly will recall that after the Soviet aggression against Czechoslovakia two years ago Soviet representatives asserted that the boundaries between socialist States did not have a full international character, so that the unprovoked invasion of territory across them had a kind of domestic intimacy. Something of that kind was asserted by Syria last week. The doctrine is that, if two States have a similar ideology or language or national culture, it is not the business of the world community if one of them invades the other without provocation. There are dozens of
States represented here which would be well advised to reflect deeply on the consequences for them if a doctrine of "invasion through kinship" were condoned.
124.	Israel followed recent events in Jordan with vigilance, restraint and a keen sense of the developing human tragedy. We could not have been indifferent to violent changes in the regional balance which would have put Israel's security in jeopardy. But it is for Arab Governments to determine their regimes and institutional structure. Israel will never move its forces in any cause except its own legitimate security. We hope that the scars of battle will be healed in Jordan and that a concerted humanitarian effort will be made to allay the vast suffering of which we have been the close witnesses in recent days. The trucks bearing medical aid dispatched by the Israeli authorities eastward across the Jordan illustrate how humane solidarities should prevail over political and military tensions. We hope that the Jordan Government will not make the error of encouraging or condoning activity by the terror groups against Israel across the ceasefire lines. This would be contrary to Jordan's international obligations, including the ceasefire, and would of course encounter Israel's firm resistance.
125.	The capacity to repeat error is revealed in the communication which the Arab Governments and the terrorist organizations signed in Cairo yesterday. There is not in that document a single, peaceful, civilized, lawful word. The talk is not of peace but of victory over an enemy ind the liberation of Israel, which means of course its extinction. That document violates the engagement which the United Arab Republic and Jordan made to Ambassador Jarring, promising to establish a just and lasting peace with Israel and to acknowledge its sovereignty and independence. The question is: which document commits the policy of those two States?
126.	Many Members have spoken here about the necessity for international action against the hijacking of aircraft. In Israel's view an agenda item on that subject would only be of value if international law came out reinforced. It is not enough to exhort parties to adopt the Tokyo Convention  or a new Convention expressive of existing law and morality. We should recall that the cooperation and States in the struggle against piracy preceded all other developments in the realm of international law. The pirate was regarded as the enemy of the human race, hostis humani generis. He was an outlaw from human society and every nation had the right and duty to apprehend and punish him with full vigor. Over a century ago, an outstanding maritime judge in Britain, Lord Stowell, expressed the current contemporary law and morality as follows:
"With professed pirates there is no state of peace.
They are the enemies of every country and at all
times and therefore are universally subject to the
extreme rights of war."
127.	It follows that aerial piracy, which involves even more horror and peril than piracy at sea, should never be indulged, condoned, or, above all, rewarded. A firm attempt should be made to secure the unconditional release of all captives. Physical methods of prevention should be adopted without limitation or reserve. What a victory would have been won for international order if all the aircraft assaulted on 6 September had been defended as effectively as was the El A1 airliner and if all the pirates had met a similar fate. But responsibility does not lie on the terrorists alone. Some Arab Governments have given practical and moral support to successful pirates. Thus, in July 1970, we find President Nasser of Egypt himself extending a welcome to men who had hijacked a Greek aircraft and to criminals released from a prison to which Greek law had properly consigned them. At meetings last year of the United Nations General Assembly and the Organization of African Unity, Arab delegations prevented the unanimous adoption of resolutions which would strongly have condemned hijackers and required firm measures to insure their extradition and punishment. When an Arab pirate lands in certain Arab countries, he is more likely to get fuel facilities, praise and reward than arrest and punishment. The recent experience and the present debate can only be useful if condemnation is unequivocal and even then only if it leads to practical measures. I have in mind that the General Assembly might endorse the proposition which was recently made by the United States in the International Civil Aviation Organization, calling for joint international action "to suspend all international civil air transport services to and from any State which, after the unlawful seizure of an aircraft, detains passengers, crew and aircraft contrary to the Tokyo Convention (including the destruction of such aircraft) or any State which fails to extradite or prosecute persons responsible for such acts of unlawful seizure". Since then we have seen other drafts. The point is that only measures which lead to practical and automatic action have validity.
128.	The avoidance of reward for hijackers sometimes requires the maintenance of strong nerves. At an early stage in the recent episode there was a precipitate tendency to offer the release of convicted hijackers as a recompense for the liberation of innocent hostages. This would have saved present victims but it would have endangered other travelers on whom the released hijackers would try their skill again. It is satisfactory that this course has not been followed, and that the four countries whose aircraft or citizens had been kidnapped accepted the principle advocated by the United Kingdom and the United States, according to which solidarity should be maintained and each airline and Government would be responsible for all passengers without distinction. Faced by attitudes of principle and strengthening nerves, the hijackers understood the uselessness of their victory and gave up its fruits to the Jordanian Government and the Egyptian Embassy, which we hope will act with correct promptitude.
129.	But the release of hostages who were wantonly submitted to hardship and peril should not dull the edge of international vigilance. Israel proposes international action along four lines:
| (a) To increase security measures at airports and ! in aircraft. Israel is prepared to cooperate by sharing the knowledge and experience that it has accumulated ! in this sphere;
(b)	To call upon The Hague Conference that will convene in December 1970 to adopt the proposed convention, and to strengthen it so that the illegal capture of an aircraft, its passengers and crew will be considered an international crime calling for maximum punishment;
(c)	To establish sanctions against States that aid or provide asylum to hijackers or criminals who attack aircraft. These sanctions should include: cessation of aerial communications with the States which aid hijackers, and withholding of services from the national carrier of a State that aids or provides asylum to those who hijack or attack aircraft;
id) To call for the establishment of a special body that will deal continuously with acts of hijacking or attacks on the international level.
130.	But what about the larger issue of peace? Before we fall into despair let us recall that there are no irreconcilable conflicts in history. The ArabIsraeli conflict, for all its rhetorical bitterness, has had no results comparable in absolute or relative terms with the carnage and mass suffering of many other wars.
131.	But peace has too often been considered by international bodies in semantic formal terms, and too little in terms of human realities. It is not enough that Egypt, Israel, Lebanon and Jordan should agree on a form of words; such agreement may even be an illusion if it conceals a wide gap in intention and interpretation. What is needed most is that they, and all concerned with their deeper interests, should have a clear vision of what our region would look like and how its people would live ones hostility was replaced by peace. The most conclusive evidence, the most conclusive hallmark of peace is the open frontier. A peaceful Middle East is a Middle East in which a man would be able to travel by road and rail from Cairo through Israel to Beirut and Amman, in which Egyptian civil aircraft could traverse Israel eastward while Israeli shipping passed unimpeded through the Suez Canal. Israeli and Arab civil aircraft would land in Cairo, Lod and Amman. Railways for the transportation of heavy goods would pass from the Suez area through Kan tarah, across the Israeli coast northward. The ports of Eilat and Aqaba would plan their expansion and development in neighborly coordination. This is not a dream. This summer 55,000 Arabs from neighboring countries visited their relatives west of the Jordan. Thousands passed from Israel and the west bank across the Jordan to remote parts of the Arab world. This year nearly half a million tourists came to Israel and an approximately similar number to Egypt. Under conditions of normality and peace, the ancient splendors and the modern amenities of our countries would attract millions more, who by their very pilgrimage would join us closer to them and to each other.
132.	In the last resort, a nation's strength and greatness will be measured not by the number of its missiles but by the quality of its scholars, scientists and technicians. Why should not Israeli and Arab doctors and scientists cooperate in the common quest for learning, visit each other's institutions, lecture to each other's students, meet face to face the opportunities and the ills which are common to our region? It was no credit to the Middle East in recent weeks when cholera disease broke out in many parts and when the appeal of the Israeli Minister of Health for cooperation with his colleagues in neighboring countries went unheeded.
133.	And the senselessness and tragedy of war are most vividly expressed in the inexcusable waste of resources. In twenty-two years the Arab States and Israel have spent more than $20,000 million for military purposes. If one-tenth of that sum had been invested in a refugee solution, the problem would have been solved long ago in a way that would have promoted economic progress in all the countries in which the resettlement was made.
134.	At the present time Egypt and Israel are spending $2,000 million every year for military purposes.
135.	It would be a delusion to believe that a formal peace agreement would be followed by a relaxation of vigilance or an abandonment of security; but there would certainly be a more rational distribution between the security and the economic needs of the signatory countries.
136.	Every year the population of the leading Arab State grows by 1 million, that is to say, by a number greater that that of those in refugee camps. In conditions of war and conflict, neither the refugee problem nor the problems of increased populations can be solved, since there is no rational use of resources for human needs. My point is that peace is not a word, it is not a juridical phrase; it is a total revolution in the meaning, style and content of life. It is not a documentary device; it is a human condition, the like of which our generation in the Middle East has never known.
137.	The question is whether Arab leadership can break loose from an obsolete routine of conflict in order to explore this prospect. It is in peace and not in violence that the Palestinian Arabs will find their true destiny. For in conditions of peace Israel's eastern neighbor would be an Arab State, a majority of whose population would be composed of Palestinian Arabs, and a majority of all the Palestinian Arabs would be citizens of that State. In other words, peace settles the problem of self-determination.
138.	What I have said has always been true of the Kingdom of Jordan, whose structure, name and regime were determined not by Israel but by its Arab citizens. But most of them are Palestinian Arab citizens. Wherever the boundary is determined in the peace agreement the Palestinian Arabs on both sides of the Jordan will find a better future than that which Arafat and Habash and the hijackers can offer them.
139.	There will always be a sizable Palestine Arab community in Israel. But this will have no negative significance when close cooperation across an open frontier exists between Israel and its eastern neighbor. The original former Palestine area the Mandated area  on both sides of the Jordan will accommodate two States, Israel and an Arab State, while the area regains its natural economic unity and advances towards new forms of integration. That, at any rate, is what Israel means by peace. If we have a clear vision of our aims, it will not be difficult to work backwards from the desired result towards the process that leads towards it.
140.	In the territorial negotiation, Israel's aim will be the determination of new, secure, agreed boundaries, offering a firmer security than the old armistice lines could ever provide. In short, there are no solutions without peace, and there are no problems which peace cannot resolve.
141.	The deep humane issues which preoccupy Israel are not only those which revolve around the Middle Eastern conflict. Our Jewish destiny and responsibility inspire our concern for the plight of small Jewish minorities still lingering in Arab lands, held as hostages, forbidden to depart, discriminated against, humiliated, their property confiscated, their communal and cultural life paralyzed. The hard facts are now well known and there has been a broad international echo in recent years. Yet the suffering and misery continue and in some countries have become more intense. We therefore welcome the recent reiteration by the Secretary General, in his address on 15 June to the Royal Commonwealth Society in London, of his call for the evacuation of Jews from Arab countries and of the conviction, expressed in the introduction to his report to last year's session of the General Assembly,  that the United Nations has a moral obligation to act for their rescue. I hope that States Members of the United Nations will join the call to save these doomed communities.
142.	Of very deep concern to enlightened world opinion is the grave situation of Jews in the Soviet Union. Year after year, the representatives of Israel and other Member States have raised their voices against the discrimination to which Soviet Jews are subjected, in particular the denial of the right of those who desire to join their kinsmen in Israel. In recent years ominous antiSemitic propaganda in the Soviet Union has been intensified under the cloak of a campaign against Zionism, which is the Jewish people's liberation movement. Thousands of slanderous articles and documents, reminiscent of medieval times, have been circulated by the information media controlled by the Soviet authorities.
143.	The plight of Jews in the USSR is dramatically illustrated by the appeals for permission to leave for Israel which Jews from all parts of the Soviet Union addressed to Heads of the Soviet Government, to the Government of Israel, to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and to others. Those appeals, giving the full names and the addresses of the signatories, have been published in the international press; they speak movingly of the suffering of separated families and of thew longing to unite their lot with the mainstream of the Jewish people. Some of the signatories have been arrested; their only crime is a desire to emigrate to Israel, which does not infringe any Soviet law. Indeed, Prime Minister Kosygin made a public statement in December 1966 promising that no obstacles would be placed in the way of Soviet Jews who wish to be united with their families in Israel.
144.	Humanity and justice call upon the Soviet Government to recognize the human rights of its Jewish citizens and to permit them freely to exercise those rights.
145.	In conclusion, let me recall that much of the work of the United Nations in its first twenty-five years has revolved around this modern encounter between the national revolutions of Israel in its small State and of the Arab nation in its expanse of multiple sovereignty. Whether the anniversary year will open a better act in the drama depends less on the General Assembly's debates than on the initiatives and decisions of Middle Eastern Governments. Israel will maintain the policy on which it decided on 4 August and reiterated on 6 September. It will fulfill its special role in the advancement of developing countries through which it has already offered training and development techniques to 12,000 future leaders of emergent societies in eighty lands. It will raise its voice and hand for the equality of nations and against discrimination and the remnants of colonialism. Above all, it will keep its mind and heart open to the prospect of a negotiated peace. Its people has the strength, the tenacity and the will to withstand the violent forces which assail its life and threaten its future. But its deepest aspiration is to deploy its energies in the service of a peaceful order of relations in the Middle East.
146.	The key to that future lies in a negotiation explicitly directed to the establishment of peace, and the key is now in Arab, and particularly in Egyptian, hands. It can be opened by restoring the original ceasefire situation and by treading the road of negotiation. I am prepared to use my presence here for talks with heads of Arab delegations on the establishment of peace and on the creation of an atmosphere and conditions in which a fruitful negotiation can take place. There is no rational or defensible reason for refusing such an opportunity. We do the United Nations no service if we confine ourselves to public debate and neglect the normal contacts without which no international problem has ever been or will ever be resolved.
147.	Mankind may either have a peaceful future or no future at all. Our 126 Governments will all have a share in deciding how the choice is made. If we can recapture the youthful spirit which moved the United Nations twenty-five years ago, we may yet convert past dreams into reality and present disappointments into enduring hopes.
180.	 At the outset, I should like to refer to the dark shadow which the tragic and untimely death of President Gamal Abdel Nasser has cast over this Assembly and the world. In a statement made in Wellington yesterday, my Prime Minister referred to the late President as one of the most significant political figures of the post Second World War era. He was a constant source of inspiration to his people and he helped to mold and fortify a new sense of national identity and dignity.
181.	The profound sympathy of the people of New Zealand has already been conveyed to the Government and people of the United Arab Republic. To the delegation of the United Arab Republic, I should like to add my own expression of deep sympathy at the tragic loss suffered by the Egyptian and, indeed, by all the Arab peoples.
182.	President Nasser's statesmanlike acceptance of the American proposals had raised hopes that the long awaited negotiations might at last have begun. We must all hope that his generous spirit will prevail and that peace will soon come to this troubled area of the world.
183.	Mr. President, it is always a pleasure to congratulate the incoming President of this Assembly. It is a singular pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, a representative of a country which sat with New Zealand at San Francisco, on the honor of presiding over the session which takes place in this twenty-fifth anniversary year. Your career has been marked by your close association with the advancement of international law and of this Organization. It is a fitting symbol that the direction of this session should have been placed in your hands at a time when the world needs from the United Nations a strong and renewed assertion of the rule of law. I also take this opportunity to pay a well-merited compliment to your distinguished predecessor in office, Mrs. Angie BrooksRandolph of Liberia.
184.	May I also at this point say how much New Zealand looks forward to welcoming Fiji a South Pacific country with which New Zealand has many close associations to membership in the early part of this twenty-fifth session.
185.	There are many features of the world situation today which could not have been foreseen at San Francisco, even though the Charter adopted there contained a wealth of insight, and has proved to be an instrument of great flexibility. But one must ask as well whether some of our purposes in banding together in the United Nations have not been neglected to the point where confidence in the Organization is gravely diminished.
186.	Who could have foreseen that, as a backdrop to the opening of the twenty-fifth anniversary session, we should have the spectacle of international piracy, the spectacle of nations held to ransom and subjected to blackmail by those whom we treat too respectfully by using the term "hijackers". We must place this in conjunction with another remarkable phenomenon: the lightning rapidity with which the shock waves of events, and particularly of violent events, are felt around the world in this age of instant communication. We cannot allow the epidemic of hijacking to be condoned. It is, I suggest, time to combat the ingenuity and ruthlessness of those who use such methods to serve their own political or personal ends. Hundreds of years ago, international law was equal to the challenge posed by piracy on the high seas.
187.	Today all the nations of a technologically advanced world will need to use all their skill and determination to stamp out the scourge of piracy in the air.
188.	In a recent address the SecretaryGeneral proposed that all nations should pledge to extradite hijackers, irrespective of their nationality or political affiliation, for trial before an agreed international tribunal. My Government welcomes the boldness of the SecretaryGeneral's approach. It believes that strong measures are required. It urges all Governments to give the most serious consideration to international action which would effectively put a stop to hijacking. Important work to this end is being undertaken in the International Civil Aviation Organization, but there may well be room for this Assembly to encourage and accelerate this urgent task.
189.	The communications revolution to which I have referred is one of the reasons why in recent years vast problems of global dimensions have been perceived so much more rapidly and universally than in the past.
190.	The United Nations today is applying itself to these problems. The solutions which are found will determine for us and future generations the quality of life. They will also be a mark of the vigor and adaptability of our Organization.
191.	The relationship between population and development is one of these problems. Its solution is essentially dependent on decisions taken at the national level within the framework of the circumstances of each country, including its economic structure and its social and spiritual aspirations. But there exists also a global responsibility. The United Nations, through its Population Commission and its Population Fund, has an important role to play in focusing attention on the world problem and in providing assistance to countries which seek it.
192.	The scope for international action to conserve the human environment is even more obvious. New Zealand, as a country in an early stage of industrial development and in an isolated geographical position, does not have the acute problems experienced by more heavily industrialized and populated countries. We have had, none the less, to develop active policies in such fields as land conservation, and are conscious of the growing risks of pollution of various kinds. A national organization in the form of an Environmental Council has been set up, and New Zealand is anxious to contribute to work in this field through participation in the Stockholm conference,  in the specialized agencies and, as we hope, in the Economic and Social Council.
193.	Of equal importance and of special interest to New Zealand is the question of establishing a just and effective regime for the deep seabed. There are fewer than ten countries with a longer coastline than New Zealand. We are isolated and surrounded by a vast area of ocean. By any definition we have an exceptionally large continental shelf. In short, we have as great a stake as any other Member of the United Nations in the work of the seabed Committee. 
194.	All these questions of global scope relate to the work of the United Nations on development generally, and all Members stand to benefit from this work.
195.	We recognize and respect the fact that for the great majority of delegations the overriding preoccupation is with the mainstream of economic development. The preparations for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, to which priority has been accorded at this session, have come to be regarded as a touchstone, and attitudes to it as a test of good faith. As my Prime Minister said in this debate last year, the first Development Decade taught that sound economic development is a continuous, complex ana longterm process in which the willing cooperation of all developed and developing countries is essential. We continue to believe that it is correspondingly important that the goals or targets set should be realistic. The New Zealand Government has stated its readiness to work towards the target of one per cent of gross national product for external aid. Its ability to do so, however, is in strict relation to its ability to maintain and expand the level of its exports, consisting almost exclusively of primary commodities. This is a factor which my Government hopes will be borne in mind during consideration of international commodity arrangements for the forthcoming decade. There is nothing unique in the problems which particular countries face. It is only by approaching them together in a spirit of common aspiration that the highest factor of benefit to all can be achieved.
196.	The opportunity to pursue a common approach to international trade problems arises most obviously through regional economic groupings. The potential for development which these can present has been amply demonstrated. Caution is needed, however, to ensure that benefits accrue both within the grouping and in trade with the outside world. The net result must not be to inhibit external trade through the growth of restrictive trade practices and protectionism.
197.	For New Zealand the problem is far from theoretical. For a decade it has faced the prospect of seeing its largest market, the United Kingdom, become part of the world's most powerful regional economic grouping, the European Economic Community. In spite of our continuing efforts to find new export markets, the British market still represents the only outlet for nearly half New Zealand's total exports and almost all our exports of certain key agricultural products. Now that negotiations for British entry to the European Economic Community have begun, my Government is confident that New Zealand's position has the full sympathy and understanding of all parties concerned and that adequate safeguards to enable this trade to continue will be adopted. In a very real sense the role of regional groupings in world trade is on trial in this test case. New Zealand appreciates and fully supports the motivations behind the drive for a united Europe which could be so powerful a force for good in the world. However, it would be tragic if, as a result of enlarging the European Economic Community, one of the world's most efficient agricultural producers were driven to the wall. This would be a sad irony in a world facing grave potential shortages of food.
198.	I have devoted my remarks thus far to economic and social questions and to some of the new areas in which the United Nations is active. It would be a mistake, however, to believe that in pursuing these important questions the United Nations is achieving the primary objectives of the Charter. As my Prime
Minister suggested last year [1757th meetingJ, we are all to some extent guilty of self-delusion for as long as we fail to achieve the essential goal of international peace and stability.
199. The occasion of the commemorative session will, I hope, provide an opportunity for an analysis of some of the reasons for the Organization's inability to control international conflicts and of steps which might lead towards the diplomatic reactivation of the United Nations. This was a theme stressed by the Foreign Minister of Brazil in the traditionally eloquent intervention with which he opened our general debate [1841st meeting].
200.	In one critical area the Middle East we have followed the patient efforts of Ambassador Jarring on behalf of the United Nations. We fervently hope that the cautious expectations engendered by the United States peace initiative, and by the stated willingness of the parties to enter into negotiations, have suffered only a temporary setback. It seems to us that the minimum conditions for further progress towards a settlement are an agreed extension of the ceasefire and the resumption within that time of endeavors to bring the parties to negotiations. In these endeavors the four permanent members of the Security Council will doubtless have to play a continuing, honest and persuasive role in accordance with the principles of the Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967 [242 (1967)].
201.	In relation to the VietNam war, however, the failure of the United Nations to play any real part is notorious and a matter of regret. The last four months have seen the involvement in that war, from no volition of its own, of a small country which has consistently sought to avoid such involvement. My delegation asks this Assembly today whether it will choose to remain indifferent to the situation in Cambodia, which has deeply concerned my Government.
202.	From the outset Cambodia refused to take sides in the VietNam conflict and tried to prevent the war from spilling across its borders, but in vain. Over a period of years the armed forces of North VietNam and the VietCong took advantage of Cambodia's neutrality to establish bases and supplylines within its territory. The then Head of State of Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk, became increasingly alarmed at that situation but was unable to persuade the North VietNamese to withdraw their forces. In March 1970 he was dismissed as Head of State by a unanimous vote of the Cambodian Parliament. The Government of General Lon Nol, which Prince Sihanouk himself had appointed, demanded the withdrawal of the communist forces, while making clear that it was prepared to negotiate on the question. Instead of taking up that offer, the communist forces immediately began to attack the forces and installations of the Government of Cambodia to make war on the country whose territory they were already making free of,
203.	That action of the North VietNamese was a clear case of aggression, of an attack on one State by the armed forces of another. It has continued right up to the present time. Indeed the communist forces have expanded their activities throughout Cambodia and have virtually annexed a large part of it. They have, it is true, used the name of the deposed Prince Sihanouk as a cover, but the forces involved in the fighting have been almost entirely VietNamese, either North VietNamese or VietCong.
204.	Some time after the communist forces had begun to attack the Cambodian Government forces, the forces of South VietNam and the United States launched a series of operations across the South VietNamese border into Cambodia. These were designed to destroy the bases from which the communist forces had so long operated with impunity against Saigon and the surrounding areas. They were welcomed by General Lon Nol and undoubtedly helped him to survive the military pressure that the North VietNamese and their supporters were putting on him. But it should be noted that the Cambodian Government had previously appealed in vain for help to the Geneva Conference coChairmen, to the members of the International Control Commission, and to this Organization. The Security Council took no effective action to deal with this clearcut case of North VietNamese aggression in Cambodia and there is no sign that it will do so.
205.	Cambodia's neighbors were more forthcoming. The Foreign Ministers of eleven Asian and Pacific countries, including New Zealand, met in Djakarta on 16 and 17 May and expressed grave concern over the situation in Cambodia. They called for an end to all hostilities there and for the withdrawal of all foreign forces. They also recommended the reactivation of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in Cambodia and supported the idea of an international conference to consider the Cambodian problem. The moderation of the Djakarta Conference was widely recognized and its outcome met with the approval of many countries which were not represented at it. Yet it was condemned out of hand by North VietNam and by Communist China, and it evoked no positive response from the Soviet Union.
206.	The Djakarta Conference was a remarkable demonstration of regional solidarity. My Government attaches great importance to the development of regional cooperation in Asia and we welcome the determination of the countries in the area to find an Asian solution for an Asian problem. We are confident that the spirit of the Conference will persist in spite of the hostile reaction from some quarters.
207.	But regional cooperation is no substitute for action on a wider basis, and the fact that action is being taken regionally is not a reason for the international community to do nothing. The great Powers  and in particular the Soviet Union and Communist China bear a heavy responsibility for the continuation and extension of the conflict in IndoChina, and no settlement can be reached without their collaboration. But what is even more relevant in this Assembly is that the fate of Cambodia is a matter of concern to small nations everywhere. All of us have an interest in ensuring that a small country cannot be invaded and attacked by stronger neighbors under whatever pretext. This Assembly may not be able to do much on its own to end the conflict and restore the integrity and neutrality of Cambodia. But that is no excuse for indifference. At the very least, the Members of this Assembly should take heed of the true nature and the implications of the situation with which the people of Cambodia are confronted.
208.	There is one other related matter I would briefly add, on which this Assembly has a humanitarian duty to fulfill. I refer to the fate of those prisoners of war held by the North VietNamese. The appeals of the International Red Cross, meeting at Istanbul in September 1969, and the reiterated efforts made by the International Committee of the Red Cross have elicited no response. Yet all that is sought is that these men be treated in accordance with international humanitarian law and, more specifically, that North VietNam honor the minimum undertakings which it gave in ar ceding to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. There is an inhumanity in the attitude displayed which must awaken this Assembly's deepest concern. How can it deal sincerely with an item such as that on human rights in armed conflicts without renewing at the solemn level of the General Assembly the appeals already made?
209.	Consideration of the ability of the Organization to discharge its responsibilities in the field of peace and security leads on to wider questions. How adequate is the structure of the United Nations to permit it to perform its functions in this twenty-fifth year of its existence? That is a matter which requires examination on two different levels. We are all conscious of the problems involved in proposals for the Charter review. The best must not, however, be the enemy of the good. If that wider reform should not prove possible, there is still scope for more modest and practical innovations. For that reason my delegation has joined in co sponsoring the item on the rationalization of the procedures and organization of the General Assembly.
210.	We do not approach this subject with preconceived ideas. We believe the Assembly could benefit from the recommendations which might come from a small group, rich in direct personal experience. We have in mind, for example, that the functioning of Assembly committees has become more formalized than was originally contemplated. Do they now serve their purpose in meeting as frequently as they do? There are a number of questions on which attitudes have become rigid. This, in turn, suggests that there may be a case for reviewing the agenda with a view to avoiding automatic inscription, or annual discussion, at least of those items where the outcome does not vary from one year to the next. How, on the one hand, can the Assembly's procedures be shaped to recognize the increasing practice of negotiation between, and within, groups which is now an abiding feature of the General Assembly and some other bodies? And how, on the other, can it be ensured that, in the larger forum of the General Assembly committees, countries which are not members of such specialized bodies as those dealing with outer space, disarmament, the seabed and the like, may still participate meaningfully in discussion of matters on which real negotiation tends to be restricted to an initiate circle? These are but some of the issues perhaps some of the more difficult issues which we should like to see debated.
211.	Finally, as part of a program to enable the Organization better to meet its responsibilities it is all too clear that its financial situation the precarious state of affairs with which the Organization has lived too long must be remedied. This is a matter to which our SecretaryGeneral has made pointed reference in the introduction to his annual report [A/8001/Add. 1 and Corr.l]. There is something incongruous about a world body which can stem insolvency only by borrowing. It is well to remind ourselves that the Organization is faced with a shortfall of some 190 million dollars in assessed contributions. It is surely not unreasonable to hope that those who perpetuate this situation could make a gesture in this anniversary year to help put the Organization back on a sound financial footing.
212.	The growth of the budget is a financial problem of a different order. The question must be asked whether the present rate of growth is not excessive. Growth must be accepted, but it must be carefully managed and apportioned to make the most effective use of our limited resources. In many countries, including my own, serious thought is being given to new forms of budget planning and presentation. We welcome the international studies carried out on this topic. There is much to be said for budgeting by program rather than by object of expenditure as at the present time.
213.	But technical measures of rationalization and consolidation are only part of the answer. What is needed above all is a willingness on the part of the membership as a whole to eliminate the conflict between what it wants and what it is prepared to pay. This is a basic conflict as much political as budgetary. The blame does not lie entirely with the Fifth Committee, which is largely ineffective in the face of the financial implications of substantive decisions. These decisions, often of a political nature, emanate from the legislative organs of the Assembly and the subsidiary bodies. Nor can the Secretariat, as the author of the budget document, be held solely responsible, nor indeed is inflation the sole culprit. It is we, the Member States, who hold apparently irreconcilable views about the desirable rate of growth, the level of overall expenditures and the use to which funds are put. As a consequence, no really effective budgetary control exists. This is a problem which the Secretary General himself has singled out in a plea for urgent action in his foreword to the budget estimates for 1971.
214.	While we must bear in mind the objectives of the Second Development Decade, a serious effort is needed in this year of stocktaking to reach common ground on these questions. The failure of the Committee on Conferences has illustrated an apparent absence of willingness effectively to empower an organ to exercise determined control. Surely we must deduce from this that there remains only the spirit of compromise if there is to be a healthy development of the budget, the administration of the Organization, and the programs which it services.
215.	I have dealt with some themes of current concern and with some pervasive questions of United Nations reform. All of us have, I am sure, been struck by the new strains to which international life is now subject, and with the correspondingly urgent need for our Organization both to strengthen its role in world order and to adjust itself to the times. In an address given in London some months ago our SecretaryGeneral said that:
"The news is so full of stories of conflict and violence that not enough attention is paid to the steady undercurrent of decency and commonsense in the affairs of nations, and people increasingly have the impression that in international affairs nothing ever goes right."
216.	For New Zealand's part I urge that we all show in this anniversary year our determination to give effect to the spirit which at San Francisco gave rise to the Charter of the United Nations. Our Prime Minister then spoke of that historic conference as "a moment of time which will not recur in our lives and which may not recur again". Now, 25 years later, we have the opportunity and the necessity in this anniversary to take stock, and to add to the stature of the Organization. Let us use this chance.1.	 It is my privilege to extend to you once again the warm congratulations of the United States delegation on your election to the Presidency of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly. Your country has few peers in the contributions it has made to the work of this Organization. Your father was a leader in the League of Nations, and now, in this session of the General Assembly, you are adding a new chapter in the family tradition. In the United Nations community we have long known you as an able spokesman of your country, as a participant in the life of the United Nations from its very beginning and an authority on the Charter, as a leading scholar and practitioner in international law, and as one whose personal outlook is strongly humanitarian and imbued with hope and determination for a better future. We are indeed fortunate to have you to lead us in this session devoted to the strengthening and improvement of the United Nations.
2.	During this session we shall commemorate with fitting ceremony one of the most creative and hopeful events of this century, the founding of the United Nations twenty-five years ago. It is right that this commemoration should be held. It is far more important, however, that the nations gathered at this session should so act together as to strengthen the United Nations for the future, to ensure that we are closer to "peace, justice and progress" five, ten and twenty- five years hence than we are today. The world is unlikely to care much what we say about the past. It will care a great deal what we do about the future.
3.	The problems the world faces today are no less grave than those it faced twenty-five years ago. Indeed they are in many respects far graver. Unless and until the Members of the United Nations demonstrate their willingness to deal effectively with these problems, the confidence of the world's peoples in the United Nations will remain uncertain and precarious.
4.	In the view of the United States, the most critical international problem today is the same as that which faced the founders of the United Nations: the need to build a reliable framework for peace and security among nations. As President Nixon said in this Assembly a year ago: "... there is no nobler destiny, nor any greater gift that one age could make to the ages that follow, than to forge the key to a lasting peace". [1755th meeting, para. 45.]
5.	In this conviction the United States has sought in the last two years to frame foreign policies which would help to make the international scene less destructively competitive, less strident, more cooperative and orderly. We have sought, in the spirit of the Charter, to pursue peaceful settlement of all conflicts and confrontations, and we have urged others to do likewise.
6.	The most significant of these efforts has been the strategic arms limitation discussions between my country and the Soviet Union. If at last we can check the nuclear arms race, the world will have been helped to move away from its gravest danger and toward new and more rational relationships.
7.	The United States also seeks, through a process of serious negotiation, to ease the tensions that arise from the division of Europe. We have welcomed the efforts of the Federal Republic of Germany to normalize relations with its eastern neighbors; we are seeking in fourPower talks to assure the security and wellbeing of the residents of Berlin; we have joined our NATO allies in proposing exploratory talks on the reduction of forces in central Europe. We hope these efforts will find the Soviet Union and its allies forthcoming.
8.	In VietNam, over eighteen months ago, the United States reversed the trend in American involvement in the war. We began a steady, uninterrupted reduction in the number of our troops. We have made a negotiated peace our highest priority. Although North VietNam has as yet shown no serious intention to negotiate a solution under which the South VietNamese people can freely decide their own future, this remains our goal and we shall not be discouraged in seeking it.
A/PV.1854
9.	My Government has likewise sought ways to move toward a constructive relationship with mainland China. To this end, we have taken a number of unilateral steps to ease tensions. We are ready at any time to resume the talks in Warsaw.
10.	Finally, nowhere in the world today is there more urgent need to move from confrontation to negotiation than in the Middle East. The legacy of bitterness, hatred and suspicion there contains the seeds of even greater tragedy not only for the Middle East but for the world, unless there is early progress toward reconciliation and peace based on the legitimate interests of all the States and peoples of the region.
11.	As the United Nations community well knows, the United States has made major diplomatic efforts in recent months and weeks to help bring about peace at long last in the Middle East. While recent developments in the area, including the tragic death of President Nasser, have cast a shadow over the high hopes of just a few weeks ago that a beginning toward that goal had been made, those hopes have not been extinguished. For the most part, the guns remain silent along the ceasefire lines. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) stands as a beacon pointing the way to peace, and the parties concerned, in accepting the United States initiative of June, have committed themselves to carry out that resolution in all its parts. Ambassador Jarring is ready to resume his mission whenever conditions permit. We earnestly hope that the parties themselves and all others concerned will now bend every effort to the task of building on the beginning that has already been made.
12.	This will require above all serious steps to restore and strengthen confidence in the integrity of the ceasefire and military standstill agreement along the Suez Canal. It will also require, if negotiations are to move forward, a willingness by the parties to move from their maximum positions on the elements of a realistic and equitable peace settlement. In this spirit, my Government is prepared to contribute to renewed efforts toward peace in the Middle East.
13.	In this anniversary year the United States, like many other Members, has given especially careful thought to means by which the United Nations can be better enabled to fulfill its purposes.
14.	My delegation has listened, and will continue to listen attentively, to the suggestions of others in this regard. In the same spirit the United States will offer proposals, or support the proposals of others, with these objectives among others: first, to put United Nations peacekeeping operations on a firmer and more reliable basis; second, to make the United Nations more effective in the peaceful settlement of disputes; third, to promote new steps in the field of disarmament; fourth, to move closer by peaceful means to the goals of decolonization and human equality; fifth, to support the Second Development Decade; sixth, to help slow down too rapid rates of population growth; seventh, to promote the exploitation of the seabeds and outer space for human benefit; eighth, to organize common action within the United Nations to safeguard the global environment; ninth, to encourage young people from all parts of the world to devote themselves to international service; tenth, to improve the organization, administration and procedures of the United Nations.
15.	If the twenty-fifth General Assembly were to move forward substantially in these directions, this session would indeed rank as one of the most fruitful in United Nations history.
16.	Let me now comment briefly on these points.
17.	We shall all of us on this podium and in the First Committee have much to say during this session about strengthening international peace and security, and about the need to live up to the Charter. This is quite proper. However, what is needed most in this respect is not still more sweeping declarations that merely restate the purposes and principles of the Charter. What is needed is more effective United Nations action on the concrete issues before us, on the Middle East, on United Nations peacekeeping procedures, on means of pacific settlement. Until we demonstrate our willingness to take such effective action, world opinion will continue to be skeptical, no matter what ringing declarations we may make, as to whether the Members of the United Nations are really serious about strengthening international peace and security.
18.	I now come to a subject which should be at the very center of our concern if we wish in fact to strengthen peace and security through the United Nations. I speak of United Nations peacekeeping.
19.	Because the world situation in the past twenty- five years developed differently from what the founders of the United Nations foresaw, it has not been found possible to create forces for the maintenance of international peace and security along the lines laid down in certain articles of Chapter VII. We would hope that at some point the provisions of the Charter designed for enforcement action can be implemented.
20.	In the meantime, however, a modus vivendi has been built up, entirely consistent with the Charter, which has carried out significant and successful peacekeeping operations, sometimes with observers, sometimes with substantial forces, in the Middle East, in Kashmir, in the Congo, in Cyprus and elsewhere. Still it is all too clear that these ad hoc and improvised arrangements need major improvement in several respects if future peacekeeping is to be effective.
21.	The Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, under the able and patient leadership of Ambassador Cuevas Cancino of Mexico, has been laboring for nearly two years at the task of developing peacekeeping guidelines. During the past year the United States has put forward concrete proposals for new procedures that would meet the political concerns of all and yet allow United Nations forces to move rapidly to carry out decisions of the Security Council. But the broad agreement that all desire is still lacking.
22.	It is high time however that the General Assembly, in this twenty-fifth anniversary year, demanded significant movement on this problem. It would be a mistake not to move at all until all are agreed to move all the way. There is strong reason and sufficient consensus for some forward movement at this Assembly. The United States will be prepared to join with others in concrete proposals to this effect.
23.	In this connexion we welcome the statement made at Lusaka in the Declaration of the nonaligned countries concerning the United Nations, that measures should be taken at this session of the General Assembly to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping, and we look forward with interest to proposals that may be made by those present at that meeting.
24.	Of course, peacekeeping without peaceful settlement is only an expedient, necessary but incomplete and inconclusive. The most potent preventive of conflict is not machinery but the will of disputing parties to show restraint and a spirit of conciliation, and to persist in peaceful methods until settlement is reached. This is a solemn obligation of every United Nations Member under the Charter, and no nation deserves more honor than those who have lived up to it in spite of every obstacle.
25.	In this past year such peaceful settlements, or major steps towards them, have been recorded in a number of situations which reflect great credit on the statesmanship of those involved. I have in mind, for example, the progress made, with the assistance of the Organization of American States, toward resolving the dispute between El Salvador and Honduras; and also the recent peaceful decision on the future of Bahrain, in which good offices provided by the Secretary General played a major role.
26.	As these cases show, where the will to settle exists, effective machinery can do much to help. This is true of regional organizations, and it is no less true of the relevant organs of the United Nations, above all the Security Council.
27.	In this connexion we have welcomed the Security Council's decision [see 1544th meeting] as proposed by Finland, to hold periodic high-level meetings under Article 28 of the Charter. My country looks forward to taking part in the first such meeting later this fall. We welcome likewise the valuable suggestion of Brazil committees of the Council, including the parties to a dispute, might be created to help settle particular disputes.
28.	To the same end, the United States would favor the reactivation of certain machinery for peaceful settlement which has long been dormant. Many years ago the General Assembly created a Panel on Inquiry and Conciliation [resolution 268 (III)], and more recently a register of fact-finding experts. My Government will soon nominate qualified individuals for both of these bodies. We believe fact-finders should be available to
1 Third Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non Aligned Countries, held at Lusaka, Zambia, from 8 to 10 September 1970.
the SecretaryGeneral or other organs of the United Nations, or directly to Member States, to report on the facts of situations of international concern at the request or with the consent of one or more of the parties.
29.	Finally, it is most important that we rejuvenate and strengthen the highest organ of judicial settlement, the International Court of Justice. The United States recently joined with others in the Security Council in referring to the Court for its advisory opinion certain aspects of the Namibia situation. We have also joined with others in submitting to this General Assembly an agenda item calling for a review of the role of the Court. We hope this review will suggest ways to enable the Court to make a more substantial contribution to the establishment of the rule of law among nations.
30.	The world has witnessed in recent weeks shocking examples of the consequences of failure to abide by this rule of law examples which have been alluded to by numerous previous speakers on this podium. Hundreds of innocent individuals engaged in peaceful international travel have been brutally seized as hostages in a conflict in which they were in no way involved. Not only their safety and convenience have been placed in jeopardy but their very lives. As President Nixon pointed out in this forum a year ago, this issue "involves the interests of. . . every air passenger and the integrity of that structure of order upon which a world community depends" [1755th meeting, para. 74].
31.	That this view is widely shared is evident from the almost universal condemnation of these most recent acts by Governments the world over and by the resolution on this matter adopted unanimously by the Security Council [286 (1970)]. But condemnation is not enough. It is time to act. The Tokyo Convention, providing for the prompt return of hijacked aircraft passengers and crew, requires the broadest international support. The same is true of the International Civil Aviation Organization's draft multilateral convention for the extradition and punishment of hijackers. In addition, the United States has submitted new proposals to the ICAO, for which I urge your most earnest consideration and support.
32.	The General Assembly's extensive annual debates and resolutions on many aspects of arms control and disarmament have long played, and continue to play, an important part in international negotiations on this most critical of all our problems. I need only mention the partial nuclear test-ban Treaty,  the outer space Treaty [resolution 2222 (XXI)] and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)]. The disarmament conference at Geneva has this year registered significant progress by achieving wide consensus on a draft treaty to prohibit the emplacement of weapons of mass destruction on a vast area of the earth's surface the seabed beneath the oceans.  We hope this draft treaty will be supported by the General Assembly at this session and opened for signature shortly thereafter.
33.	I can assure the Assembly that the United States Government is unceasingly aware of the worldwide concern and need for an end to the arms race and the perilous burden of armaments in all its forms, and that we shall do whatever one negotiating partner can do to bring about new agreements on new steps toward the ultimate goal of general and complete disarmament.
34.	Permit me to say a word about a matter of quite different but equally wide concern that of human rights throughout the world.
35.	In addition to the basic responsibility of Governments to maintain human rights for all their citizens, the United Nations under the Charter has a clear responsibility in this regard. To strengthen the implementation of that responsibility my Government hopes the General Assembly at this session will create a new post, that of High Commissioner for Human Rights, to advise United Nations organs in this field and to assist States, at their request, with human rights problems. This proposal has been thoroughly studied and fully justified. It deserves a high priority at the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
36.	A particular issue of human rights that is of acute concern to my Government, among others, is the protection of the rights of prisoners of war. While these rights have long since been internationally guaranteed, they are in practice still denied to many prisoners of war, as American wives and families of such prisoners know to their great sorrow. The United States strongly hopes that this Assembly will press for worldwide observance of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, verified by impartial inspection. It is intolerable that the tragedy of armed conflict should be compounded by additional inhumanities in violation of international norms.
37.	In no field have the aims of the United Nations found more dramatic fulfilment during its first quarter of a century than in the field of decolonization. Before the Second World War a third of mankind lived in colonial dependencies. Today the proportion is less than 1 per cent. A revolution of independence has created some sixty new nations and has been the main factor in increasing the membership of the United Nations from 51 to 126.
38.	However, the situation in much of southern Africa is still characterized by the denial of self-determination and of racial equality. The United Nations and its member States must continue to exert peaceful efforts to defend and advance these basic human rights of the peoples concerned. Their cause is just and must in time prevail.
39.	Against these evils the United States in recent months has taken further steps. We put into effect last May a new policy designed to discourage United States investment in, and trade with, Namibia so long as South Africa remains in unlawful occupation. We urge other Governments to join us in this policy. My Government continues strictly to observe resolutions in regard to sanctions against the illegal regime in Rhodesia and in regard to the sale of arms to South Africa. We have closed our consulate in Salisbury. We shall continue in every peaceful and practicable way to pursue the ends of justice, equality and self determination.
40.	High on the list of the United Nations contributions to human progress is its longstanding effort to assist in comprehensive global development. That effort is being continued and, we hope, improved and strengthened through the launching of the Second United Nations Development Decade.
41.	The success of the Decade will depend most of all on the policies of Member States, both developed and developing. To bring all these policies into effective focus is the ambitious aim of the development strategy. The United States strongly supports the strategy which is before this Assembly [A 17982, para. 16] and intends to participate fully in this common enterprise.
42.	I wish to leave no doubt of the serious commitment of the United States to the Second Development Decade. President Nixon, in a series of policy decisions and especially in his recent announcement on the new focus of United States economic assistance, has made clear our intention:
(a)	To reverse the downward trend in United States development assistance;
(b)	To increase substantially United States contributions to multilateral development institutions including the World Bank, the International Development Association, the regional development banks and the United Nations Development program so that, as the capabilities of these institutions increase, we may be able to channel through them most of our official development assistance;
(c)	Further to encourage the efforts of donor nations to "untie" their bilateral aid to developing countries from the obligation to import products of the donor country;
(<d) To bring United States science and technology more effectively to bear on the problems of development, and for this purpose to create a new United States International Development Institute;
(<?) To take new steps to stimulate American private investment in developing countries within the framework of the developing countries' plans.
43.	These approaches are already reflected in the new policies my country has announced toward Latin America and Africa, which stress continued assistance, greater multilateral participation, and increased trade and investment.
44.	Finally, bearing in mind the crucial connexion between trade and development, the United States is pressing for a liberalized system of generalized tariff preferences for products of developing countries, with preferential access to the American market, and we are urging that the developing countries receive similar access to the markets of all developed countries.
45.	I wish to add a particular comment on the role of the United Nations Development program. This program, in cooperation with the specialized agencies, has done important pioneering work in development assistance. Its machinery, however, was built for a smaller program and must be reorganized to meet its growing responsibilities. With the aid of last year's excellent "capacity study" ,  the program is now preparing to put the necessary reforms into effect. In planning our future contributions to this important program we in the United States will give major weight to the progress actually achieved m undertaking these reforms.
46.	In recent years people all over the world have suddenly awakened to the inexorable and tragic fact that excessive population growth can, if continued much longer, frustrate all our hopes for peace, justice and progress. There can be no progress for the majority of mankind if population growth outstrips all available means of development. There can be no justice for the majority of mankind where population expands faster than production and social services. There can be no peace for the majority of mankind where progress and justice are unattainable because of unrestrained population growth.
47.	This is not a problem confined to either developed or developing countries. In my own country, although our growth rate has recently slowed to about 1 per cent a year, we have adopted as a national goal the availability within five years of family planning services to every citizen.
48.	Clearly, the need is equally urgent in many nations striving for development whose annual population growth in some cases approaches 4 per cent which means a doubling of the number of people in less than twenty- years. The care and feeding of such enormous numbers of dependent children, their upbringing in conditions compatible with human dignity, could constitute such a burden as to nullify progress in economic development and to cause living standards to remain at past low levels or even to fall lower.
49.	The United States is convinced that the vigorous pursuit of family planning policies is an indispensable element in the strategy of development. In this conviction we have pledged this year $7.5 million to the recently established United Nations Fund for Population Activities, whose services to requesting Governments are rapidly growing.
50.	In the context of development I wish also to emphasize the enormous potential of the world's deep seabeds, whose exploitation is just now beginning to come within the reach of our technology.
51.	Last May President Nixon, in a farreaching announcement concerning the oceans, proposed that an international regime be established by treaty for the exploitation of seabed resources beyond the depth of 200 meters. He further proposed that this regime "should provide for the collection of substantial mineral royalties to be used for international community purposes, particularly economic assistance to developing countries". Early in August the United States circulated in the United Nations seabed Committee  a draft convention [A18021, annex V], embodying these and other important proposals in the President's announcement.
52.	These proposals, if carried out, will amount to a new departure in the history of nations. Never in history has the exploitation of resources of such great potential value been placed under the supervision and regulation of an effective international authority. Never in history has assurance been offered that the international community could have a substantial, independent source of revenue to be equitably divided to serve the interests of mankind as a whole.
53.	The United States hopes that the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly will advance this important enterprise so that a sound and workable international seabed regime, backed up by effective machinery, can come into being as soon as possible. To this end it is important that States refrain from making further claims to jurisdiction over the seabeds or over the waters of the oceans. We believe that a conference on subjects related to the law of the sea, including seabeds, should be called as soon as practicable and that preparatory steps should be initiated by this session of the General Assembly.
54.	I come now to an issue of critical and rapidly growing importance the protection of the human environment. Development and protection of the environment are not mutually contradictory; indeed, they must go hand in hand if the world is to be a fit place in which to live. The United Nations is in a key position to foster the necessary cooperation so that the needs of the environment, as well as those of development, receive the energetic attention they require.
55.	Already the plans for the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972 have begun to take shape and have helped to focus the attention of United Nations Member Governments on this worldwide challenge; but we should not wait for the Stockholm Conference before launching necessary initiatives.
56.	Therefore the United States urges that all of us here, representing both developed and developing countries, work together to enable the United Nations to take the following steps. Firstly, it should identify those environmental problems, especially those pollutants in the atmosphere and the oceans, which are or may be dangerous on a global scale. Second, it should make plans for a coordinated world monitoring network to keep track of these environmental dangers. This network should build on existing programs, particularly those of the agencies of the United Nations family, and should use the most advanced data processing and satellite technology, such as the earth resource survey satellites which my country has been developing. Third, it should collect and analyze the suggestions of governments concerning environmental guidelines for States, both developed and developing, as well as for international institutions engaged in development programs. Fourth, it should explore the possibility of establishing international air and water quality standards. The United States hopes the Assembly at this session will act to advance those important objectives.
51. A newly acute problem which threatens a growing number of societies is the epidemic spread of addiction to dangerous drugs, especially among young people. This phenomenon has mushroomed in a very few years, not only in my own country but in a number of others, both developed and developing. It creates untold misery, violence, lawlessness and economic and human loss.This menace must be stopped. To do so it will be necessary to reinforce existing international agreements and to strengthen the longstanding and excellent work of agencies in this field, especially those of the United Nations. We are glad to note that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs is meeting now to deal with the whole range of problems involved, from the poppy field through the international syndicate to the needle in the vein. My Government hopes that an adequate action program will emerge from this process and will command the energetic support of the community of nations. The United States has already offered, subject to Congressional approval, a contribution of $2 million to such a program.
58.	Finally, it is important that we make better use of the talents of young people in international service, especially the service of the United Nations. Many delegations to this session, including that of the United States, contain youthful members as suggested by the General Assembly a year ago. That is entirely fitting, because the fate of the United Nations and indeed of world peace will soon be in their hands.
59.	With that in mind President Nixon, in his address to this Assembly a year ago [1755th meeting], pledged the enthusiastic support of the United States for Iran's proposal to establish an international volunteer service corps [see 1695th meeting, para. 75], to work in the cause of development and to be recruited on an individual basis from the people, principally young people, of many countries. We hope that proposal will be given final approval in the current session. We hope also that the United Nations will seek new ways to encourage able young people to find careers in its Secretariat and those of the other agencies of the United Nations family.
60.	In these remarks I have discussed only a few of the major tasks facing the United Nations in the years ahead. Even those, however, are enough tc make it obvious that, if we indeed address ourselves to such tasks, the effectiveness of this Organization will be tested more severely than ever. To meet this test we shall have to be far more attentive than has been our habit to many matters of structure, organization and procedure. For example, I would mention the following.
61.	In considering applications for membership by very small States, we must make sure that they are not only willing but also, as the Charter stipulates, able to carry out the Charter's obligations. As the SecretaryGeneral has for years pointed out, many Territories now moving towards independence are too small, either in population or in resources or both, to carry out the minimum obligations which membership requires. Yet these very small entities need more than most the assistance that the United Nations system can provide. Where the burden of membership would be excessive, we should provide a form of association with the United Nations which would enable such States to enjoy the benefits without the burdens of the system.
62.	The persistence of the United Nations financial deficit undermines confidence in the Organization, threatens its capabilities in many fields and casts a cloud over its future. The United States welcomes the SecretaryGeneral's recent call for "a concerted effort to restore the financial solvency of the Organization". We hope that he will himself take a lead in such an effort, in which we shall certainly play our part.
63.	In the annual choice of non-permanent members of the Security Council, it would be well that, as the Charter requires, due regard be specially paid, in the first instance, to the prospective member's contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security, rather than merely to rotation among the members of geographic groups.
64.	The primary consideration in selecting individuals for posts in the Secretariat, above all for senior posts, should be fully to meet the Charter's "paramount consideration" namely "the highest standards of efficiency, competence, and integrity".
65.	We must at long last take decisive steps to streamline the excessively time-consuming organization and procedures of the General Assembly, as Canada has wisely proposed, or else we shall either "drown in a sea of words" or suffocate under an avalanche of paper.
66.	We must take more effective measures to ensure that the entire United Nations system is so organized and managed that it responds efficiently to the directives of its governing organs and to the priority needs of the world. That will require much better administrative and budgetary coordination and control than we have yet achieved.
67.	The United States offers these suggestions in the spirit of the twenty-fifth anniversary session, which we understand to be a spirit of sober determination to make this Organization more effective, to make its future more responsive than its past to the imperative needs of men, women and children everywhere. Many other delegations have offered or will offer their proposals in the same spirit. The test of our seriousness and our success will be how much of this agenda of objectives we can begin to carry out.
68.	We are assembled from the four corners of the earth. The interests of the Governments we speak for often seem to be and sometimes are in contradiction. But by our presence here, by our commitment to the United Nations and its Charter, we have acknowledged that we also have interests in common, interests in peace, justice and progress, interests in the continued habitability of our planet, common interests which we are at last beginning to recognize are inescapable and overriding.
69.	The question now is, do we have the wit not only to perceive these common interests in some vague rhetorical way, but also to act upon them together realistically and decisively even at the cost sometimes of older and narrower interests? If we do not do so, history may sweep aside not only this Organization but also the nations that compose it.
70.	The SecretaryGeneral has said that we may have only ten years left to cope effectively with the problems of our times before they become so staggering as to be beyond our capacities. As we enter the Disarmament Decade and the Second Development Decade, let us keep that warning foremost in our minds and let us be determined to act together to avert catastrophe.




1.   Mr President, my delegation has already extended to you from this rostrum its warm congratulations on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly and has assured you of its co-operation at all times. I wish to associate myself with those remarks and extend to you my personal congratulations and good wishes.
2.	This Assembly is no ordinary Assembly. It marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and is a significant milestone in the story of the international community. It is a time for looking forward and a time for looking back. We must look back at the past quarter of a century to identify the successes and failures, to examine where our procedures have been sound and where we have been misguided, to recognize where we have tried too hard and where not enough, and to assess the correctness of our priorities, emphasis and direction. The information we derive from this necessary process of introspection must be carefully weighed so as to enable us to produce a sound program for the future attention of the Organization, one that will help it to achieve its most important aims more effectively.
3.	On looking back, the unfortunate but unavoidable conclusion is that the achievements of the Organization have not matched the high hopes of its founders. A crisis of confidence has been experienced by Members and even noted by the Secretary-General. Dissatisfaction with the lack of progress by the Organization is
reflected in the call from many quarters for a revision of the Charter with a view to improving the effectiveness of the Organization as an instrument for promoting peace and international security.
4.	It is understandable that this prescription for the maladies of the Organization should appeal to some, but it seems to my Government that treatment of this kind would be misdirected; we should be attempting to cure a symptom instead of the disease. Despite its imperfections, it is not the Charter which is basically at fault, but the lack of will on the part of Members to apply it constructively. Chapter I of the Charter embodies the highest common denominator of the aspirations of the peoples of the world acting in community; but when Member States have participated in the proceedings of organs created by the Charter, they have generally acted as individuals, promoting their own or narrow sectional interests only. The rights, interests and sensitivities of other States have been relegated to a position of subordinate importance, and this has given rise to friction between nations, and the dissemination, even by the Secretariat, of political propaganda directed against Member States. This pattern of behaviour of States diverges fundamentally from the vision of the architects of San Francisco, who would "save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". The conclusion to which we are drawn is that in order to enable the world body more effectively to fill the role it was originally designed to play in world affairs, Member States must return to the spirit of San Francisco. My Government believes that this is the first essential step towards restoring the authority and prestige of the United Nations. The second is that States should honor the letter and the spirit of the existing Charter, being guided by the broadly defined purposes and principles set out in Chapter I.
5.	It has been said, increasingly of late, that the United Nations is merely a mirror of the realities of the existing world situation. There is no disputing that. Nations tend to reach decisions, and act, outside the framework of the United Nations, according to the dictates of self-interest, and then to seek to justify their actions in this forum, or, alternatively, to find a scapegoat to divert attention. In that way Member States have tended to neglect their individual responsibilities.
6.	By signing the Charter, Member States undertook, for instance, to strive for the creation of the conditions of stability and well-being which are essential for peaceful and friendly relations among nations. Article 55 of the Charter deals with that aspect. The creation of these conditions is a responsibility which falls
primarily within the sphere of action of individual States, which should ardently pursue the goals of economic and social development and the well-being of their own peoples. Signatories of the Charter, however, have also committed themselves to act, in their relations with one another, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter, and they have thereby accepted a responsibility vis-a-vis other States and their peoples. Membership has, therefore, brought with it both domestic and international obligations.
7.	It is the appropriate time for Members to take stock of their domestic and international achievements, measured against the standard of the Charter. I am not suggesting that the United Nations should take upon itself the task of weighing up the achievements and/or failures of any particular State or States, a course which would be in violation of the provisions of the Charter. I am suggesting rather that Member States should themselves, in this anniversary year, in the spirit of Article 56 of the Charter, direct their inquiring scrutiny at their own achievements over the past 25 years. It is not merely the question of where they stand today that is relevant, but also of where they are today in comparison with 1945. Accordingly, States should first assess their progress domestically in the fields referred to in Article 55. They might ask themselves to what extent they have succeeded in promoting higher standards of living, full employment, conditions of economic and social progress and development and respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms among their own peoples. Secondly, they should consider whether in their behavior towards others they have acted, and are continuing to act, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
8.	As for my own Government, we know that much remains to be done in the future. But I am glad to say also that much has been accomplished in the past 25 years. The general advancement on all fronts of our diverse peoples has been such that their well-being in 1970 certainly exceeds the most optimistic expectations of 1945. We, therefore, are satisfied that we are making significant headway in acquitting ourselves of our commitment under Article 55 of the Charter. Let there be no doubt that we are as concerned as any other State about the realization of the objectives expressed in that Article. We are furthermore satisfied that we shall continue to make progress in the manner which is best suited to, and is dictated by, "the particular circumstances" existing in the area under our jurisdiction to borrow a phrase from Article 73 of the Charter.
9.	Article 55 emphasizes respect for the right of self- determination of peoples. This does not mean that in multinational countries or groupings, one group or nation which happens to be in the majority should be allowed, in the exercise of its right of self- determination, to deprive other numerically smaller nations of the same right. Accordingly, in the exercise of self-determination in such multinational countries, the history and diversity of the peoples living there should be taken fully into account.
10.	South Africa is a multinational country. Our population does not consist of only two elements, a black nation and a white nation. It is composed, in fact, of a white nation and several non-white nations or peoples and the distinction between them is based on the fact that their language, culture, history and traditions differ from one another as markedly as day does from night. In other words the distinction is not based solely on race or colour. We believe that in applying the principle of self-determination, the rights of each of these nations should be preserved. Since 1948, when it first came to power, my Government has actively promoted self-determination for those of our peoples not yet enjoying it, on this basis.
11.	Today all peoples in South Africa possess self- government in varying forms and at various levels of development. Most of our black African peoples, for instance, already have their own legislative and executive assemblies, or councils, with the necessary administrative departments. The Xhosa people of the Transkei were the first to receive a modern parliament and their own Government after their first general election was held in 1963. During the past two years no fewer than eight new territorial Governments have been established with their own legislative and executive councils and with approximately 50 state departments already under their control. In this process of evolution towards independence the peoples of each of these territories have acquired a representative and responsible Government which is actively engaged in planning their own future and preparing them for independence in co-operation with the South African Government, in a peaceful and orderly manner.
12.	On the 15th of last month, in the South African Parliament, my Prime Minister restated government policy in that respect. He reaffirmed that our policy does not constitute a denial of human dignity and added that while he claimed for himself the right of maintaining his identity as a white person, he also conceded to every non-white nation living in South Africa the right to its own identity. He continued as follows:
"Here in South Africa a Bantu person has never got into trouble for having requested and demanded self-determination for his people. Quite the contrary! We are in fact guiding them along the road to self- determination; we are in fact preparing them for self- determination; we are in the process of training them and making them and their land receptive to self- determination. If honorable members or the outside world ask me when it will happen that they go their own way, I can merely reply once again that this Parliament has passed certain legislation and that any black nation is at liberty to come to this Parliament and say that the time has arrived for it to go its own way. This Government, or whatever other Government may be in power, will deliberate and negotiate with that nation.
"I want to make the principle very clear: if there is a desire to hold discussions, we shall be obliged and ready to enter into such discussions. It stands to reason that we would prefer these discussions to be deferred until greater development has taken place in those black territories so that they may be more viable and better prepared to stand on their own feet. But it is by no means my intention to make it a condition that they must be viable before they have the right to approach us. This is their inalienable right, which they can exercise tomorrow if they so desire."
13.	After the black peoples of South Africa have attained independence we shall not desert them. We shall continue to assist them in a spirit of good neighborliness. We shall continue to co-operate with them to our mutual advantage and, in the nature of things, on a much larger scale than we are already doing in the case of our other newly independent African neighbors. In the long term this political development could lead to a commonwealth of independent peoples and States, living side by side on a basis of sovereign equality. They will continue to be inter-dependent economically, but there will be no domination of any one people or any one State by others.
14.	To the skeptics who may still refuse to believe in the feasibility or practicability of the program I have outlined perhaps because of the size and economic viability of the Territories or homelands we are leading to independence let me say this: the populations of the Territories in question range between 300,000 and 3.5 million, populations which exceed those of many States which belong to this Organization and are represented here today. Their areas, too, exceed the areas of many Members of the United Nations. The gross national income of several of those Territories compares more than favorably with that of some Member States. Moreover, South Africa itself has one of the strongest and fastest developing economies in the entire world. In the light of our economic interdependence and our commitment to regional co-operation, economic stability in southern Africa will be guaranteed and development in all fields assured.
15.	Against that background we do not believe that we can legitimately be accused of denying the peoples of South Africa the right of self-determination. As I have said, our whole policy is aimed at avoiding domination of any one people or any one State by others. It is designed to enable each nation, while maintaining its identity, to realize its own ambitions to the full. That surely is the essence of self-determination.
16.	Apart from the right of self-determination, there are other equally important basic rights. Almost three decades ago President Roosevelt outlined his four "freedoms" which are today no less important than they were then. In those, and other fields mentioned in Article 55 of the Charter, substantial progress has been made in my country. Freedom of religion and speech, the liberty of the person, inviolability of person and property and free access to courts of impartial justice are assured. But here, too, the rights of the individual must not be exercised in such a way as to deprive others of that same right. Hence, those rights can be enjoyed only within the framework of an ordered and peaceful society. Only in such a society can high standards of living, full employment and conditions  of economic and educational progress and development be realized for the individual human being.
17.	Other freedoms are related to the fundamental needs of man, for example, freedom from poverty and want and the need for health, education and other social services. Freedom from poverty and want is directly related to economic advancement. It is significant in this respect that the real per capita income of South Africa rose by 66 per cent during the 20 years from 1949 to 1969. As regards other services, we have implemented an education program which will within one generation eliminate illiteracy and which provides opportunities for a university education to increasing numbers of students of all races; we have opened up avenues of technical instruction for non- white persons in all fields; we have established and staffed Africa's most outstanding hospitals and heavily subsidized them, so that black African patients are charged a single fee of 70 United States cents irrespective of the complexity of the treatment they receive or the period they remain in hospital; we have built 600,000 houses in 20 years, 400,000 of which were for black African persons.
18.	We do not claim that in the pursuit of the ideals set out in Article 55 we have reached the stage where we can be self-satisfied. We do not claim to be perfect; but neither are we hypocrites. We acknowledge the common ideals and aspirations of mankind and we have formulated our policies accordingly. We recognize the problems that we have to overcome; we do not, however, criticize others for their shortcomings, for we realize that no State can be perfect. But many others do not hesitate to condemn our policies on moral and practical grounds. These charges are, however, completely unfounded. How can a system be wrong which leads peoples to self-determination and enables and assists them in maintaining their national identities; which provides them with higher social, educational and economic standards that can be attained anywhere else on the continent; which prepares them for independence by providing them with technical assistance and administrative support, thus creating opportunities for all of them to gain valuable experience in the art of government at various levels; which guarantees security for all by avoiding a struggle for power between non-white and white in South Africa and also between competing and traditionally hostile African nationalisms? In the light of the realities of the world today and of the substantial progress we have made in South Africa in the field of human uplift and in the light of the premises and objectives of our policies as I have described them, I feel that the record of South Africa can be measured honorably against the ideals set out in the Charter.
19.	I now wish to refer briefly to the wider field of the individual Member's responsibility. Here it is the duty of Member States to reflect to what extent each of them, individually, has adhered to the basic purposes and principles of the Charter. Without this, all our efforts to promote the moral and social welfare of our peoples would be in vain. These provisions impose a duty on Member States not only towards their own peoples but also towards other States and their peoples. I wish to refer to only three of these provisions, which in present circumstances cannot be sufficiently emphasized: first, the call to the United Nations to be a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the purposes and principles of the Charter; secondly, the call to all Members to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered, and, thirdly, as a corollary to this, the call to all Members to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State.
20.	Unless Members, individually and collectively, are willing to apply these provisions in their daily relations with others, there can be little hope of achieving the ideals of the Charter, of making a reality of the better world envisaged in 1945.
21.	My Government, for its part, has made it clear time and again that we base our relations with other States, first, on acceptance of the rule of nonintervention in their internal affairs; and secondly, on acceptance of the principle that differences of political systems are no bar to peaceful coexistence and friendly relations.
22.	We are of Africa. It is in this continent, especially in the southern region, that our destiny lies. We believe it to be in everyone's interest that all the countries of the region should develop and prosper, that the real enemies of Africa disease, ignorance, poverty and misery should be conquered.
23.	It is of cardinal importance, moreover, that the security and stability of this region should be preserved. We are therefore dismayed to note the emphasis being placed in various United Nations bodies on the use of force as a means for attaining political objectives in southern Africa.
24.	The strengthening of international security and the preservation of peace and order throughout the world is a major preoccupation of the United Nations this year. How can these aims be reconciled with resolutions not only condoning but actually encouraging the use of force in an area of the world where it is least likely to solve any problems? It should not be necessary for me to point out that it cannot be in the interest of any of the peoples of southern Africa to have the stability and security of the region shattered, for without stability and security the future progress and prosperity of the region are in jeopardy. I wish to state in this connexion that I welcome the stand which the Secretary-General took in a statement a fortnight ago against subversive activities and inter-ference in the internal affairs of other nations.
25.	My Government has been obliged to take cognizance of the growing threat to the southern African region and it has a duty to ensure the security of its peoples. Having said this, I must emphasize, however, that South Africa has no aggressive designs. Indeed, any form of aggression is foreign to our history, our traditions, our outlook and our policy.
26.	Two weeks ago, my Prime Minister reminded Parliament of his statement on assuming office four years ago that the independent black States on the borders of the Republic had no cause to spend a single cent on arms for their own defense since they knew that South Africa would not attack them and that they had nothing to fear from us.
27.	Certain States persist, however, in questioning our good faith. In these circumstances my Prime Minister stated that he was prepared to negotiate a non- aggression treaty with any African State, whether that State was an immediate neighbor or was situated further away, such as Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania and other States in Africa. He added that he was prepared to take the initiative in negotiating a non-aggression treaty of this nature.
28.	From this rostrum I wish to invite other African States to give serious consideration to my Prime Minister's offer to conclude non-aggression pacts with them. It is our earnest hope that they will respond positively to this gesture. For my part, I shall be happy to discuss the matter further with representatives of any other African States who may be interested in our proposal or who may wish to have further information about it.
29.	We have heard a great deal in the last 12 months of the Lusaka Manifesto.1 If the spirit which this Manifesto has been said to symbolize does indeed reflect a genuine desire on the part of the African States to find a peaceful solution to the problems of Africa, one might have expected my Prime Minister's initiative to have been welcomed. This unfortunately has not so far been the case. I note with disappointment, indeed surprise, that certain African States have already rejected our offer. I hope very much that they will reconsider their attitude, for I know of nothing more that South Africa can do or say to convince them that any fears they may have of aggressive intentions on our part are totally unfounded. I trust, however, that if they should persist in spuming our offer they will at least refrain from accusing us of aggressive designs in future, for continued accusations of this sort cannot be reconciled with a rejection of a non-aggression pact.
30.	For our part, we are firmly resolved to pursue policies which will contribute to the maintenance of peace and the solution of the urgent problems which will face Africa in the years ahead. We would welcome co-operating with others in this great and challenging task. The Charter enjoins us to practice tolerance and to co-operate with one another. Surely in this commemorative year it is for us to respond positively. Let us all, therefore, rededicate ourselves to the ideals of the Charter and resolve to work together to achieve greater understanding and a better future for all mankind.



84.	  Within one month, when we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of this Organization, we will emphasize its merits, too often ill-appreciated, recall the services that it has always rendered in spite of all its setbacks and redefine the hopes which we still place in it as a founding Member. "Patience," said a famous French moralist, "is the art of hoping".
85.	But today, as this anniversary draws near, is it not our duty to proceed to a certain examination of our consciences without hiding any truth, without masking any reality, carefully avoiding giving lessons that we are less ready to receive and especially taking
9
for our criteria not the interest of any given country no matter how legitimate but the future, the duties and the opportunities of the international community that we claim, that we want to be?
86.	If I had hesitated to choose this path, the character of the statesmen whom we have happily chosen to preside over our work after Mrs. Angie Brooks-Randolph whose competence and authority all of us greatly appreciated would have been enough to suggest it to me. This statesman not only represents the moral strength of a legal tradition; the name he bears, and I say this with emotion, is associated with the history of the founding of an international community. His father, whom I knew in my youth, was twice President of the Assembly of the League of Nations and represented Norway at the San Francisco Conference, in which you yourself, Mr. President, did take part. Finally, you remind us of the indomitable courage which earned the victory over Nazism without which the very name of the United Nations would never have found expression.
87.	What qualities do we need today, if not boldness in the face of challenge, and faithfulness to the principles of the law, so that we may justify our existence, that is, in the long run and in spite of every thing, successfully to counter violence with equilibrium? I shall try neither to cover every topic nor to mention every continent, nor to define once again the attitude of my country with regard to crises which are threatening or shaking the world, but merely to reply to the question which, as we all know, as we all feel in our hearts, and as was said by all the speakers this morning, the people, all the peoples of the world, are asking themselves and asking us as the spectacular ceremonies approach next month: Why so much disappointment in the face of so much hope? Why let us speak plainly this gnawing sensation of impotence to which none of us is resigned?
88.	I will give my three answers before I justify them. None of them grant me this at least is dictated by concern, fear or resentments special to my country or to a group of countries. In mentioning them I am referring only to the principles which, a quarter of a century ago, gave birth to the Charter.
89.	In three sentences here they are: our weakness, first of all, is the void caused by the absence from among us of a large part of mankind. Our weakness, secondly, is the inadequate effort made by the most fortunate peoples in aiding the struggle of the least favored peoples against hunger, disease, stagnation; and, lastly, our weakness is the resignation to a certain division of power which, unless we take care, will perpetuate the split in the world and, under cover of opposing blocs, condemn the majority of nations which paid so dearly to win the pride of their independence to choose one hegemony or submit to it.
90.	Must we then, in the first place, take the universality of the United Nations for an illusion? What is actually an illusion is to believe that the Organization can perform its task while remaining incomplete. Our Secretary-General, to whom I wish to pay a just tribute here, has never been more worthy of his lofty function than recently when he asked us in effect: Shall we, under the pretext that the debate on the question of China has been going on for twenty years, behave as if it could go on for another twenty years?
91.	Let us consider this carefully. On the one hand, the whole world recognizes as has just been done in Oslo in particularly felicitous terms by ti.e democracies of northern Europe, whose heartening vitality I noted once again last week in Finland that only a political solution, a negotiated solution, can bring an end to the unjust, interminable drama which has bathed South-East Asia in blood. On the other hand, everybody recognizes that this political, negotiated solution requires the participation of China. Everybody deplores the fact that the United Nations cannot bring an end to a tragedy which scandalizes the conscience and common sense of the world because the majority of those whom it concerns above all are unable to bear witness here to their suffering, their ruin and their dead.
92.	However, the debate on which, in the long run, the end of this artificial state of affairs depends is postponed from one year to the next as if it were a scholastic disputation or an oratorical joust. Avoiding the issue prevents the United Nations from assuming its responsibilities and the People's Republic of China from exercising its own.
93.	The Soviet Union and we congratulate it on this has renewed its dialog with Peking. The United States, in turn, can only feel a little more, with every passing day and year, the desire to resume the dialog. If the General Assembly encouraged them either to persist or to commit themselves more resolutely to this task, it might well be that the dynamism of peace would be released in Asia. Then the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Organization could almost do without our speeches. It would be celebrated by the gratitude of the peoples of Viet-Nam, Cambodia and Laos, beloved by France, and for whom the President of the French Republic would at last no longer have to ask for justice.
94.	But it is not in Asia alone that the service of the truth presupposes the recognition of realities.
95.	The conclusion of a non-aggression treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union  is in itself an element of detente, understanding and co-operation one of the basic steps that General de Gaulle had wanted, announced and prepared. But, at this point, we have one more reason to welcome it. It brings us closer to the day when "the whole of Europe" that Mr. Georges Pompidou spoke about at The Hague Conference  will be present here in this Assembly. Let us not say that we are still far from this, but let us rather say that we are less far.
96.	However, when we think of the United Nations as it should be, we must not divert our attention from what it is. Now, this shows up another weakness. Of course, it is not responsible for the growing disparity between the standards of living and the conditions of existence of countries which make up this Organization. On the contrary, to its credit, it has emphasized, analyzed, sometimes revealed, this increase in iniquity. One would have to mention twenty names to pay a just tribute to the intelligence, depth and generosity of the reports and studies that have made it possible to map out the problems without hiding the difficulties. This is all to the good. And now? Well, now the time has come to harness the goodwill of States. The time has come to obtain from each one of them commitments equal to its capacities. What the preliminary work shows is that it is no longer possible to mention any real reason, any acceptable excuse, to further delay this moment.
97.	As the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development forecast last month at Geneva, the "year 2000, without new collective efforts, will see the share of the developing countries in world exports drop to 10 per cent". It is easy to understand that those countries cannot, without a certain bitterness, compare this prophecy with the sentence I noted in the last annual report of the World Bank: "The work of the commission headed by Mr. Lester Pearson on joint action for the development of the third world has given rise to wide-ranging discussions in official circles."
98.	Is there anyone here who could possibly believe that the stage of discussion even wide-ranging discussions should not be over? France recently defined the objectives of her new Plan. Figures and percentages will hardly be found in it. It is a rule of conduct which will not surprise economists. But we did make one exception: whatever the circumstances, credits devoted to aid to development will remain above 1 per cent of our gross national product. More than half of these credits will be absorbed by public aid which itself comprises more than 80 per cent in grants.
99.	Those who have been associated with the work of General de Gaulle, and, primarily, the present President of the Republic, believe that decolonization itself creates obligations. That is why and I say so weighing every word they are and expect to remain attentive to all requests which reach them from Africa. That is also why they feel authorized to say to you: may common action for the development of the third world become our mutual obsession at last.
100.	But serious as they may be, the weaknesses resulting from certain absences and a certain deficiency are at least known and, most often, admitted. No one considers that the collective effort in favor of the peoples who have the right to claim it is sufficient or satisfactory. No one can regard it as normal that a quarter of mankind is outside the United Nations. On the other hand there is a third danger of which less is said but which should be squarely faced the danger that threatens the balance of responsibilities on which the Charter, and therefore the United Nations itself, is founded. I repeat: the balance of responsibilities. It would disappear if the strongest Powers shirked their own responsibilities; it would equally be upset if they pretended to assume the responsibilities of others, or if others relinquished the responsibilities which their status as Members of the United Nations gives them. Hegemony, exclusive or shared, is the surest way of preventing the United Nations from breathing and therefore from acting.
101.	Three consequences flow from this double statement. First the dialog and rapprochement of the major Powers are desirable and beneficial. Secondly, the international community cannot have guardians. Thirdly, due to the very fact that they are immune to the temptation of guardianship, a special duty falls to the countries which, though not among the highest ranking Powers, are permanent members of the Security Council.
102.	Those three principles are fully applicable to the crisis in the Middle East. All of us welcome with relief the determination seen in the leaders of the two Powers which possess the most fearful strategic weapons to replace controversy by negotiation. As for France, we find involved, on the one hand, our oldest ally and, on the other, a great friendly country with which France has developed closer and closer bonds of co-operation. The President of the French Republic, who has surely not forgotten his reception by President Nixon, was a few months ago the guest of Washington. In a few days, he will be the guest of Moscow. When, in one of the most troubled areas of the world, the movement towards peace receives a new impetus from the dialog happily re-established between Moscow and Washington, it is only natural that we should rejoice about it. That is our first point.
103.	And here is the second. The more we consider it to be indispensable, in view of reappearing and growing threats, to do everything possible to ensure respect for the cease-fire and to do away with obstacles to negotiations, the more we see that the sharing of power or influence cannot form a basis for peace. "If the situation is disturbing for the bordering countries", a high-level Arab official, the Foreign Minister of Tunisia, recently said, "it is because it makes the Mediterranean one of the centers of encounter or of confrontation of the two greatest world Powers as was Europe during the fifties which means that its destiny is not completely its own". Now is not our basic maxim precisely this: that no one, except that country itself, may decide the fate of a nation?
104.	How, then, to move away from trusteeships and guardianships, even involuntary ones, without losing the advantage of beneficial rapprochements? The third and last point gives the reply. It is necessary that recommendations be drawn up not for the advantage of one State or one ethnic group, one religion or one culture, but in order to re-establish, in a region which has already given so much to mankind, a zone of cooperation between all ethnic groups, all religions, all cultures which exist there side by side, in the respect for boundaries and the rights of all the States. It is also necessary that these recommendations be mutual. That is, far from becoming a means for one State to put pressure upon another, they should propose procedures of implementation which would be both substantial and well-balanced for all the rules laid down by the Security Council resolution [242 (1967)], whether it be a question of withdrawal from conquered lands or guarantees of peace, freedom of navigation or the rights of the Palestinian refugees.
105.	Now who can permanently defend the spirit and letter of this resolution? Who can somehow be the permanent representative of the international community, if not precisely the whole formed by the perma-nent members of the Security Council? "The area of agreement between the Four is much wider than the area of disagreement", our Secretary-General rightly said at a recent press conference. At the same time he thus reminded us that the agreement of the Four is the true way to arrive at our goal without divesting the United Nations as a whole of the irreplaceable responsibilities it assumes and should continue to assume in that part of the world.
106.	Without naming them I have just mentioned two European countries, my own and the United Kingdom. It is not by chance that I link them. The Conference of The Hague, as you know, opened up a new chapter. In making public its decision to make its work irreversible, the European Economic Community showed not once but twice that it wanted to be neither exclusive nor inward-looking. It showed this first by opening itself to all European States which accept its rules and goals Britain as well as Ireland, Norway as well as Denmark, to mention only the present candidates. It showed this also by affirming that its mission prevented it from transforming itself into a bloc confronting other blocs. It is not only for itself that it wishes to be an independent center of progress and prosperity. Today, everyone can see that the building of Europe is in fact inseparable from European detente and thus from world peace.
107.	Moreover, the bonds of solidarity which, thanks to the Yaounde Conventions,  join it to Africa are only one example of the mission which a reconciled Europe can assume in the world. It is right that, from the shores of the Mediterranean to the whole of Latin America, people should turn towards that Europe and place their hopes in it. For it is known that, fortified by its own originality, it will certainly not threaten but rather encourage the independence of others.
108.	The celebration of the awe-inspiring anniversary of which I spoke at the beginning may have started last week when a wholesome and significant unanimity was reached in the Security Council [see resolution 286 (1970)] in denouncing, in the face of a new form of premeditated violence, the hijacking of aircraft as well as any other interference with international civil air travel, and reprisals against innocent people. Respect for human rights is not an obligation only for States but also for peoples;, groups, individuals and especially those who may have cause to invoke it.
109.	The same moral strength of the collective con-science should be brought to bear to find a remedy through specific steps to the inadequacy of the international protection of basic rights. One example, among so many others, comes to mind. I am thinking of those journalists on dangerous missions who have often, by their very objectivity, contributed to the freeing and liberation of unfortunate peoples and whose fearless, professional conscience has led them to an unfair death. As long ago as 1968, the International Congress of Montecatini turned to the United Nations to ensure that these indispensable witnesses should receive legal protection suitable to their mission. Our forthcoming discussions regarding respect for human rights in times of armed conflict should make it possible for us to respond to this appeal.
110.	But the protection of human rights is indivisible. It obliges every Member of the United Nations to condemn discrimination, first and foremost racial discrimination, apartheid, whatever the pretext or method. We have not forgotten the words which the President of the Federal Republic of Cameroon used in speaking about this in the General Assembly last year [1756th meeting]. He would have proved to us, had it been necessary, that respect for the Charter and concern for its effectiveness are in the long run the true means to fight for the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
111.	In truth, these principles on which our Organization is founded have lost none of their vitality and power of attraction in twenty-five years. These principles are evoked by peoples everywhere in the world to defend their independence or to obtain, at long last, the right freely to choose their destiny. These are the principles in which today's youth, restless, boisterous and demanding, is trying to find an ideal again, as quite recently the World Youth Assembly  showed us here.
112.	May so much assembled hope give us the strength to overcome our weaknesses. The enjoyment of the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights requires, first of all, that arms be silent. This is why, on the eve of a re-examination of our consciences, we are resolved are we not? to be worthy of the trust which people put in us, by placing more clarity, wisdom and boldness in the service of peace.



110.	 Mr. President, I should like first to say how glad I am to sit under you as President in this anniversary year. It is particularly appropriate, as we pass the quarter-century mark, that our President should be the representative of a State which has contributed so much to the United Nations and to the League of Nations before it; that he should have been a delegate at San Francisco; and that he should be one who has made so great a personal contribution to the analysis of that international law of which this Organization was intended to be the prime instrument.
111.	I should also like to say what a personal pleasure it is to me, after an absence of seven years from the United Nations, to find our SecretaryGeneral still at his post. Politicians come and go; the Secretary General remains. I am bound to say that that is the right way round.
112.	In what I have to say this morning, I start again where I left off seven years ago, talking about the rule of law.
113.	The commemorative session will be the right occasion for a general review, as we look back over our achievements and our failures since 1945. Two weeks ago I did not think that I would trouble this Assembly with an assessment, in view of the fact that my Prime Minister is coming here later on. But since then the attention of the world has been captured by a horrifying series of events.
114.	They began with a week of incidents which were properly described by our SecretaryGeneral as a "return to the law of the jungle". He was right. In the jungle there is fear; the law men know does not exist. In the same way, all people in the world have been frightened and lawful Governments have been almost helpless in the face of violence and threats of violence which are alien to the civilized world.
115.	If they had been isolated criminal acts, these events would not have deserved our attention here. But as it is, they have come as a portent to us a glimpse of the forces of lawlessness and anarchy that still exist a reminder of how very thin is the veneer of civilization on which we reply. These events therefore demand attention here in this General Assembly, above all, because they epitomize a danger which threatens the aim of every State, the aim of the United Nations and that is that law should rule both men and nations.
116.	This Organization was created to maintain the peace of the world by collective measures, and to provide for the peaceful settlement of disputes between States. The authors of the Charter of our United Nations did foresee one of the dangers ahead. That danger was the interference by force in the internal affairs of one country by another. But one development which the authors of the Charter did not anticipate was that the peace should be threatened by armed forces outside their Government's control. The anarchy produced by force in that guise can be just as wrecking to peace as direct aggression.
117.	When I last spoke to the Assembly, I felt optimistic. It seemed to me that the cold war might be drawing to an end. I recalled a television broadcast which I had made in Moscow at Mr. Gromyko's invitation to the people of the Soviet Union, when I said that a renunciation by the Soviet Government of the use of war and force to impose a political doctrine was the key which would open the way to genuine coexistence.
118.	Looking back over those seven years, we can note that there have been some very serious setbacks to that optimism, but nevertheless it seems partially to have been justified. The new willingness to negotiate which we had then begun to perceive has continued, and through negotiation some of the darkest of the clouds which used to menace us have started to lift.
If the United States and the Soviet Union can reach agreement on limitations to their nuclear arsenals, that will be a long step forward. I say that, even as a European on whom the missiles will still be concentrated. But we hope for the success of the strategic arms limitation talks. It will not free us from the recurring nightmare of global destruction. That possibility will remain as long as States have access to the ultimate weapons. But such an agreement could slow down the growth of the means of destruction, and so give new life to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which has up to now been almost totally frustrated. On its ability to achieve positive results much of the happiness and, it may be, the survival of man hangs.
119.	Other negotiations are taking place on issues which have threatened peace in Europe since 1945. There is the recent treaty between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany", and the Federal Republic's negotiations with its other neighbors to the East. They hold the key to constructive coexistence in Europe.
120.	The test, of course, as always, is not in words but deeds, and in that area Berlin is still the key to real coexistence. If we cannot agree to take the humanitarian step of lowering the barriers between two halves of a city, what hope is there for two halves of the European continent to live in peace? Berlin therefore will be the touchstone of the will of the peoples of Europe to achieve detente between East and West, It was in Berlin that the ordeal of 1939 to 1945 ended for Europe; and it is in Berlin that Europe is still waiting for a release from the aftermath of war and the beginning of a peace which is real.
121.	No one should underestimate the importance of such a release. Europe cannot throw stones at others. It was in wars which spread from Europe over the whole world that this Organization and its predecessor were both conceived. But a new Western Europe is emerging now, and as Mr. Schumann said here last Friday [1842nd meeting, this Europe will inevitably be more outward-looking a more powerful center of economic growth carrying a fertilizing process far outside the borders of that particular continent. That is why our negotiations in Europe have a significance for every country represented here.
122.	We must note with honesty that all these negotiations are going on outside the framework of the United Nations. Nevertheless, their importance is fundamental to us here. When our predecessors at San Francisco framed the Charter, they based their hopes of peace on the collective determination of what were then the major Powers, and there are two ways in which these hopes have since been undermined.
123.	The first, which has already been mentioned by one or two speakers this morning, is that not all the major Powers are represented in the United Nations. This has made it undoubtedly more difficult for us to tackle effectively in this forum some of the most pressing and dangerous problems that trouble the
c Signed in Moscow on 12 August 1970.
world. I am thinking as have others, and as did Mr. Schumann of China. The Chinese are increasingly involved in those very situations around the world which engage our attention here.
124.	If the representatives of Peking were seated here their influence would be greatly felt. I cannot forecast what it would mean. They could well, by the rigidity of their political doctrine, make our tasks more difficult. But they have more than many to gain from expanding trade, from prosperity and from interdependence. They could add immensely if they chose, along with the rest of us, to real coexistence. Their intentions, in the opinion of the British Government, should be put to the proof in this assembly of nations.
125.	The second disappointment for the hopes of 1945 has, very simply, been that it has so seldom been possible for the major Powers to reach a collective view on any important issue of world politics. Until now, our collective postures have at best been negative. That is why the negotiations in Helsinki, in Vienna and in Berlin are so important for us here in the United Nations. Because if the 1960s saw the beginning of an era of negotiation, the 1970s could see at last the beginning of an era of collective action for the maintenance of peace collective action based on the common desire of the most powerful nations in the world to work together for political stability and for the settlement of disputes. That opportunity is there.
126.	The authors of the Charter assumed harmony between the leading Powers. But, of course, the ink was scarcely dry on the signatures of the Charter before that hope and trust were falsified. The lesson of the years since then is unmistakable, and it is that there can be no collective action without a collective aim and a common interest. If there does begin to emerge at last, out of all the negotiations now in progress, a common interest in peace and stability, it will transform our work in the next Twenty-five years, both in the Security Council and in the Assembly of this Organization, and that transformation would immediately be reflected in the relationship between countries in many parts of the world.
127.	There is one challenge, above all, which such determination would help us to meet. Provided a balance of strength a balance of terror, if you like is kept, the old-fashioned war of the Charter is a receding threat. States are less inclined today to pursue their political objectives through alliance and ultimatum, through mobilization and declared belligerency. To this extent, one of the ideals of San Francisco is being realized, even though this has been due in part and the admission is shameful in a civilized world at this time to the fearsome growth in the destructiveness of total war.
128.	Nevertheless, in many parts of the world today men are fighting. Victims are falling to the bullet, the shell and the grenade. All too often those victims are innocent civilian bystanders, and it is not much comfort to the widow or the orphan that no war has been declared. It is time for us in this Assembly squarely to face the fundamental, unacceptable dangers of condoning those who take the law into their own hands. We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down and once again to submit themselves to the rule of law.
129.	There is and it will be readily perceived by this Assembly and it has been touched upon by several speakers a cruel dilemma here. For force is so dreadful a weapon in modern terms that one has to add: "... lay down their arms, even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice".
130.	The Charter of the United Nations visualized this dilemma. Our predecessors insisted on the proclamation of human rights consistent with the dignity of man, of which the representatives of Gambia and Zambia both spoke just now. And it is undoubtedly our duty to do all we can by example to secure that countries practice social justice. There are today, and we have heard them mentioned, political systems where social injustice rules, and it is right that they should be exposed, whether it is suffering under communism, or suffering under apartheid, or suffering under any other of the creeds which do not square with the practices of true democracy.
131.	But the authors of the Charter perceived another and an equal truth; that if the nations tried to impose upon each other their own notions of justice and to do it by force, that would be the finish of international order. That is why an appeal to arms, except for defense against external aggression, was expressly forbidden under our rules. If that was right then, it is a hundred times more so now. For if the end can justify the means, then more and more groups of unknown men will take up arms; they will put themselves above and beyond the law and, what is more, they will put themselves above the legal Governments of countries represented here.
132.	Kidnapping and hijacking make that lesson plain and the nations must deal with them. In the case of the. hijackers, the duty of individual Governments is clear. We should all ratify the Tokyo Convention  and support the new Convention at the forthcoming Hague Conference. We should all make hijacking a crime in our own countries, and allow it to be punished by any Government in whose territory a hijacked aircraft lands. If we could agree on these and other measures which may result from the international conference now to be held, perhaps this new and dreadful illegality could be brought under control. It is, however, a most vivid and contemporary example of how force used on a small scale can spread its repercussions far and wide, and when that happens in this modem world it is almost always the innocent who are the victims.
133.	But the dangers of the overspill of force go far beyond hijacking. This week we have an example before us of how people, who act sincerely in the name of justice as they see it and take to arms, can start a bloody widespread war beyond the control of legal Governments.
134.	After Twenty- years of intolerance and bloodshed in the Middle East, the hopes of coexistence in place of belligerency began to grow. We took a British initiative, and as a result of it we have now a Security Council resolution which sets out the essential terms of a settlement. A Special Representative for the Middle East has been appointed in whom we all have full confidence. In that forum, the four Powers in New York, we in Britain are ready to play a full part. Mr. Maurice Schumann last week [ibidj gave a most penetrating analysis of this work, which was started by his Government, and so I need not repeat what he said. The world began to breathe again when, on the United States initiative which the rest of us support, a ceasefire was agreed upon.
135.	But there has been a breakdown, which could be fatal. Violations of the conditions for an end to the fighting have been alleged. I am not judging that issue today, except to say this, that the minimum basis of trust has, for the moment, been destroyed and ways must be found to repair it. Otherwise we shall get back into the situation where we were a few weeks ago, with the danger of the Middle Eastern conflict always spreading to something much wider than a battle or confrontation between Israel and Egypt.
136.	But all this ambition for the greater peace and security of the area has been overlaid by the civil war in Jordan and it is a doubly tragic development. These refugees in whose interest this Organization has worked so hard now find themselves not only in conflict with the Government of a country which has given them refuge; they are also in declared and violent opposition to a settlement whose basic elements have been endorsed by the Security Council of the United Nations.
137.	The degree of desperation to which these people have been driven is, in some way, a measure of the failure of our Organization over the years to solve this problem in which it has been so deeply engaged. But the use of force to try and solve it has already left a deep scar on Arabia.
138.	The immediate priority must be to make an end to the tragic strife in Jordan and in that context we can welcome the apparent withdrawal of foreign intervention yesterday from Jordanian soil and to ensure humanitarian treatment for all those who have been wounded or made homeless by the conflict. We are relying on the Arab Governments to achieve these minimum objectives.
139.	The larger task, though, is still before us, and the events of the past two weeks have only added to its dimensions and complexity. The surest basis for any hope of settlement in the end must still be this; that all those concerned will support our efforts here in the United Nations to achieve and guarantee a peace that will bring security and justice to those concerned.
140.	It was that consensus which so recently seemed to be bringing a settlement within our reach; it is that consensus alone which can enable the United Nations to reach any major achievement; and it is that consensus alone which can resolve the tragic history of the last generation for all the people who live in that area of violence, intolerance and hate.
141. But there is another condition which is even more fundamental and which has also been underlined this month in Jordan. The truth is, and this must be understood by the legally established Governments of the world, whether we live in Europe, or Africa, or the Americas, or Asia, that force to achieve political ends can never pay, in the modern world, a dividend in terms of justice and peace.
142. Our theme for the next Twenty-five years is fundamentally the same as the last. It is to outlaw force; it is to sustain law. And because in recent weeks we have got somewhere near to looking into the abyss of what international anarchy can mean, we must give a new sense of urgency to our counsels in the United Nations and in this Assembly.
40.	 Mr. President, I offer you our congratulations on your election as the President of the current session of the General Assembly. You represent Norway, a country which can take pride in its reputation as peaceful, just and progressive. Your personal qualifications and your family's dedication to international effort are well known. I should also like to express our appreciation of the services of your distinguished predecessor, Mrs. Angie Brooks Randolph. I would also repeat our admiration for U Thant, whose skill and dedication have won him our respect.
41.	Today is Mahatma Gandhi's one-hundred-first birthday, and we in India will take a fresh pledge to dedicate ourselves once again to the ideals for which the Mahatma lived and died, peace and nonviolence being the foremost among them. We may not fully succeed in living up to his ideals but we must continue to try.
42.	There are many developments in India which give us satisfaction. Our people are expecting a better life through our development plans. We have had a sizable increase in agricultural and industrial production. Our trade is also showing signs of improvement. India has once again demonstrated its faith in full-fledged democracy. Alongside this there is a growing desire of the common man to share more equitably in the distribution of national wealth.
43.	twenty-two days ago a great conference ended at Lusaka, and in 22 days from now we shall be celebrating the signing of the Charter of the United Nations. The Conference of Lusaka owes much of its success to the efforts and organization undertaken by the Government and people of Zambia, and once again we should like to thank them. The final declarations and resolution s of that Conference are being circulated as United Nations documents. They represent the consensus of 53 Members of the United Nations, representing about half the human race. I would urge that everyone read them.
44.	The Conference at Lusaka highlighted several key points. These are: international peace and security, peaceful coexistence and friendly relations, solution of international problems by negotiations, the value of the United Nations as a universal forum, decolonization, development, disarmament and the pursuit of the principles of nonalignment. In order to fulfill the objectives we subscribed to at Lusaka, we seek the widest support and cooperation of the Members of the United Nations.
45.	In assessing the achievements of the United Nations over the past 25 years, the major factor that strikes us is that, while another world war has been avoided, insecurity still prevails and that, while tension between the great Powers has eased and negotiations between them in certain fields have begun developments which are welcome armed conflicts are still raging in many parts of the world. This situation requires attention from the world community. A positive step in that direction that has been taken is the adoption by the Sixth Committee last week [1184th meeting] of the Declaration on Principles of international law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [A 18082, para. 8]. A further step to strengthen the edifice of peace that this Assembly could take is to adopt a declaration on the strengthening of international peace and security.
46.	Such a declaration should particularly include prohibition of the threat or use of force to settle international differences, scrupulous respect for existing international frontiers, inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by military conquest, settlement of disputes exclusively by peaceful means, regional cooperation, reduction of the gap between the developing and the developed countries, disarmament, and the right of self-determination for people under racist and colonial regimes.
47.	The developing countries particularly face innumerable threats to their independence and identity. They also face impediments in their economic development. Pressures continue from countries better organized, better developed and better equipped militarily. This has come to be known as neocolonialism and one of our efforts in the coming years should be to arrest these trends. In this context may I draw your attention to what our Prime Minister said at Lusaka about intellectual and cultural emancipation. She said:
"Those who dominated the world's political affairs and manned its economic controls also imposed a monopoly of ideas. For years we accepted their values, their image of the world and, strangely enough, even of ourselves. Whether we liked it or not, we have been pushed into postures of imitation. We have now to break away from borrowed models of development and evolve models of the worthwhile life, which is more relevant to our conditions not necessarily as a group but as individual countries with distinctive personalities."
48.	There has been a great deal of success in the United Nations program for bringing new territories and new countries to independence, but much remains to be done. Portuguese colonialism in Africa, South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia, defiance by the racist regime in Rhodesia and the continued colonial status of a large number of territories and areas remind us of how much more needs to be done.
49.	South Africa denies the fundamental rights to the majority of its citizens and its policy of apartheid poses a threat to the peace. The alliance which has emerged there between the forces of colonialism and racism in an effort to preserve "white supremacy" is an affront. We deplore the attitudes and actions of certain countries which encourage the regimes in Salisbury, Pretoria and in the Portuguese possessions.
50.	We are concerned at the declared intention of the Government of the United Kingdom to resume the sale of arms to South Africa. Any accretion to the military strength of South Africa will increase the threat not only to the neighboring countries in Africa, but also to the Indian Ocean area. We should like this area to be a zone of peace free from great Power rivalry.
51.	Much has been said about the United Nations peacemaking and peacekeeping operations. We believe that in the changing and evolving political scene of the world, the United Nations should occupy a central place. The expectation of the Charter that in the field of peace and security the great Powers would work in concert has not, unfortunately, materialized,. We hope that in the coming years this cooperation will be forthcoming for the benefit of all.
52.	We believe that in order to bring about a better atmosphere and eliminate many difficulties which persist it will be necessary to give all Members in the United Nations a feeling of participation in all decisions that may be made. Whether it be the issues of war and peace, economic development or independence and sovereignty, all Member States should participate in decision making. We welcome the cooperation among the great Powers, but are anxious that whatever decisions they may arrive at should be subject to discussion among all of us and that no decision should be implemented until it has received significant support, or consensus, if you like, of the United Nations as a whole.
53.	We regret that the universality of membership of the United Nations has not been achieved. In particular, there is a general realization that without the rightful participation of the People's Republic of China this Organization will continue to face difficulties in solving several basic problems.
54.	It is a matter of concern that the United Nations and the SecretaryGeneral have been handicapped for lack of adequate funds. We would, therefore, urge that all Members should cooperate in ensuring that the important problems in various fields undertaken by the United Nations do not suffer for paucity of funds. The Indian delegation will do whatever it can to strengthen the hands of the SecretaryGeneral in this respect. Equally, we are concerned about our procedures and methods of work. We would support any steps which may be suggested to bring about improvements in these matters. We attach great importance to suitable geographical distribution, not merely for the Organization as a whole, but in all its departments and at all levels.
55.	We consider that the Charter, if faithfully implemented, would overcome many difficulties which the Organization faces. Mr. Lester Pearson, a noted winner of the Nobel Peace Prize and a former Prime Minister of Canada, said recently that "It is the sheerest hypocrisy for Governments to flee from their own responsibilities by blaming the world Organization". We regret that it is becoming increasingly a fashion to denigrate the importance of the United Nations by what Mr. Pearson calls the tendency of Governements "to flee from their own responsibilities".
56.	India has made its contribution to the various United Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope that the differences on the initiation, control and financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations will be speedily resolved so that the United Nations can contribute more effectively to preserving peace. India accepts the principle of strengthening the machinery of peacekeeping by the United Nations and would consider concrete action after the modalities have been agreed upon.
57.	General and complete disarmament under international control is even more urgent today. The nuclear arms race and innovations in sophisticated delivery systems are making life on the planet daily more precarious. It deflects resources and energies from constructive work. It also leads to deadly competition, military blocs and spheres of influence.
58.	The Indian delegation will strive to ensure the success of the Disarmament Decade through a comprehensive program of disarmament for the next 10 years. We must concentrate our attention on general and complete disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament. We realize that it may not be possible to achieve progress all at once and that collateral measures are expedient. We are aware of the tremendous contribution which the technology of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including peaceful nuclear explosions, can make to the economy of the developing world. The benefits of this technology should be available to all States without any discrimination. At Lusaka the nonaligned nations indicated a general order of priorities which should be followed in drawing up the program for the Disarmament Decade.
59.	It is obvious that measures of nuclear disarmament such as cut off in the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes, a comprehensive test ban, reduction and destruction of stockpiles of nuclear weapons and so forth, should receive the highest priority. The next priority should be for other measures in the disarmament field, such as an agreement prohibiting the development, production and stockpiling of chemical and biological weapons and providing for their elimination from the arsenals of all nations.
60.	I should like to refer briefly to the de-nuclearization draft treaty relating to the seabed and ocean floor . The approval of the agreement on non-emplacement of weapons of mass destruction on the seabed beyond the twelve mile limit is to be welcomed, but it is only a limited disarmament measure in this field.
61.	My delegation is convinced that the seabed and the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that the potential wealth of the area and its resources should be developed and used for the benefit of mankind as a whole. I should like to appeal to all representatives to make a sincere and determined effort to define the regime of the seas and to create an international machinery to regulate it before a mad rush to expropriate the resources of this last frontier sets in.
62.	As regards the conference on the law of the sea, my delegation supports the viewpoints expressed at the nonaligned summit in favor of convening a conference on the law of the sea at an early date, after adequate preparations have been made for it by a preparatory committee. We are of the opinion that all the questions, namely, the regimes of the high seas, the continental shelf, the territorial sea and the contiguous zone, fishing and conservation of the living resources of the high seas, etc., should be dealt with at the same time in a comprehensive manner, rather than in a piecemeal fashion.
63.	On the occasion of this twenty-fifth anniversary session of the United Nations we can derive some satisfaction from the contribution of this Organization in placing economic cooperation for development on a sound, rational and dynamic basis. We have a long way to go, however, in order to realize the fundamental objectives of the Charter for creating conditions of stability and wellbeing and for ensuring a minimum standard of living necessary for human worth and dignity.
64.	The gap separating the affluent and the poor nations has been widening rapidly; this is a serious threat to the independence of the developing countries and to international peace and security. Some of the recent trends in the field of international economic cooperation indicate that there has been a retreat from the high ideals of 1950s. Despite the endeavors of the developing countries to contribute their due and rightful share in the world economic life, the process of their continuous alienation from the mainstream of the world economy remains unabated.
65.	India views with favor, and looks forward with great expectation, to the effort of the international community to adopt an international development strategy for the seventies as a basis for solving the problem of poverty in a concerted manner and on a rational and comprehensive basis. My delegation would, therefore, commend to the Assembly the strong recommendation of the nonaligned nations that the General Assembly, at its commemorative session, should adopt a declaration on international development strategy for the 1970s.
66.	Such a concept does not admit of halfhearted measures undertaken in an isolated manner. What we need is a definition of goals and objectives and time bound policy measures to achieve them. The adoption of a mere declaratory resolution by the General Assembly, launching the Second United Nations
Development Decade, would not I repeat, not represent any point of departure, and hence our plea for a strategy of development which not only would provide for policy measures to enable the developing countries to overcome their current economic difficulties, but would also be l decisive move towards the objective of restructuring international economic relations on a just and equitable basis.
67.	The primary task for the implementation of the strategy would rest on the developing countries themselves. One of the most hopeful features of the past decade has been the determination shown by the developing countries to try to achieve economic and social progress through their own efforts. At the same time they have progressed also towards broadening and diversifying economic relations among themselves, with a view to imparting strength, to their national endeavors. It is our sincere hope that, consistent with the commitments undertaken by the developed countries in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other forums, and as reflected in the draft international development strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [A',7982, para. 16] now under consideration by the General Assembly, the developed countries will assist in the implementation of concrete and specific schemes to be put forward by developing countries in the field of economic cooperation, and regional and sub regional integration among themselves.
68.	While we attempt to build the edifice of a secure peace at the United Nations we cannot overlook the conflicts that are currently raging in the world. The situation in VietNam continues to cause us deep concern. We recognize that all parties to the conflict have declared their adherence to the Geneva Agreements and their desire to achieve a peaceful solution in VietNam. The cessation of the bombing of the Democratic Republic of VietNam has been appreciated generally, as also the desire of all sides to continue the talks in Paris to find a peaceful settlement. In our view those talks can progress if there is an indication that all foreign forces will be withdrawn from VietNam. The United States Government already has withdrawn some troops, and we believe that a firm timetable, together with a date for final withdrawal, will help the negotiations in Paris. A broad based Government, comprising all elements of South VietNam, would be another factor which could contribute to the success of the negotiations.
69.	The eruption of fighting in Cambodia has increased the tension in that area. We earnestly hope that the people of Cambodia, with whom the Indian people have historic ties of culture and friendship, will be able to overcome all their internal difficulties and will be allowed to live in peace and friendship with their neighbors, without any interference from outside.
70.	In Laos the proposed negotiations between the parties are not making much headway.
71.	The conflict in the States of Indo-China has brought much distress and suffering to their people.
As a result of this series of conflicts the people of those countries have suffered grievously through death and destruction over the years. India has an abiding interest in peace and stability in that area. Everything should be done to put an end to this human misery.
72.	At present it would be difficult to discuss separately the problems of the States of Indo-China, and we believe that once the fighting in Indo-China is stopped it would be necessary to have an international conference to resolve the complex situation now gripping those States. India is prepared to join other States and interested parties in working out arrangements to ensure respect for the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and neutrality of all the States of Indo-China.
73.	West Asia is another region which is torn by bitter conflict and has not seen peace for many years. Israel continues to occupy large Arab territories seized in the 1967 conflict from which they must withdraw. The human problem of Arab refugees exiled from their homeland cannot be ignored and the just rights of the Palestinian people must be respected.
74.	The determination of the international community to take concrete steps to respect and protect the just and reasonable rights of the Palestinian people would provide the most effective and durable check against many desperate measures, including hijacking, which we all deplore and which cause much needless suffering to so many innocent people. We are glad that all the hostages have been released.
75.	The foundations of a just and lasting peace in West Asia were laid three years ago when the Security Council adopted resolution 242 (1967). This resolution must be fully implemented. My delegation hopes that the talks under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral's Special Representative will take place without further delay or procrastination. We share the general concern for peace in this area and hope that the proposed talks will result in the implementation of the Security Council resolution of 1967 and a just and lasting peace in the area.
76.	While conflict and tension continue in Asia, there have been certain positive developments in Europe which we welcome. I refer to the nonaggression Treaty recently signed between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany.  We hope that this development will open the way for further agreements to strengthen security in Europe. I should also like to express the hope that the bilateral talks between the United States and the Soviet Union on the limitation of strategic arms will bear fruit. This will not only be an important arms limitation measure but also a positive contribution to the general relaxation of tension in the world.
77.	International relations are entering a phase characterized by increasing interdependence on the one hand and the desire of States to pursue independent policies on the other. Scientific and technological innovations, rapid communication, increased commerce and ecological considerations are lowering the barriers between States and encouraging cooperation. Side by side, the international community remains separated by political, economic and racial barriers and prejudices; the weak continue to live in the shadow of the more powerful, and neither peace nor prosperity nor the right to independence and equality have yet become the integral attributes of all mankind. The United Nations is at the center of the world, attempting to restrain the aggressor, fighting greed and prejudice and promoting international cooperation on a just and equal basis.
78.	I am certain that the Heads of State and Government attending the commemorative session, beginning in a fortnight's time, will give the requisite lead to make our Organization more effective.
79.	The world today seems full of strife. Conflicts and conflagrations are unfortunately continuing. This naturally saddens us all especially when we meet to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. However, the situation is not entirely full of gloom and despair. Let us not fail to take note of the many areas in which significant progress towards peace and prosperity is being made. World peace has been maintained for a quarter of a century even though we have been unable to stop local wars. The pace of development in many parts of the world is gathering momentum. The threat of starvation has been lifted. The production of food grains in countries like India is not only matching current needs but also rising faster than the growth in the population. Each year more and more countries are throwing off the colonial yoke and declaring their determination to play their full part as independent, free nations.
80.	As the United Nations completes its twenty-fifth year, we can look to the future, not with despair and despondency but with hope and confidence.




93.	: Mr. President, your country, Norway, has a warm place in Israel's heart. Our common sacrifice drew our peoples together in the darkness of the Nazi age, and friendship has lit up every road that we have trodden ever since. Your erudition and integrity enlarge the respect which your country's name evokes across the world. In carrying out your charge you have before you the recent example of your predecessor, Mrs. Angie BrooksRandolph, who graced henPresidency with charm, originality and deep international convictions.
94.	The twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly has been chosen as a commemorative occasion. What we need most is not a festive celebration but a lucid exercise in self-criticism. The United Nations has fallen on hard days. Its resonance is diminished and its flame is burning low. It exerts no more than a marginal influence on the main issues of conflict in our times, and the central currents of international thought and action flow outside its walls. There is a sharp paradox in that turn of fortune, for there has never been a greater objective need for a unitary framework of international relations to express the common interest of mankind. For the first time in history distance has become irrelevant, and all peoples are bound together in danger and opportunity. Thus, international institutions seem to be declining in the very conditions which logically favor their success. The United Nations should be asking itself with implacable candor: "what went wrong?".
95.	The trouble lies, of course, mainly in the discordant policies of the States which compose international society. But this does not absolve the Organization from the duty to analyze its own experience and to take a rational and effective view of its priorities and procedures in the coming years. This Organization is young in relation to the immensity of the vision which it serves. Yet the rhythm of change has been so intense that the world in which the United Nations was born now belongs to receding memory. There is urgent need for Governments to determine the place which the United Nations occupies in their policies, and for the United Nations itself to modernize its concepts, structures, and its methods of operation. Only thus will the gap between the brilliant hope and the harsh reality be reduced.
96.	The main international preoccupation is now focused on the region where the Arab and Israeli nations were born and in which they must forever live side by side. In the summer of 1967 the Security Council and the General Assembly were the inactive spectators of a war that they did nothing to prevent. In recent weeks, they have watched a Member State in the Middle East pass through its most destructive and agonizing ordeal. It may be that in its present strength and condition our Organization is unable to restrain violence and ensure security as its Charter envisaged. But it need not renounce its role as the central forum from which the policies of its Members may be communicated to the opinion of the world. In that spirit I come to this rostrum to state Israel's views on the tensions which convulse our region and hang heavy on the conscience and concern of all mankind.
97.	The point of reference is still the unforgotten drama of 1967. Forty months have passed since a resolute attempt was made to bring about the destruction of Israel's peace, sovereignty and very life through the strangling grip of belligerency, blockade, encirclement and aggressive assault. Israel's policy is still dominated by the recollection of the brief moment when its extinction was a real and vivid prospect. The defeat of that attempt by its solitary effort and independent sacrifice is inscribed on Israel's unfailing memory. Beyond its place in Israel's history, that victory was a landmark in the human journey towards justice, law and peace. We still recall the relief and consolation which gripped the enlightened world when Israel tore the strangling fingers from its throat.
98.	Israel remembers. It cannot forget; it cannot forget the horror from which it barely escaped or the sense of salvation which came from its successful resistance. From then until now our national policy has been inspired by two central purposes: to build a structure of permanent peace with the neighboring States, if their policy makes that possible, and, in any case, to avoid a return to the conditions of anarchy and vulnerability out of which the war exploded.
99.	In its tense debates during 1967, the United Nations developed the contours of an international policy designed to meet the new conditions created by the 1967 war. It rejected all proposals for reproducing the situation which had led to one war and which, if renewed, would lead inevitably to another. It voted down five proposals for a return to the old armistice lines, and in November 1967 it called for the establishment of a just and lasting peace, based on the total renunciation of belligerency and war, the liquidation of maritime blockade and hostile acts, and the explicit recognition by the Arab States and Israel of each other's sovereignty, independence and national identity. It also called for the establishment of "secure and recognized boundaries". These have never existed in our region; they must be established by agreement for the first time.
100.	The simple theme of this international policy was that the structure of peace should be built by agreement between the States of the Middle East. An international representative, held in universal trust, was appointed to assist the parties in the promotion of that agreement. Moreover, a ceasefire had been proposed by the Security Council and accepted by the parties on the morrow of the war. According to its terms, the ceasefire was to be unconditional, of indefinite duration, and could not be legitimately set aside before the attainment of permanent peace.
101.	In its sessions since 1967 the General Assembly has reviewed successive attempts to bring about agreement on the establishment of a final peace Now and then a prospect has glowed briefly, only W be extinguished almost before it could be discerned. But by the summer of this year the perils were great enough to compel new thinking and new effort on many sides. In March 1969 President Nasser had unilaterally repudiated his country's agreement to maintain the ceasefire. The resultant warfare across the Suez Canal was henceforward constant, destructive and of growing intensity. And it was achieving no purpose whatever. Attempts to bring about Israel's collapse through attrition had totally failed. Israel was aware of the loss and waste inflicted on it and, still more, on Egypt by the war. But neither the artillery assaults on Israel's forces from the south, nor terrorist attacks on helpless civilians from the north and east, nor the arrogant violence and piracy of Arab terrorists in countries remote from the conflict had prevented our national enterprise from going forward in swift growth. Above all, the attacks by regular armies and terrorist groups had not dislodged us from any point along the ceasefire lines which we were resolved and internationally entitled to hold until the attainment of peace. The war of attrition brought its authors neither victory nor honor. Indeed, it exposed the Arab States to tensions, frustrations and dangers far greater than those by which Israel was afflicted.
102.	In this dilemma Arab policy faced two choices. It could acknowledge the futility of war, accept the reestablishment of the ceasefire and embark on the negotiation of a final peace; or it could appeal to forces outside the region for help to continue and intensify hostilities. The first choice would have meant to work with Israel for the establishment of peace; the second meant the pursuit of Soviet aid for maintaining the war at a higher level of intensity. Alas, it is clear that in the early months of 1970 the second choice was taken.
103.	Thereafter, the conflict was extended with every passing month beyond its regional context. It now took on a global dimension. A system of SAM2 missiles had been erected so that the artillery bombardment of Israeli forces could be carried out without fear of aerial response. The weapons were defensive only in the narrow tactical sense; they were geared to an offensive strategy, the elimination of the ceasefire and its replacement by a constant war of attrition. The missiles stand guard in order that the guns should be free to speak. When this strategy failed, through Israel's successful response, the more complex SAM3 missiles, this time manned by Soviet personnel, were introduced. And by early summer Soviet pilots were flying operational missions in the battle zone. Now, this was more ominous than anything that had gone on before. This aroused a worldwide concern. Nothing of the kind had happened anywhere since the end of the Second World War, apart from the unhappy participation of Soviet pilots in the bombardment of villages in Yemen in 1963. But Soviet involvement in the Suez Canal hostilities had far graver implications. It is bad enough that regional conflicts should rage unsolved through a rejection of the normal principles of ceasefire and negotiation. It is far worse when a great Power intervenes to aggravate a regional conflict, to widen its scope, to risk counteraction by other Powers and thus to extend the perils of a local war to all mankind. The Soviet intervention does not concern Israel alone. It has other aims. Its other aims are to win predominance in the Mediterranean; to outflank the European defense system from the south; to establish a large foreign army on African soil in contempt for the principle of African independence; and to bring about a general disturbance of the international equilibrium. Thus, President Nasser's repudiation of the ceasefire and the increasing scope of Soviet intervention have results which the world can ill afford.
104.	It was in the light of those conditions that my Government studied the United States peace initiative in June and July 1970. We knew that some Arab States and all the Palestine terrorist organizations had rejected that proposal because it spoke of peace, to which they are in principle totally opposed. We knew that Egypt and Jordan had accompanied their acceptance of the initiative by a statement of terms and conditions incompatible with its principles and with its authors' stated intentions. There were other features of the proposal which raised difficulties for us within our parliamentary and democratic system. But we saw this initiative with all its defects and complexities as an opportunity to explore the conditions of a final peace. These considerations prevailed above all the others. And so, on 4 August, the Government of Israel determined and formulated a policy to which it still adheres. We decided to designate a representative to discussions to be held under Ambassador Jarring's auspices with the United Arab Republic and Jordan.
105.	We stated that:
"Israel's position in favor of a ceasefire on the basis of reciprocity on all fronts, including the Egyptian front, in accordance with the Security Council's ceasefire resolutions remains unchanged. On the basis of clarifications given by the United States Government in this matter, Israel is prepared to reply affirmatively to the United States proposal for a ceasefire for at least three months on the Egyptian front."
We further agreed:
"to hold discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices within the framework of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) on the basis of the expression of readiness by the parties to carry out the Security Council's resolution in all its parts, in order to achieve an agreed and binding contractual peace agreement which would ensure:
"(a) Termination by Egypt and Israel of all claims or states of belligerency and respect and acknowledgment of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of each other and their right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries, free from threats or acts of force. Each of the parties to be responsible within its territory for the prevention of all hostile acts by regular military forces or paramilitary forces, including irregular forces, against the armed forces or against civilians living in the territory of the other party;
"(ft) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict to secure, recognized and agreed boundaries to be determined in the peace agreements."
That was the text to which we agreed.
106.	And, finally, we made clear that:
"Israel will not claim the prior acceptance by the other party of her positions, as Israel does not accept in advance the positions of the other parties as communicated publicly or otherwise. Each party will be free to present its proposals on the matters under discussion."
107.	The ceasefire agreement, as members will see, held a central place in our response to the United States peace initiative. The United Arab Republic had limited its acceptance of the ceasefire to a period of ninety days. That restriction raised issues which would not have existed with comparable force in an unlimited ceasefire which would have brought the military phase of the conflict to a permanent end. Instead of this we now had an explicit prospect that after three months the United Arab Republic might regard the ceasefire as having expired. And the futile but destructive war of attrition would be resumed. Since that was the United Arab Republic position, its implications had to be seriously weighed. We had to ask ourselves whether the short negotiating period would be devoted to a genuine quest for peace; or whether it would be used as a respite for the United Arab Republic, with Soviet aid, to improve its prospect for a military solution by a massive missile concentration which would be brought up without Israeli interference under cover of the ceasefire. In short, what were the ninety days designed to promote: an EgyptianIsraeli effort at peace, or a SovietEgyptian deployment for a more effective war?
108.	Decisive reassurance on this question was found for us in that part of the American peace initiative which provided for a "standstill" in an agreed area on each side of the Suez Canal ceasefire line. The purpose was to stabilize the local military balance, so that our Governments could go forward in easy mind to negotiate, without fear lest their security would be undermined during the talks. And the standstill, more than any other part of the United States peace initiative, supported our cautious hope that the United Arab Republic might be ready for an authentic peace effort, and not merely for a maneuver designed to prepare a new phase of war.
109.	In the early days of August we were informed by the United States that the United Arab Republic, with the support of the Soviet Union, had given agreement and endorsement to the following pro visions. This is the text of the standstill agreement:
"(a) Israel and the United Arab Republic will observe a ceasefire effective at 2200 hours GMT Friday 7 August;
"(ft) Both sides will stop all incursions and all firing on the ground and in the air across the ceasefire lines;
"(c) Both sides will refrain from changing the military status quo within the zones extending 50 kilometers to the east and to the west of the ceasefire line. Neither side will introduce or construct any new military installations in these zones. Activities within the zones will be limited to the maintenance of existing installations at their present sites and positions'' the maintenance of existing (installations at their present sites and positions 4 'and to the rotation and supply of forces presently within the zones;
"(d) For the purpose of verifying observance of the ceasefire, each side will rely on its own national means, including reconnaissance aircraft which will be free to operate without interference up to 10 kilometers from the ceasefire line on its own side of the line;
"(e) Each side may avail itself as appropriate of all United Nations machinery in reporting alleged violations to each other of the ceasefire and of the military standstill;
"(0 Both sides will abide by the Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War and will accept the assistance of the International Committee of the Red Cross in carrying out their obligations under that Convention."
110.	It was to this that we agreed. And I draw special attention to the phrases:
"Neither side will introduce or construct any new military installations in these zones. Activities within will be limited to the maintenance of existing installations at their present sites and positions."
111.	Not a single hour passed between Egypt's acceptance of that agreement and its violation of it. Within a few days those violations had been physically ascertained not only by Israel, but by the Government which sponsored the peace initiative. At the very time when the Israeli Cabinet was hopefully formulating its approach to the forthcoming peace talks, the missile buildup became conspicuously massive and intense. It is going forward to this very day. In the "standstill" area, which is fifty kilometers west of the Canal, but mostly within an area thirty kilometer of the Canal, at least twenty- SAM2 and SAM3 batteries, many of them operational, have been introduced. Tens of additional missiles have been advanced into that zone. This has been made possible by Israel's observance of the ceasefire. Rarely has there been a more perfidious violation of an international agreement through the exploitation of the good faith and pacific intention of the other side. I have circulated to delegations this morning, a graphic representation comparing the position which should exist under the 7 August agreement with that existing a few days ago, a situation created by headlong violation.
112.	I now come to analyze the implications of this development.
113.	First, through Israel's acceptance of the ceasefire standstill agreement the United Arab Republic has achieved a substantial and illicit change of the military situation to its advantage.
114.	Secondly, in these conditions Israel would be negotiating under the intimidating effects of a growing threat to its forces along the ceasefire line, and therefore to its national security.
115.	Thirdly, there has been a collapse of confidence in the validity of Egypt's pledge. The proposed peace talks, after all, would be designed to produce an agreement, on the strength of which Israel would withdraw on the establishment of peace to secure, recognized and agreed boundaries which are not yet determined, but which would be determined in the peace negotiations. The object of the talks would be agreement. But what would be the worth or weight of a new agreement negotiated and concluded while an existing agreement is being torn cynically to shreds. Thus, the violation of the standstill agreement has cast an anticipatory shadow on the validity of any peace agreement that we hope to conclude. This is, in the last resort, the gravest result of all. The question, what binding force will a peace agreement have, overshadows every other question affecting the Middle East in future.
116.	Fourthly, the standstill agreement was not only accepted by the United Arab Republic; it was also endorsed by the Soviet Union, which, as I have said, mans many of the missile bases. Therefore, the violation of that agreement with Soviet acquiescence is a major international event. Its repercussions go far beyond the Middle East; they affect the crucial issues of peace and security in other continents of the world. They shed a disturbing light on Soviet policy everywhere. Member States in all continents would do well to take this to heart and mind.
117.	In making a firm stand for the integrity of agreements we defend an international interest wider than our own. It is still our desire and policy to explore the terms of a final peace by discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices in accordance with our statement of 4 August. In a dialog on peace we shall have much to say and to propose for the common benefit of our region. I must add, in frankness, that even when the violations are corrected, the memory of them will not swiftly vanish from our minds and hearts. A new burden has been laid on the eventual negotiating process which, at best, will be complex, arduous and long. When we reflect on our experience with the hopes and expectations of 1957 and with this latest incident, we become fortified in our resolve to insist that all peace engagements be direct, explicit, signed and sealed in the most precise contractual form. Israel is ready to resume discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices as soon as the violations are rectified and the situation prevailing on the day of the ceasefire restored.
118.	The Egyptian violation of the ceasefire agreement is only one of the obstacles which now impede progress towards peace. Others have come into sharp relief during the hectic events of the past few days. The Palestinian Arabs on both sides of the Jordan are in urgent need of peace. They have been the primary victims of the hostile policies whereby neighboring Arab States have for twenty-two years sought to prevent the establishment of peaceful and constructive relations between Israel and the Arab States. Palestinian Arabs, west of the river Jordan, are at this very time creating new processes of coexistence and commerce between themselves and the Israeli people. Their situation in recent days has been in sharp contrast with the immense havoc which came upon their kinsmen east of the Jordan in the recent fighting. No constructive interests of Palestinian Arabs can be served by the small gangs commanded by Arafat, Habash and others whose ideology consists of nothing except the prevention of peace between Israel and the Arab States. As we watched the torrents of shells, grenades and bullets pouring from and into streets and homes across the river Jordan last week, we could not fail to reflect what the fate of every Israeli home would be if our nation's security were not maintained and defended with the utmost tenacity and zeal.
119.	Let us have a frank understanding of what every one of the Palestine terrorist organizations portends. There is no distinction between the means they use and the aims they seek. The means and the aims are equally to be condemned. What is the aim? The aim is to fulfill an exclusive fantasy under which Israel would have no existence in the Middle East as a State embodying its specific Jewish heritage and its particular national and social vocation. Their doctrine is based on the wild absurdity that there can ever be a Middle East without a State of Israel at its heart and centre. They turn away in flight from the central truth that Israel is organic to the past, the present and the future of the Middle East. The Arab nation has a very large place in the Middle Eastern region, but it has no monopoly on the right to statehood, independence, sovereignty and specific national identity. The Middle East is a concept which cannot be exhaustively understood in Arab terms alone. In 1970 Israel's statehood is not something to be explained, defended, or submitted to approval or dissent. It is something to be proclaimed as an absolute and inexorable reality, deep rooted and authentic, on a level of absolute equality with the statehood, sovereignty and national identity of any nation, great or small, old or young, represented in this hall. We do not seek what is called "recognition of Israel's right to exist", for that right is independent of any recognition of it. What we seek is a reciprocal recognition by the Arab States and Israel of each other's right to peaceful life and unreserved sovereignty. In denying this axiomatic right, the terrorist organizations commit the most disruptive heresy at work in the life of our age. There are now fourteen Arab sovereign States, with a population of a hundred million, an area of four million square miles, and unlimited wealth and opportunity. Facing them alone in the scales of equity is the small State of Israel. There is, therefore, only one nation which stands or fails in history by the way in which this conflict is resolved. By its solitude and uniqueness, Israel's secure existence is the overriding moral imperative in this dispute. International peace demands an equitable distribution not only of wealth and material resources but also of sovereignty and national freedom. To suggest a distribution whereby all Arabs must be sovereign everywhere and all Jews nowhere is to fall into an abyss of paradox and discrimination.
120.	So much for the aims of the terrorist groups. The aim is politicize the murder of a state and the method is piracy and murder. The moral quality of the struggle is illustrated by assaults on housewives in a supermarket, on students in a cafeteria, on humble citizens, Jews and Arabs, in crowded markets and bus stations, on innocent travelers in vulnerable civil aircraft. No other political movement in our days has chosen its victims so exclusively amongst defenseless, unarmed civilians in many lands. Therefore, it is a movement not of liberation but of enslavement. Its aim is not to win freedom for the Arab nation, whose freedom is amply and lavishly assured, but to liquidate the national liberation which another nation, the most ancient of nations, has already achieved. Such honourable words as "liberation", "resistance" and "commando" have no application and have never before been applied to attempts to liquidate a lawful sovereignty, to compound the Nazi assault on Jewish survival and to wage a campaign of indiscriminate attack against civilians in the Middle East and elsewhere.
121.	Having failed in their assaults on Israel, the Fatah organization, the "Palestine Liberation Organization" and other kindred groups have directed their main threat against the independence and sovereignty of Arab States. Early this year they were hard at work attempting to turn Lebanon away from its peaceful vocation and to subvert its specific national personality. Last week we saw the most recent of many attempts to bring about anarchy and disintegration in Jordan in order to shatter any hope of peace between Israel and the Arabs nations.
122.	Arab Governments which are the victims of these acts are, ironically, often the sponsors of them. The terrorist groups do not spring out of the empty air. They do not work in a vacuum. They could not exist, still less function, without the shelter, support, endorsement, financial aid, arms, training facilities and territorial base supplied to them by sovereign Arab States. Nor could they endanger life and limb outside the Middle East if certain Governments, especially in Europe, did not grant them excessive indulgence and immunity. Surely the time has come for the world community to turn in wrath not only against the specific outrage of aerial piracy but also against the other activities of the terrorist groups. All these activities, without exception, violate the principles which the signatories of the Charter, including its Arab signatories, have pledged themselves to defend. Any action which aims to destroy or violate a legitimate sovereignty is a form of international hijacking. Therefore it is important that these acts be resisted. They were successfully resisted ten days ago by those who foiled the hijacking of an El A1 aircraft by using righteous force against an odious pair of pirates. They were resisted by Jordan, which but for that resistance would have lost title to be regarded as a sovereign authority. The main adversaries of peace suffered another setback when the invasion of Jordan by regular armored units of the Syrian 
Army was repelled. The Syrian invasion of Jordan was too brief for its full implications to be seized. Here we have a member of the Security Council violating an international frontier in order to impose its will and policy upon a neighboring State. A Syrian representative at the United Nations, attempting publicly to justify this aggression, has taken refuge in a doctrine which denies the international character of boundaries between States of kindred cultures.
123.	The General Assembly will recall that after the Soviet aggression against Czechoslovakia two years ago Soviet representatives asserted that the boundaries between socialist States did not have a full international character, so that the unprovoked invasion of territory across them had a kind of domestic intimacy. Something of that kind was asserted by Syria last week. The doctrine is that, if two States have a similar ideology or language or national culture, it is not the business of the world community if one of them invades the other without provocation. There are dozens of
States represented here which would be well advised to reflect deeply on the consequences for them if a doctrine of "invasion through kinship" were condoned.
124.	Israel followed recent events in Jordan with vigilance, restraint and a keen sense of the developing human tragedy. We could not have been indifferent to violent changes in the regional balance which would have put Israel's security in jeopardy. But it is for Arab Governments to determine their regimes and institutional structure. Israel will never move its forces in any cause except its own legitimate security. We hope that the scars of battle will be healed in Jordan and that a concerted humanitarian effort will be made to allay the vast suffering of which we have been the close witnesses in recent days. The trucks bearing medical aid dispatched by the Israeli authorities eastward across the Jordan illustrate how humane solidarities should prevail over political and military tensions. We hope that the Jordan Government will not make the error of encouraging or condoning activity by the terror groups against Israel across the ceasefire lines. This would be contrary to Jordan's international obligations, including the ceasefire, and would of course encounter Israel's firm resistance.
125.	The capacity to repeat error is revealed in the communication which the Arab Governments and the terrorist organizations signed in Cairo yesterday. There is not in that document a single, peaceful, civilized, lawful word. The talk is not of peace but of victory over an enemy ind the liberation of Israel, which means of course its extinction. That document violates the engagement which the United Arab Republic and Jordan made to Ambassador Jarring, promising to establish a just and lasting peace with Israel and to acknowledge its sovereignty and independence. The question is: which document commits the policy of those two States?
126.	Many Members have spoken here about the necessity for international action against the hijacking of aircraft. In Israel's view an agenda item on that subject would only be of value if international law came out reinforced. It is not enough to exhort parties to adopt the Tokyo Convention  or a new Convention expressive of existing law and morality. We should recall that the cooperation and States in the struggle against piracy preceded all other developments in the realm of international law. The pirate was regarded as the enemy of the human race, hostis humani generis. He was an outlaw from human society and every nation had the right and duty to apprehend and punish him with full vigor. Over a century ago, an outstanding maritime judge in Britain, Lord Stowell, expressed the current contemporary law and morality as follows:
"With professed pirates there is no state of peace.
They are the enemies of every country and at all
times and therefore are universally subject to the
extreme rights of war."
127.	It follows that aerial piracy, which involves even more horror and peril than piracy at sea, should never be indulged, condoned, or, above all, rewarded. A firm attempt should be made to secure the unconditional release of all captives. Physical methods of prevention should be adopted without limitation or reserve. What a victory would have been won for international order if all the aircraft assaulted on 6 September had been defended as effectively as was the El A1 airliner and if all the pirates had met a similar fate. But responsibility does not lie on the terrorists alone. Some Arab Governments have given practical and moral support to successful pirates. Thus, in July 1970, we find President Nasser of Egypt himself extending a welcome to men who had hijacked a Greek aircraft and to criminals released from a prison to which Greek law had properly consigned them. At meetings last year of the United Nations General Assembly and the Organization of African Unity, Arab delegations prevented the unanimous adoption of resolutions which would strongly have condemned hijackers and required firm measures to insure their extradition and punishment. When an Arab pirate lands in certain Arab countries, he is more likely to get fuel facilities, praise and reward than arrest and punishment. The recent experience and the present debate can only be useful if condemnation is unequivocal and even then only if it leads to practical measures. I have in mind that the General Assembly might endorse the proposition which was recently made by the United States in the International Civil Aviation Organization, calling for joint international action "to suspend all international civil air transport services to and from any State which, after the unlawful seizure of an aircraft, detains passengers, crew and aircraft contrary to the Tokyo Convention (including the destruction of such aircraft) or any State which fails to extradite or prosecute persons responsible for such acts of unlawful seizure". Since then we have seen other drafts. The point is that only measures which lead to practical and automatic action have validity.
128.	The avoidance of reward for hijackers sometimes requires the maintenance of strong nerves. At an early stage in the recent episode there was a precipitate tendency to offer the release of convicted hijackers as a recompense for the liberation of innocent hostages. This would have saved present victims but it would have endangered other travelers on whom the released hijackers would try their skill again. It is satisfactory that this course has not been followed, and that the four countries whose aircraft or citizens had been kidnapped accepted the principle advocated by the United Kingdom and the United States, according to which solidarity should be maintained and each airline and Government would be responsible for all passengers without distinction. Faced by attitudes of principle and strengthening nerves, the hijackers understood the uselessness of their victory and gave up its fruits to the Jordanian Government and the Egyptian Embassy, which we hope will act with correct promptitude.
129.	But the release of hostages who were wantonly submitted to hardship and peril should not dull the edge of international vigilance. Israel proposes international action along four lines:
| (a) To increase security measures at airports and ! in aircraft. Israel is prepared to cooperate by sharing the knowledge and experience that it has accumulated ! in this sphere;
(b)	To call upon The Hague Conference that will convene in December 1970 to adopt the proposed convention, and to strengthen it so that the illegal capture of an aircraft, its passengers and crew will be considered an international crime calling for maximum punishment;
(c)	To establish sanctions against States that aid or provide asylum to hijackers or criminals who attack aircraft. These sanctions should include: cessation of aerial communications with the States which aid hijackers, and withholding of services from the national carrier of a State that aids or provides asylum to those who hijack or attack aircraft;
id) To call for the establishment of a special body that will deal continuously with acts of hijacking or attacks on the international level.
130.	But what about the larger issue of peace? Before we fall into despair let us recall that there are no irreconcilable conflicts in history. The ArabIsraeli conflict, for all its rhetorical bitterness, has had no results comparable in absolute or relative terms with the carnage and mass suffering of many other wars.
131.	But peace has too often been considered by international bodies in semantic formal terms, and too little in terms of human realities. It is not enough that Egypt, Israel, Lebanon and Jordan should agree on a form of words; such agreement may even be an illusion if it conceals a wide gap in intention and interpretation. What is needed most is that they, and all concerned with their deeper interests, should have a clear vision of what our region would look like and how its people would live ones hostility was replaced by peace. The most conclusive evidence, the most conclusive hallmark of peace is the open frontier. A peaceful Middle East is a Middle East in which a man would be able to travel by road and rail from Cairo through Israel to Beirut and Amman, in which Egyptian civil aircraft could traverse Israel eastward while Israeli shipping passed unimpeded through the Suez Canal. Israeli and Arab civil aircraft would land in Cairo, Lod and Amman. Railways for the transportation of heavy goods would pass from the Suez area through Kan tarah, across the Israeli coast northward. The ports of Eilat and Aqaba would plan their expansion and development in neighborly coordination. This is not a dream. This summer 55,000 Arabs from neighboring countries visited their relatives west of the Jordan. Thousands passed from Israel and the west bank across the Jordan to remote parts of the Arab world. This year nearly half a million tourists came to Israel and an approximately similar number to Egypt. Under conditions of normality and peace, the ancient splendors and the modern amenities of our countries would attract millions more, who by their very pilgrimage would join us closer to them and to each other.
132.	In the last resort, a nation's strength and greatness will be measured not by the number of its missiles but by the quality of its scholars, scientists and technicians. Why should not Israeli and Arab doctors and scientists cooperate in the common quest for learning, visit each other's institutions, lecture to each other's students, meet face to face the opportunities and the ills which are common to our region? It was no credit to the Middle East in recent weeks when cholera disease broke out in many parts and when the appeal of the Israeli Minister of Health for cooperation with his colleagues in neighboring countries went unheeded.
133.	And the senselessness and tragedy of war are most vividly expressed in the inexcusable waste of resources. In twenty-two years the Arab States and Israel have spent more than $20,000 million for military purposes. If one-tenth of that sum had been invested in a refugee solution, the problem would have been solved long ago in a way that would have promoted economic progress in all the countries in which the resettlement was made.
134.	At the present time Egypt and Israel are spending $2,000 million every year for military purposes.
135.	It would be a delusion to believe that a formal peace agreement would be followed by a relaxation of vigilance or an abandonment of security; but there would certainly be a more rational distribution between the security and the economic needs of the signatory countries.
136.	Every year the population of the leading Arab State grows by 1 million, that is to say, by a number greater that that of those in refugee camps. In conditions of war and conflict, neither the refugee problem nor the problems of increased populations can be solved, since there is no rational use of resources for human needs. My point is that peace is not a word, it is not a juridical phrase; it is a total revolution in the meaning, style and content of life. It is not a documentary device; it is a human condition, the like of which our generation in the Middle East has never known.
137.	The question is whether Arab leadership can break loose from an obsolete routine of conflict in order to explore this prospect. It is in peace and not in violence that the Palestinian Arabs will find their true destiny. For in conditions of peace Israel's eastern neighbor would be an Arab State, a majority of whose population would be composed of Palestinian Arabs, and a majority of all the Palestinian Arabs would be citizens of that State. In other words, peace settles the problem of self-determination.
138.	What I have said has always been true of the Kingdom of Jordan, whose structure, name and regime were determined not by Israel but by its Arab citizens. But most of them are Palestinian Arab citizens. Wherever the boundary is determined in the peace agreement the Palestinian Arabs on both sides of the Jordan will find a better future than that which Arafat and Habash and the hijackers can offer them.
139.	There will always be a sizable Palestine Arab community in Israel. But this will have no negative significance when close cooperation across an open frontier exists between Israel and its eastern neighbor. The original former Palestine area the Mandated area  on both sides of the Jordan will accommodate two States, Israel and an Arab State, while the area regains its natural economic unity and advances towards new forms of integration. That, at any rate, is what Israel means by peace. If we have a clear vision of our aims, it will not be difficult to work backwards from the desired result towards the process that leads towards it.
140.	In the territorial negotiation, Israel's aim will be the determination of new, secure, agreed boundaries, offering a firmer security than the old armistice lines could ever provide. In short, there are no solutions without peace, and there are no problems which peace cannot resolve.
141.	The deep humane issues which preoccupy Israel are not only those which revolve around the Middle Eastern conflict. Our Jewish destiny and responsibility inspire our concern for the plight of small Jewish minorities still lingering in Arab lands, held as hostages, forbidden to depart, discriminated against, humiliated, their property confiscated, their communal and cultural life paralyzed. The hard facts are now well known and there has been a broad international echo in recent years. Yet the suffering and misery continue and in some countries have become more intense. We therefore welcome the recent reiteration by the Secretary General, in his address on 15 June to the Royal Commonwealth Society in London, of his call for the evacuation of Jews from Arab countries and of the conviction, expressed in the introduction to his report to last year's session of the General Assembly,  that the United Nations has a moral obligation to act for their rescue. I hope that States Members of the United Nations will join the call to save these doomed communities.
142.	Of very deep concern to enlightened world opinion is the grave situation of Jews in the Soviet Union. Year after year, the representatives of Israel and other Member States have raised their voices against the discrimination to which Soviet Jews are subjected, in particular the denial of the right of those who desire to join their kinsmen in Israel. In recent years ominous antiSemitic propaganda in the Soviet Union has been intensified under the cloak of a campaign against Zionism, which is the Jewish people's liberation movement. Thousands of slanderous articles and documents, reminiscent of medieval times, have been circulated by the information media controlled by the Soviet authorities.
143.	The plight of Jews in the USSR is dramatically illustrated by the appeals for permission to leave for Israel which Jews from all parts of the Soviet Union addressed to Heads of the Soviet Government, to the Government of Israel, to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and to others. Those appeals, giving the full names and the addresses of the signatories, have been published in the international press; they speak movingly of the suffering of separated families and of thew longing to unite their lot with the mainstream of the Jewish people. Some of the signatories have been arrested; their only crime is a desire to emigrate to Israel, which does not infringe any Soviet law. Indeed, Prime Minister Kosygin made a public statement in December 1966 promising that no obstacles would be placed in the way of Soviet Jews who wish to be united with their families in Israel.
144.	Humanity and justice call upon the Soviet Government to recognize the human rights of its Jewish citizens and to permit them freely to exercise those rights.
145.	In conclusion, let me recall that much of the work of the United Nations in its first twenty-five years has revolved around this modern encounter between the national revolutions of Israel in its small State and of the Arab nation in its expanse of multiple sovereignty. Whether the anniversary year will open a better act in the drama depends less on the General Assembly's debates than on the initiatives and decisions of Middle Eastern Governments. Israel will maintain the policy on which it decided on 4 August and reiterated on 6 September. It will fulfill its special role in the advancement of developing countries through which it has already offered training and development techniques to 12,000 future leaders of emergent societies in eighty lands. It will raise its voice and hand for the equality of nations and against discrimination and the remnants of colonialism. Above all, it will keep its mind and heart open to the prospect of a negotiated peace. Its people has the strength, the tenacity and the will to withstand the violent forces which assail its life and threaten its future. But its deepest aspiration is to deploy its energies in the service of a peaceful order of relations in the Middle East.
146.	The key to that future lies in a negotiation explicitly directed to the establishment of peace, and the key is now in Arab, and particularly in Egyptian, hands. It can be opened by restoring the original ceasefire situation and by treading the road of negotiation. I am prepared to use my presence here for talks with heads of Arab delegations on the establishment of peace and on the creation of an atmosphere and conditions in which a fruitful negotiation can take place. There is no rational or defensible reason for refusing such an opportunity. We do the United Nations no service if we confine ourselves to public debate and neglect the normal contacts without which no international problem has ever been or will ever be resolved.
147.	Mankind may either have a peaceful future or no future at all. Our 126 Governments will all have a share in deciding how the choice is made. If we can recapture the youthful spirit which moved the United Nations twenty-five years ago, we may yet convert past dreams into reality and present disappointments into enduring hopes.
180.	 At the outset, I should like to refer to the dark shadow which the tragic and untimely death of President Gamal Abdel Nasser has cast over this Assembly and the world. In a statement made in Wellington yesterday, my Prime Minister referred to the late President as one of the most significant political figures of the post Second World War era. He was a constant source of inspiration to his people and he helped to mold and fortify a new sense of national identity and dignity.
181.	The profound sympathy of the people of New Zealand has already been conveyed to the Government and people of the United Arab Republic. To the delegation of the United Arab Republic, I should like to add my own expression of deep sympathy at the tragic loss suffered by the Egyptian and, indeed, by all the Arab peoples.
182.	President Nasser's statesmanlike acceptance of the American proposals had raised hopes that the long awaited negotiations might at last have begun. We must all hope that his generous spirit will prevail and that peace will soon come to this troubled area of the world.
183.	Mr. President, it is always a pleasure to congratulate the incoming President of this Assembly. It is a singular pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, a representative of a country which sat with New Zealand at San Francisco, on the honor of presiding over the session which takes place in this twenty-fifth anniversary year. Your career has been marked by your close association with the advancement of international law and of this Organization. It is a fitting symbol that the direction of this session should have been placed in your hands at a time when the world needs from the United Nations a strong and renewed assertion of the rule of law. I also take this opportunity to pay a well-merited compliment to your distinguished predecessor in office, Mrs. Angie BrooksRandolph of Liberia.
184.	May I also at this point say how much New Zealand looks forward to welcoming Fiji a South Pacific country with which New Zealand has many close associations to membership in the early part of this twenty-fifth session.
185.	There are many features of the world situation today which could not have been foreseen at San Francisco, even though the Charter adopted there contained a wealth of insight, and has proved to be an instrument of great flexibility. But one must ask as well whether some of our purposes in banding together in the United Nations have not been neglected to the point where confidence in the Organization is gravely diminished.
186.	Who could have foreseen that, as a backdrop to the opening of the twenty-fifth anniversary session, we should have the spectacle of international piracy, the spectacle of nations held to ransom and subjected to blackmail by those whom we treat too respectfully by using the term "hijackers". We must place this in conjunction with another remarkable phenomenon: the lightning rapidity with which the shock waves of events, and particularly of violent events, are felt around the world in this age of instant communication. We cannot allow the epidemic of hijacking to be condoned. It is, I suggest, time to combat the ingenuity and ruthlessness of those who use such methods to serve their own political or personal ends. Hundreds of years ago, international law was equal to the challenge posed by piracy on the high seas.
187.	Today all the nations of a technologically advanced world will need to use all their skill and determination to stamp out the scourge of piracy in the air.
188.	In a recent address the SecretaryGeneral proposed that all nations should pledge to extradite hijackers, irrespective of their nationality or political affiliation, for trial before an agreed international tribunal. My Government welcomes the boldness of the SecretaryGeneral's approach. It believes that strong measures are required. It urges all Governments to give the most serious consideration to international action which would effectively put a stop to hijacking. Important work to this end is being undertaken in the International Civil Aviation Organization, but there may well be room for this Assembly to encourage and accelerate this urgent task.
189.	The communications revolution to which I have referred is one of the reasons why in recent years vast problems of global dimensions have been perceived so much more rapidly and universally than in the past.
190.	The United Nations today is applying itself to these problems. The solutions which are found will determine for us and future generations the quality of life. They will also be a mark of the vigor and adaptability of our Organization.
191.	The relationship between population and development is one of these problems. Its solution is essentially dependent on decisions taken at the national level within the framework of the circumstances of each country, including its economic structure and its social and spiritual aspirations. But there exists also a global responsibility. The United Nations, through its Population Commission and its Population Fund, has an important role to play in focusing attention on the world problem and in providing assistance to countries which seek it.
192.	The scope for international action to conserve the human environment is even more obvious. New Zealand, as a country in an early stage of industrial development and in an isolated geographical position, does not have the acute problems experienced by more heavily industrialized and populated countries. We have had, none the less, to develop active policies in such fields as land conservation, and are conscious of the growing risks of pollution of various kinds. A national organization in the form of an Environmental Council has been set up, and New Zealand is anxious to contribute to work in this field through participation in the Stockholm conference,  in the specialized agencies and, as we hope, in the Economic and Social Council.
193.	Of equal importance and of special interest to New Zealand is the question of establishing a just and effective regime for the deep seabed. There are fewer than ten countries with a longer coastline than New Zealand. We are isolated and surrounded by a vast area of ocean. By any definition we have an exceptionally large continental shelf. In short, we have as great a stake as any other Member of the United Nations in the work of the seabed Committee. 
194.	All these questions of global scope relate to the work of the United Nations on development generally, and all Members stand to benefit from this work.
195.	We recognize and respect the fact that for the great majority of delegations the overriding preoccupation is with the mainstream of economic development. The preparations for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, to which priority has been accorded at this session, have come to be regarded as a touchstone, and attitudes to it as a test of good faith. As my Prime Minister said in this debate last year, the first Development Decade taught that sound economic development is a continuous, complex ana longterm process in which the willing cooperation of all developed and developing countries is essential. We continue to believe that it is correspondingly important that the goals or targets set should be realistic. The New Zealand Government has stated its readiness to work towards the target of one per cent of gross national product for external aid. Its ability to do so, however, is in strict relation to its ability to maintain and expand the level of its exports, consisting almost exclusively of primary commodities. This is a factor which my Government hopes will be borne in mind during consideration of international commodity arrangements for the forthcoming decade. There is nothing unique in the problems which particular countries face. It is only by approaching them together in a spirit of common aspiration that the highest factor of benefit to all can be achieved.
196.	The opportunity to pursue a common approach to international trade problems arises most obviously through regional economic groupings. The potential for development which these can present has been amply demonstrated. Caution is needed, however, to ensure that benefits accrue both within the grouping and in trade with the outside world. The net result must not be to inhibit external trade through the growth of restrictive trade practices and protectionism.
197.	For New Zealand the problem is far from theoretical. For a decade it has faced the prospect of seeing its largest market, the United Kingdom, become part of the world's most powerful regional economic grouping, the European Economic Community. In spite of our continuing efforts to find new export markets, the British market still represents the only outlet for nearly half New Zealand's total exports and almost all our exports of certain key agricultural products. Now that negotiations for British entry to the European Economic Community have begun, my Government is confident that New Zealand's position has the full sympathy and understanding of all parties concerned and that adequate safeguards to enable this trade to continue will be adopted. In a very real sense the role of regional groupings in world trade is on trial in this test case. New Zealand appreciates and fully supports the motivations behind the drive for a united Europe which could be so powerful a force for good in the world. However, it would be tragic if, as a result of enlarging the European Economic Community, one of the world's most efficient agricultural producers were driven to the wall. This would be a sad irony in a world facing grave potential shortages of food.
198.	I have devoted my remarks thus far to economic and social questions and to some of the new areas in which the United Nations is active. It would be a mistake, however, to believe that in pursuing these important questions the United Nations is achieving the primary objectives of the Charter. As my Prime
Minister suggested last year [1757th meetingJ, we are all to some extent guilty of self-delusion for as long as we fail to achieve the essential goal of international peace and stability.
199. The occasion of the commemorative session will, I hope, provide an opportunity for an analysis of some of the reasons for the Organization's inability to control international conflicts and of steps which might lead towards the diplomatic reactivation of the United Nations. This was a theme stressed by the Foreign Minister of Brazil in the traditionally eloquent intervention with which he opened our general debate [1841st meeting].
200.	In one critical area the Middle East we have followed the patient efforts of Ambassador Jarring on behalf of the United Nations. We fervently hope that the cautious expectations engendered by the United States peace initiative, and by the stated willingness of the parties to enter into negotiations, have suffered only a temporary setback. It seems to us that the minimum conditions for further progress towards a settlement are an agreed extension of the ceasefire and the resumption within that time of endeavors to bring the parties to negotiations. In these endeavors the four permanent members of the Security Council will doubtless have to play a continuing, honest and persuasive role in accordance with the principles of the Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967 [242 (1967)].
201.	In relation to the VietNam war, however, the failure of the United Nations to play any real part is notorious and a matter of regret. The last four months have seen the involvement in that war, from no volition of its own, of a small country which has consistently sought to avoid such involvement. My delegation asks this Assembly today whether it will choose to remain indifferent to the situation in Cambodia, which has deeply concerned my Government.
202.	From the outset Cambodia refused to take sides in the VietNam conflict and tried to prevent the war from spilling across its borders, but in vain. Over a period of years the armed forces of North VietNam and the VietCong took advantage of Cambodia's neutrality to establish bases and supplylines within its territory. The then Head of State of Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk, became increasingly alarmed at that situation but was unable to persuade the North VietNamese to withdraw their forces. In March 1970 he was dismissed as Head of State by a unanimous vote of the Cambodian Parliament. The Government of General Lon Nol, which Prince Sihanouk himself had appointed, demanded the withdrawal of the communist forces, while making clear that it was prepared to negotiate on the question. Instead of taking up that offer, the communist forces immediately began to attack the forces and installations of the Government of Cambodia to make war on the country whose territory they were already making free of,
203.	That action of the North VietNamese was a clear case of aggression, of an attack on one State by the armed forces of another. It has continued right up to the present time. Indeed the communist forces have expanded their activities throughout Cambodia and have virtually annexed a large part of it. They have, it is true, used the name of the deposed Prince Sihanouk as a cover, but the forces involved in the fighting have been almost entirely VietNamese, either North VietNamese or VietCong.
204.	Some time after the communist forces had begun to attack the Cambodian Government forces, the forces of South VietNam and the United States launched a series of operations across the South VietNamese border into Cambodia. These were designed to destroy the bases from which the communist forces had so long operated with impunity against Saigon and the surrounding areas. They were welcomed by General Lon Nol and undoubtedly helped him to survive the military pressure that the North VietNamese and their supporters were putting on him. But it should be noted that the Cambodian Government had previously appealed in vain for help to the Geneva Conference coChairmen, to the members of the International Control Commission, and to this Organization. The Security Council took no effective action to deal with this clearcut case of North VietNamese aggression in Cambodia and there is no sign that it will do so.
205.	Cambodia's neighbors were more forthcoming. The Foreign Ministers of eleven Asian and Pacific countries, including New Zealand, met in Djakarta on 16 and 17 May and expressed grave concern over the situation in Cambodia. They called for an end to all hostilities there and for the withdrawal of all foreign forces. They also recommended the reactivation of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in Cambodia and supported the idea of an international conference to consider the Cambodian problem. The moderation of the Djakarta Conference was widely recognized and its outcome met with the approval of many countries which were not represented at it. Yet it was condemned out of hand by North VietNam and by Communist China, and it evoked no positive response from the Soviet Union.
206.	The Djakarta Conference was a remarkable demonstration of regional solidarity. My Government attaches great importance to the development of regional cooperation in Asia and we welcome the determination of the countries in the area to find an Asian solution for an Asian problem. We are confident that the spirit of the Conference will persist in spite of the hostile reaction from some quarters.
207.	But regional cooperation is no substitute for action on a wider basis, and the fact that action is being taken regionally is not a reason for the international community to do nothing. The great Powers  and in particular the Soviet Union and Communist China bear a heavy responsibility for the continuation and extension of the conflict in IndoChina, and no settlement can be reached without their collaboration. But what is even more relevant in this Assembly is that the fate of Cambodia is a matter of concern to small nations everywhere. All of us have an interest in ensuring that a small country cannot be invaded and attacked by stronger neighbors under whatever pretext. This Assembly may not be able to do much on its own to end the conflict and restore the integrity and neutrality of Cambodia. But that is no excuse for indifference. At the very least, the Members of this Assembly should take heed of the true nature and the implications of the situation with which the people of Cambodia are confronted.
208.	There is one other related matter I would briefly add, on which this Assembly has a humanitarian duty to fulfill. I refer to the fate of those prisoners of war held by the North VietNamese. The appeals of the International Red Cross, meeting at Istanbul in September 1969, and the reiterated efforts made by the International Committee of the Red Cross have elicited no response. Yet all that is sought is that these men be treated in accordance with international humanitarian law and, more specifically, that North VietNam honor the minimum undertakings which it gave in ar ceding to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. There is an inhumanity in the attitude displayed which must awaken this Assembly's deepest concern. How can it deal sincerely with an item such as that on human rights in armed conflicts without renewing at the solemn level of the General Assembly the appeals already made?
209.	Consideration of the ability of the Organization to discharge its responsibilities in the field of peace and security leads on to wider questions. How adequate is the structure of the United Nations to permit it to perform its functions in this twenty-fifth year of its existence? That is a matter which requires examination on two different levels. We are all conscious of the problems involved in proposals for the Charter review. The best must not, however, be the enemy of the good. If that wider reform should not prove possible, there is still scope for more modest and practical innovations. For that reason my delegation has joined in co sponsoring the item on the rationalization of the procedures and organization of the General Assembly.
210.	We do not approach this subject with preconceived ideas. We believe the Assembly could benefit from the recommendations which might come from a small group, rich in direct personal experience. We have in mind, for example, that the functioning of Assembly committees has become more formalized than was originally contemplated. Do they now serve their purpose in meeting as frequently as they do? There are a number of questions on which attitudes have become rigid. This, in turn, suggests that there may be a case for reviewing the agenda with a view to avoiding automatic inscription, or annual discussion, at least of those items where the outcome does not vary from one year to the next. How, on the one hand, can the Assembly's procedures be shaped to recognize the increasing practice of negotiation between, and within, groups which is now an abiding feature of the General Assembly and some other bodies? And how, on the other, can it be ensured that, in the larger forum of the General Assembly committees, countries which are not members of such specialized bodies as those dealing with outer space, disarmament, the seabed and the like, may still participate meaningfully in discussion of matters on which real negotiation tends to be restricted to an initiate circle? These are but some of the issues perhaps some of the more difficult issues which we should like to see debated.
211.	Finally, as part of a program to enable the Organization better to meet its responsibilities it is all too clear that its financial situation the precarious state of affairs with which the Organization has lived too long must be remedied. This is a matter to which our SecretaryGeneral has made pointed reference in the introduction to his annual report [A/8001/Add. 1 and Corr.l]. There is something incongruous about a world body which can stem insolvency only by borrowing. It is well to remind ourselves that the Organization is faced with a shortfall of some 190 million dollars in assessed contributions. It is surely not unreasonable to hope that those who perpetuate this situation could make a gesture in this anniversary year to help put the Organization back on a sound financial footing.
212.	The growth of the budget is a financial problem of a different order. The question must be asked whether the present rate of growth is not excessive. Growth must be accepted, but it must be carefully managed and apportioned to make the most effective use of our limited resources. In many countries, including my own, serious thought is being given to new forms of budget planning and presentation. We welcome the international studies carried out on this topic. There is much to be said for budgeting by program rather than by object of expenditure as at the present time.
213.	But technical measures of rationalization and consolidation are only part of the answer. What is needed above all is a willingness on the part of the membership as a whole to eliminate the conflict between what it wants and what it is prepared to pay. This is a basic conflict as much political as budgetary. The blame does not lie entirely with the Fifth Committee, which is largely ineffective in the face of the financial implications of substantive decisions. These decisions, often of a political nature, emanate from the legislative organs of the Assembly and the subsidiary bodies. Nor can the Secretariat, as the author of the budget document, be held solely responsible, nor indeed is inflation the sole culprit. It is we, the Member States, who hold apparently irreconcilable views about the desirable rate of growth, the level of overall expenditures and the use to which funds are put. As a consequence, no really effective budgetary control exists. This is a problem which the Secretary General himself has singled out in a plea for urgent action in his foreword to the budget estimates for 1971.
214.	While we must bear in mind the objectives of the Second Development Decade, a serious effort is needed in this year of stocktaking to reach common ground on these questions. The failure of the Committee on Conferences has illustrated an apparent absence of willingness effectively to empower an organ to exercise determined control. Surely we must deduce from this that there remains only the spirit of compromise if there is to be a healthy development of the budget, the administration of the Organization, and the programs which it services.
215.	I have dealt with some themes of current concern and with some pervasive questions of United Nations reform. All of us have, I am sure, been struck by the new strains to which international life is now subject, and with the correspondingly urgent need for our Organization both to strengthen its role in world order and to adjust itself to the times. In an address given in London some months ago our SecretaryGeneral said that:
"The news is so full of stories of conflict and violence that not enough attention is paid to the steady undercurrent of decency and commonsense in the affairs of nations, and people increasingly have the impression that in international affairs nothing ever goes right."
216.	For New Zealand's part I urge that we all show in this anniversary year our determination to give effect to the spirit which at San Francisco gave rise to the Charter of the United Nations. Our Prime Minister then spoke of that historic conference as "a moment of time which will not recur in our lives and which may not recur again". Now, 25 years later, we have the opportunity and the necessity in this anniversary to take stock, and to add to the stature of the Organization. Let us use this chance.1.	 It is my privilege to extend to you once again the warm congratulations of the United States delegation on your election to the Presidency of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly. Your country has few peers in the contributions it has made to the work of this Organization. Your father was a leader in the League of Nations, and now, in this session of the General Assembly, you are adding a new chapter in the family tradition. In the United Nations community we have long known you as an able spokesman of your country, as a participant in the life of the United Nations from its very beginning and an authority on the Charter, as a leading scholar and practitioner in international law, and as one whose personal outlook is strongly humanitarian and imbued with hope and determination for a better future. We are indeed fortunate to have you to lead us in this session devoted to the strengthening and improvement of the United Nations.
2.	During this session we shall commemorate with fitting ceremony one of the most creative and hopeful events of this century, the founding of the United Nations twenty-five years ago. It is right that this commemoration should be held. It is far more important, however, that the nations gathered at this session should so act together as to strengthen the United Nations for the future, to ensure that we are closer to "peace, justice and progress" five, ten and twenty- five years hence than we are today. The world is unlikely to care much what we say about the past. It will care a great deal what we do about the future.
3.	The problems the world faces today are no less grave than those it faced twenty-five years ago. Indeed they are in many respects far graver. Unless and until the Members of the United Nations demonstrate their willingness to deal effectively with these problems, the confidence of the world's peoples in the United Nations will remain uncertain and precarious.
4.	In the view of the United States, the most critical international problem today is the same as that which faced the founders of the United Nations: the need to build a reliable framework for peace and security among nations. As President Nixon said in this Assembly a year ago: "... there is no nobler destiny, nor any greater gift that one age could make to the ages that follow, than to forge the key to a lasting peace". [1755th meeting, para. 45.]
5.	In this conviction the United States has sought in the last two years to frame foreign policies which would help to make the international scene less destructively competitive, less strident, more cooperative and orderly. We have sought, in the spirit of the Charter, to pursue peaceful settlement of all conflicts and confrontations, and we have urged others to do likewise.
6.	The most significant of these efforts has been the strategic arms limitation discussions between my country and the Soviet Union. If at last we can check the nuclear arms race, the world will have been helped to move away from its gravest danger and toward new and more rational relationships.
7.	The United States also seeks, through a process of serious negotiation, to ease the tensions that arise from the division of Europe. We have welcomed the efforts of the Federal Republic of Germany to normalize relations with its eastern neighbors; we are seeking in fourPower talks to assure the security and wellbeing of the residents of Berlin; we have joined our NATO allies in proposing exploratory talks on the reduction of forces in central Europe. We hope these efforts will find the Soviet Union and its allies forthcoming.
8.	In VietNam, over eighteen months ago, the United States reversed the trend in American involvement in the war. We began a steady, uninterrupted reduction in the number of our troops. We have made a negotiated peace our highest priority. Although North VietNam has as yet shown no serious intention to negotiate a solution under which the South VietNamese people can freely decide their own future, this remains our goal and we shall not be discouraged in seeking it.
A/PV.1854
9.	My Government has likewise sought ways to move toward a constructive relationship with mainland China. To this end, we have taken a number of unilateral steps to ease tensions. We are ready at any time to resume the talks in Warsaw.
10.	Finally, nowhere in the world today is there more urgent need to move from confrontation to negotiation than in the Middle East. The legacy of bitterness, hatred and suspicion there contains the seeds of even greater tragedy not only for the Middle East but for the world, unless there is early progress toward reconciliation and peace based on the legitimate interests of all the States and peoples of the region.
11.	As the United Nations community well knows, the United States has made major diplomatic efforts in recent months and weeks to help bring about peace at long last in the Middle East. While recent developments in the area, including the tragic death of President Nasser, have cast a shadow over the high hopes of just a few weeks ago that a beginning toward that goal had been made, those hopes have not been extinguished. For the most part, the guns remain silent along the ceasefire lines. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) stands as a beacon pointing the way to peace, and the parties concerned, in accepting the United States initiative of June, have committed themselves to carry out that resolution in all its parts. Ambassador Jarring is ready to resume his mission whenever conditions permit. We earnestly hope that the parties themselves and all others concerned will now bend every effort to the task of building on the beginning that has already been made.
12.	This will require above all serious steps to restore and strengthen confidence in the integrity of the ceasefire and military standstill agreement along the Suez Canal. It will also require, if negotiations are to move forward, a willingness by the parties to move from their maximum positions on the elements of a realistic and equitable peace settlement. In this spirit, my Government is prepared to contribute to renewed efforts toward peace in the Middle East.
13.	In this anniversary year the United States, like many other Members, has given especially careful thought to means by which the United Nations can be better enabled to fulfill its purposes.
14.	My delegation has listened, and will continue to listen attentively, to the suggestions of others in this regard. In the same spirit the United States will offer proposals, or support the proposals of others, with these objectives among others: first, to put United Nations peacekeeping operations on a firmer and more reliable basis; second, to make the United Nations more effective in the peaceful settlement of disputes; third, to promote new steps in the field of disarmament; fourth, to move closer by peaceful means to the goals of decolonization and human equality; fifth, to support the Second Development Decade; sixth, to help slow down too rapid rates of population growth; seventh, to promote the exploitation of the seabeds and outer space for human benefit; eighth, to organize common action within the United Nations to safeguard the global environment; ninth, to encourage young people from all parts of the world to devote themselves to international service; tenth, to improve the organization, administration and procedures of the United Nations.
15.	If the twenty-fifth General Assembly were to move forward substantially in these directions, this session would indeed rank as one of the most fruitful in United Nations history.
16.	Let me now comment briefly on these points.
17.	We shall all of us on this podium and in the First Committee have much to say during this session about strengthening international peace and security, and about the need to live up to the Charter. This is quite proper. However, what is needed most in this respect is not still more sweeping declarations that merely restate the purposes and principles of the Charter. What is needed is more effective United Nations action on the concrete issues before us, on the Middle East, on United Nations peacekeeping procedures, on means of pacific settlement. Until we demonstrate our willingness to take such effective action, world opinion will continue to be skeptical, no matter what ringing declarations we may make, as to whether the Members of the United Nations are really serious about strengthening international peace and security.
18.	I now come to a subject which should be at the very center of our concern if we wish in fact to strengthen peace and security through the United Nations. I speak of United Nations peacekeeping.
19.	Because the world situation in the past twenty- five years developed differently from what the founders of the United Nations foresaw, it has not been found possible to create forces for the maintenance of international peace and security along the lines laid down in certain articles of Chapter VII. We would hope that at some point the provisions of the Charter designed for enforcement action can be implemented.
20.	In the meantime, however, a modus vivendi has been built up, entirely consistent with the Charter, which has carried out significant and successful peacekeeping operations, sometimes with observers, sometimes with substantial forces, in the Middle East, in Kashmir, in the Congo, in Cyprus and elsewhere. Still it is all too clear that these ad hoc and improvised arrangements need major improvement in several respects if future peacekeeping is to be effective.
21.	The Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, under the able and patient leadership of Ambassador Cuevas Cancino of Mexico, has been laboring for nearly two years at the task of developing peacekeeping guidelines. During the past year the United States has put forward concrete proposals for new procedures that would meet the political concerns of all and yet allow United Nations forces to move rapidly to carry out decisions of the Security Council. But the broad agreement that all desire is still lacking.
22.	It is high time however that the General Assembly, in this twenty-fifth anniversary year, demanded significant movement on this problem. It would be a mistake not to move at all until all are agreed to move all the way. There is strong reason and sufficient consensus for some forward movement at this Assembly. The United States will be prepared to join with others in concrete proposals to this effect.
23.	In this connexion we welcome the statement made at Lusaka in the Declaration of the nonaligned countries concerning the United Nations, that measures should be taken at this session of the General Assembly to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping, and we look forward with interest to proposals that may be made by those present at that meeting.
24.	Of course, peacekeeping without peaceful settlement is only an expedient, necessary but incomplete and inconclusive. The most potent preventive of conflict is not machinery but the will of disputing parties to show restraint and a spirit of conciliation, and to persist in peaceful methods until settlement is reached. This is a solemn obligation of every United Nations Member under the Charter, and no nation deserves more honor than those who have lived up to it in spite of every obstacle.
25.	In this past year such peaceful settlements, or major steps towards them, have been recorded in a number of situations which reflect great credit on the statesmanship of those involved. I have in mind, for example, the progress made, with the assistance of the Organization of American States, toward resolving the dispute between El Salvador and Honduras; and also the recent peaceful decision on the future of Bahrain, in which good offices provided by the Secretary General played a major role.
26.	As these cases show, where the will to settle exists, effective machinery can do much to help. This is true of regional organizations, and it is no less true of the relevant organs of the United Nations, above all the Security Council.
27.	In this connexion we have welcomed the Security Council's decision [see 1544th meeting] as proposed by Finland, to hold periodic high-level meetings under Article 28 of the Charter. My country looks forward to taking part in the first such meeting later this fall. We welcome likewise the valuable suggestion of Brazil committees of the Council, including the parties to a dispute, might be created to help settle particular disputes.
28.	To the same end, the United States would favor the reactivation of certain machinery for peaceful settlement which has long been dormant. Many years ago the General Assembly created a Panel on Inquiry and Conciliation [resolution 268 (III)], and more recently a register of fact-finding experts. My Government will soon nominate qualified individuals for both of these bodies. We believe fact-finders should be available to
1 Third Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non Aligned Countries, held at Lusaka, Zambia, from 8 to 10 September 1970.
the SecretaryGeneral or other organs of the United Nations, or directly to Member States, to report on the facts of situations of international concern at the request or with the consent of one or more of the parties.
29.	Finally, it is most important that we rejuvenate and strengthen the highest organ of judicial settlement, the International Court of Justice. The United States recently joined with others in the Security Council in referring to the Court for its advisory opinion certain aspects of the Namibia situation. We have also joined with others in submitting to this General Assembly an agenda item calling for a review of the role of the Court. We hope this review will suggest ways to enable the Court to make a more substantial contribution to the establishment of the rule of law among nations.
30.	The world has witnessed in recent weeks shocking examples of the consequences of failure to abide by this rule of law examples which have been alluded to by numerous previous speakers on this podium. Hundreds of innocent individuals engaged in peaceful international travel have been brutally seized as hostages in a conflict in which they were in no way involved. Not only their safety and convenience have been placed in jeopardy but their very lives. As President Nixon pointed out in this forum a year ago, this issue "involves the interests of. . . every air passenger and the integrity of that structure of order upon which a world community depends" [1755th meeting, para. 74].
31.	That this view is widely shared is evident from the almost universal condemnation of these most recent acts by Governments the world over and by the resolution on this matter adopted unanimously by the Security Council [286 (1970)]. But condemnation is not enough. It is time to act. The Tokyo Convention, providing for the prompt return of hijacked aircraft passengers and crew, requires the broadest international support. The same is true of the International Civil Aviation Organization's draft multilateral convention for the extradition and punishment of hijackers. In addition, the United States has submitted new proposals to the ICAO, for which I urge your most earnest consideration and support.
32.	The General Assembly's extensive annual debates and resolutions on many aspects of arms control and disarmament have long played, and continue to play, an important part in international negotiations on this most critical of all our problems. I need only mention the partial nuclear test-ban Treaty,  the outer space Treaty [resolution 2222 (XXI)] and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)]. The disarmament conference at Geneva has this year registered significant progress by achieving wide consensus on a draft treaty to prohibit the emplacement of weapons of mass destruction on a vast area of the earth's surface the seabed beneath the oceans.  We hope this draft treaty will be supported by the General Assembly at this session and opened for signature shortly thereafter.
33.	I can assure the Assembly that the United States Government is unceasingly aware of the worldwide concern and need for an end to the arms race and the perilous burden of armaments in all its forms, and that we shall do whatever one negotiating partner can do to bring about new agreements on new steps toward the ultimate goal of general and complete disarmament.
34.	Permit me to say a word about a matter of quite different but equally wide concern that of human rights throughout the world.
35.	In addition to the basic responsibility of Governments to maintain human rights for all their citizens, the United Nations under the Charter has a clear responsibility in this regard. To strengthen the implementation of that responsibility my Government hopes the General Assembly at this session will create a new post, that of High Commissioner for Human Rights, to advise United Nations organs in this field and to assist States, at their request, with human rights problems. This proposal has been thoroughly studied and fully justified. It deserves a high priority at the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
36.	A particular issue of human rights that is of acute concern to my Government, among others, is the protection of the rights of prisoners of war. While these rights have long since been internationally guaranteed, they are in practice still denied to many prisoners of war, as American wives and families of such prisoners know to their great sorrow. The United States strongly hopes that this Assembly will press for worldwide observance of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, verified by impartial inspection. It is intolerable that the tragedy of armed conflict should be compounded by additional inhumanities in violation of international norms.
37.	In no field have the aims of the United Nations found more dramatic fulfilment during its first quarter of a century than in the field of decolonization. Before the Second World War a third of mankind lived in colonial dependencies. Today the proportion is less than 1 per cent. A revolution of independence has created some sixty new nations and has been the main factor in increasing the membership of the United Nations from 51 to 126.
38.	However, the situation in much of southern Africa is still characterized by the denial of self-determination and of racial equality. The United Nations and its member States must continue to exert peaceful efforts to defend and advance these basic human rights of the peoples concerned. Their cause is just and must in time prevail.
39.	Against these evils the United States in recent months has taken further steps. We put into effect last May a new policy designed to discourage United States investment in, and trade with, Namibia so long as South Africa remains in unlawful occupation. We urge other Governments to join us in this policy. My Government continues strictly to observe resolutions in regard to sanctions against the illegal regime in Rhodesia and in regard to the sale of arms to South Africa. We have closed our consulate in Salisbury. We shall continue in every peaceful and practicable way to pursue the ends of justice, equality and self determination.
40.	High on the list of the United Nations contributions to human progress is its longstanding effort to assist in comprehensive global development. That effort is being continued and, we hope, improved and strengthened through the launching of the Second United Nations Development Decade.
41.	The success of the Decade will depend most of all on the policies of Member States, both developed and developing. To bring all these policies into effective focus is the ambitious aim of the development strategy. The United States strongly supports the strategy which is before this Assembly [A 17982, para. 16] and intends to participate fully in this common enterprise.
42.	I wish to leave no doubt of the serious commitment of the United States to the Second Development Decade. President Nixon, in a series of policy decisions and especially in his recent announcement on the new focus of United States economic assistance, has made clear our intention:
(a)	To reverse the downward trend in United States development assistance;
(b)	To increase substantially United States contributions to multilateral development institutions including the World Bank, the International Development Association, the regional development banks and the United Nations Development program so that, as the capabilities of these institutions increase, we may be able to channel through them most of our official development assistance;
(c)	Further to encourage the efforts of donor nations to "untie" their bilateral aid to developing countries from the obligation to import products of the donor country;
(<d) To bring United States science and technology more effectively to bear on the problems of development, and for this purpose to create a new United States International Development Institute;
(<?) To take new steps to stimulate American private investment in developing countries within the framework of the developing countries' plans.
43.	These approaches are already reflected in the new policies my country has announced toward Latin America and Africa, which stress continued assistance, greater multilateral participation, and increased trade and investment.
44.	Finally, bearing in mind the crucial connexion between trade and development, the United States is pressing for a liberalized system of generalized tariff preferences for products of developing countries, with preferential access to the American market, and we are urging that the developing countries receive similar access to the markets of all developed countries.
45.	I wish to add a particular comment on the role of the United Nations Development program. This program, in cooperation with the specialized agencies, has done important pioneering work in development assistance. Its machinery, however, was built for a smaller program and must be reorganized to meet its growing responsibilities. With the aid of last year's excellent "capacity study" ,  the program is now preparing to put the necessary reforms into effect. In planning our future contributions to this important program we in the United States will give major weight to the progress actually achieved m undertaking these reforms.
46.	In recent years people all over the world have suddenly awakened to the inexorable and tragic fact that excessive population growth can, if continued much longer, frustrate all our hopes for peace, justice and progress. There can be no progress for the majority of mankind if population growth outstrips all available means of development. There can be no justice for the majority of mankind where population expands faster than production and social services. There can be no peace for the majority of mankind where progress and justice are unattainable because of unrestrained population growth.
47.	This is not a problem confined to either developed or developing countries. In my own country, although our growth rate has recently slowed to about 1 per cent a year, we have adopted as a national goal the availability within five years of family planning services to every citizen.
48.	Clearly, the need is equally urgent in many nations striving for development whose annual population growth in some cases approaches 4 per cent which means a doubling of the number of people in less than twenty- years. The care and feeding of such enormous numbers of dependent children, their upbringing in conditions compatible with human dignity, could constitute such a burden as to nullify progress in economic development and to cause living standards to remain at past low levels or even to fall lower.
49.	The United States is convinced that the vigorous pursuit of family planning policies is an indispensable element in the strategy of development. In this conviction we have pledged this year $7.5 million to the recently established United Nations Fund for Population Activities, whose services to requesting Governments are rapidly growing.
50.	In the context of development I wish also to emphasize the enormous potential of the world's deep seabeds, whose exploitation is just now beginning to come within the reach of our technology.
51.	Last May President Nixon, in a farreaching announcement concerning the oceans, proposed that an international regime be established by treaty for the exploitation of seabed resources beyond the depth of 200 meters. He further proposed that this regime "should provide for the collection of substantial mineral royalties to be used for international community purposes, particularly economic assistance to developing countries". Early in August the United States circulated in the United Nations seabed Committee  a draft convention [A18021, annex V], embodying these and other important proposals in the President's announcement.
52.	These proposals, if carried out, will amount to a new departure in the history of nations. Never in history has the exploitation of resources of such great potential value been placed under the supervision and regulation of an effective international authority. Never in history has assurance been offered that the international community could have a substantial, independent source of revenue to be equitably divided to serve the interests of mankind as a whole.
53.	The United States hopes that the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly will advance this important enterprise so that a sound and workable international seabed regime, backed up by effective machinery, can come into being as soon as possible. To this end it is important that States refrain from making further claims to jurisdiction over the seabeds or over the waters of the oceans. We believe that a conference on subjects related to the law of the sea, including seabeds, should be called as soon as practicable and that preparatory steps should be initiated by this session of the General Assembly.
54.	I come now to an issue of critical and rapidly growing importance the protection of the human environment. Development and protection of the environment are not mutually contradictory; indeed, they must go hand in hand if the world is to be a fit place in which to live. The United Nations is in a key position to foster the necessary cooperation so that the needs of the environment, as well as those of development, receive the energetic attention they require.
55.	Already the plans for the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972 have begun to take shape and have helped to focus the attention of United Nations Member Governments on this worldwide challenge; but we should not wait for the Stockholm Conference before launching necessary initiatives.
56.	Therefore the United States urges that all of us here, representing both developed and developing countries, work together to enable the United Nations to take the following steps. Firstly, it should identify those environmental problems, especially those pollutants in the atmosphere and the oceans, which are or may be dangerous on a global scale. Second, it should make plans for a coordinated world monitoring network to keep track of these environmental dangers. This network should build on existing programs, particularly those of the agencies of the United Nations family, and should use the most advanced data processing and satellite technology, such as the earth resource survey satellites which my country has been developing. Third, it should collect and analyze the suggestions of governments concerning environmental guidelines for States, both developed and developing, as well as for international institutions engaged in development programs. Fourth, it should explore the possibility of establishing international air and water quality standards. The United States hopes the Assembly at this session will act to advance those important objectives.
51. A newly acute problem which threatens a growing number of societies is the epidemic spread of addiction to dangerous drugs, especially among young people. This phenomenon has mushroomed in a very few years, not only in my own country but in a number of others, both developed and developing. It creates untold misery, violence, lawlessness and economic and human loss.This menace must be stopped. To do so it will be necessary to reinforce existing international agreements and to strengthen the longstanding and excellent work of agencies in this field, especially those of the United Nations. We are glad to note that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs is meeting now to deal with the whole range of problems involved, from the poppy field through the international syndicate to the needle in the vein. My Government hopes that an adequate action program will emerge from this process and will command the energetic support of the community of nations. The United States has already offered, subject to Congressional approval, a contribution of $2 million to such a program.
58.	Finally, it is important that we make better use of the talents of young people in international service, especially the service of the United Nations. Many delegations to this session, including that of the United States, contain youthful members as suggested by the General Assembly a year ago. That is entirely fitting, because the fate of the United Nations and indeed of world peace will soon be in their hands.
59.	With that in mind President Nixon, in his address to this Assembly a year ago [1755th meeting], pledged the enthusiastic support of the United States for Iran's proposal to establish an international volunteer service corps [see 1695th meeting, para. 75], to work in the cause of development and to be recruited on an individual basis from the people, principally young people, of many countries. We hope that proposal will be given final approval in the current session. We hope also that the United Nations will seek new ways to encourage able young people to find careers in its Secretariat and those of the other agencies of the United Nations family.
60.	In these remarks I have discussed only a few of the major tasks facing the United Nations in the years ahead. Even those, however, are enough tc make it obvious that, if we indeed address ourselves to such tasks, the effectiveness of this Organization will be tested more severely than ever. To meet this test we shall have to be far more attentive than has been our habit to many matters of structure, organization and procedure. For example, I would mention the following.
61.	In considering applications for membership by very small States, we must make sure that they are not only willing but also, as the Charter stipulates, able to carry out the Charter's obligations. As the SecretaryGeneral has for years pointed out, many Territories now moving towards independence are too small, either in population or in resources or both, to carry out the minimum obligations which membership requires. Yet these very small entities need more than most the assistance that the United Nations system can provide. Where the burden of membership would be excessive, we should provide a form of association with the United Nations which would enable such States to enjoy the benefits without the burdens of the system.
62.	The persistence of the United Nations financial deficit undermines confidence in the Organization, threatens its capabilities in many fields and casts a cloud over its future. The United States welcomes the SecretaryGeneral's recent call for "a concerted effort to restore the financial solvency of the Organization". We hope that he will himself take a lead in such an effort, in which we shall certainly play our part.
63.	In the annual choice of non-permanent members of the Security Council, it would be well that, as the Charter requires, due regard be specially paid, in the first instance, to the prospective member's contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security, rather than merely to rotation among the members of geographic groups.
64.	The primary consideration in selecting individuals for posts in the Secretariat, above all for senior posts, should be fully to meet the Charter's "paramount consideration" namely "the highest standards of efficiency, competence, and integrity".
65.	We must at long last take decisive steps to streamline the excessively time-consuming organization and procedures of the General Assembly, as Canada has wisely proposed, or else we shall either "drown in a sea of words" or suffocate under an avalanche of paper.
66.	We must take more effective measures to ensure that the entire United Nations system is so organized and managed that it responds efficiently to the directives of its governing organs and to the priority needs of the world. That will require much better administrative and budgetary coordination and control than we have yet achieved.
67.	The United States offers these suggestions in the spirit of the twenty-fifth anniversary session, which we understand to be a spirit of sober determination to make this Organization more effective, to make its future more responsive than its past to the imperative needs of men, women and children everywhere. Many other delegations have offered or will offer their proposals in the same spirit. The test of our seriousness and our success will be how much of this agenda of objectives we can begin to carry out.
68.	We are assembled from the four corners of the earth. The interests of the Governments we speak for often seem to be and sometimes are in contradiction. But by our presence here, by our commitment to the United Nations and its Charter, we have acknowledged that we also have interests in common, interests in peace, justice and progress, interests in the continued habitability of our planet, common interests which we are at last beginning to recognize are inescapable and overriding.
69.	The question now is, do we have the wit not only to perceive these common interests in some vague rhetorical way, but also to act upon them together realistically and decisively even at the cost sometimes of older and narrower interests? If we do not do so, history may sweep aside not only this Organization but also the nations that compose it.
70.	The SecretaryGeneral has said that we may have only ten years left to cope effectively with the problems of our times before they become so staggering as to be beyond our capacities. As we enter the Disarmament Decade and the Second Development Decade, let us keep that warning foremost in our minds and let us be determined to act together to avert catastrophe.




1.   Mr President, my delegation has already extended to you from this rostrum its warm congratulations on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly and has assured you of its co-operation at all times. I wish to associate myself with those remarks and extend to you my personal congratulations and good wishes.
2.	This Assembly is no ordinary Assembly. It marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and is a significant milestone in the story of the international community. It is a time for looking forward and a time for looking back. We must look back at the past quarter of a century to identify the successes and failures, to examine where our procedures have been sound and where we have been misguided, to recognize where we have tried too hard and where not enough, and to assess the correctness of our priorities, emphasis and direction. The information we derive from this necessary process of introspection must be carefully weighed so as to enable us to produce a sound program for the future attention of the Organization, one that will help it to achieve its most important aims more effectively.
3.	On looking back, the unfortunate but unavoidable conclusion is that the achievements of the Organization have not matched the high hopes of its founders. A crisis of confidence has been experienced by Members and even noted by the Secretary-General. Dissatisfaction with the lack of progress by the Organization is
reflected in the call from many quarters for a revision of the Charter with a view to improving the effectiveness of the Organization as an instrument for promoting peace and international security.
4.	It is understandable that this prescription for the maladies of the Organization should appeal to some, but it seems to my Government that treatment of this kind would be misdirected; we should be attempting to cure a symptom instead of the disease. Despite its imperfections, it is not the Charter which is basically at fault, but the lack of will on the part of Members to apply it constructively. Chapter I of the Charter embodies the highest common denominator of the aspirations of the peoples of the world acting in community; but when Member States have participated in the proceedings of organs created by the Charter, they have generally acted as individuals, promoting their own or narrow sectional interests only. The rights, interests and sensitivities of other States have been relegated to a position of subordinate importance, and this has given rise to friction between nations, and the dissemination, even by the Secretariat, of political propaganda directed against Member States. This pattern of behaviour of States diverges fundamentally from the vision of the architects of San Francisco, who would "save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". The conclusion to which we are drawn is that in order to enable the world body more effectively to fill the role it was originally designed to play in world affairs, Member States must return to the spirit of San Francisco. My Government believes that this is the first essential step towards restoring the authority and prestige of the United Nations. The second is that States should honor the letter and the spirit of the existing Charter, being guided by the broadly defined purposes and principles set out in Chapter I.
5.	It has been said, increasingly of late, that the United Nations is merely a mirror of the realities of the existing world situation. There is no disputing that. Nations tend to reach decisions, and act, outside the framework of the United Nations, according to the dictates of self-interest, and then to seek to justify their actions in this forum, or, alternatively, to find a scapegoat to divert attention. In that way Member States have tended to neglect their individual responsibilities.
6.	By signing the Charter, Member States undertook, for instance, to strive for the creation of the conditions of stability and well-being which are essential for peaceful and friendly relations among nations. Article 55 of the Charter deals with that aspect. The creation of these conditions is a responsibility which falls
primarily within the sphere of action of individual States, which should ardently pursue the goals of economic and social development and the well-being of their own peoples. Signatories of the Charter, however, have also committed themselves to act, in their relations with one another, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter, and they have thereby accepted a responsibility vis-a-vis other States and their peoples. Membership has, therefore, brought with it both domestic and international obligations.
7.	It is the appropriate time for Members to take stock of their domestic and international achievements, measured against the standard of the Charter. I am not suggesting that the United Nations should take upon itself the task of weighing up the achievements and/or failures of any particular State or States, a course which would be in violation of the provisions of the Charter. I am suggesting rather that Member States should themselves, in this anniversary year, in the spirit of Article 56 of the Charter, direct their inquiring scrutiny at their own achievements over the past 25 years. It is not merely the question of where they stand today that is relevant, but also of where they are today in comparison with 1945. Accordingly, States should first assess their progress domestically in the fields referred to in Article 55. They might ask themselves to what extent they have succeeded in promoting higher standards of living, full employment, conditions of economic and social progress and development and respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms among their own peoples. Secondly, they should consider whether in their behavior towards others they have acted, and are continuing to act, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
8.	As for my own Government, we know that much remains to be done in the future. But I am glad to say also that much has been accomplished in the past 25 years. The general advancement on all fronts of our diverse peoples has been such that their well-being in 1970 certainly exceeds the most optimistic expectations of 1945. We, therefore, are satisfied that we are making significant headway in acquitting ourselves of our commitment under Article 55 of the Charter. Let there be no doubt that we are as concerned as any other State about the realization of the objectives expressed in that Article. We are furthermore satisfied that we shall continue to make progress in the manner which is best suited to, and is dictated by, "the particular circumstances" existing in the area under our jurisdiction to borrow a phrase from Article 73 of the Charter.
9.	Article 55 emphasizes respect for the right of self- determination of peoples. This does not mean that in multinational countries or groupings, one group or nation which happens to be in the majority should be allowed, in the exercise of its right of self- determination, to deprive other numerically smaller nations of the same right. Accordingly, in the exercise of self-determination in such multinational countries, the history and diversity of the peoples living there should be taken fully into account.
10.	South Africa is a multinational country. Our population does not consist of only two elements, a black nation and a white nation. It is composed, in fact, of a white nation and several non-white nations or peoples and the distinction between them is based on the fact that their language, culture, history and traditions differ from one another as markedly as day does from night. In other words the distinction is not based solely on race or colour. We believe that in applying the principle of self-determination, the rights of each of these nations should be preserved. Since 1948, when it first came to power, my Government has actively promoted self-determination for those of our peoples not yet enjoying it, on this basis.
11.	Today all peoples in South Africa possess self- government in varying forms and at various levels of development. Most of our black African peoples, for instance, already have their own legislative and executive assemblies, or councils, with the necessary administrative departments. The Xhosa people of the Transkei were the first to receive a modern parliament and their own Government after their first general election was held in 1963. During the past two years no fewer than eight new territorial Governments have been established with their own legislative and executive councils and with approximately 50 state departments already under their control. In this process of evolution towards independence the peoples of each of these territories have acquired a representative and responsible Government which is actively engaged in planning their own future and preparing them for independence in co-operation with the South African Government, in a peaceful and orderly manner.
12.	On the 15th of last month, in the South African Parliament, my Prime Minister restated government policy in that respect. He reaffirmed that our policy does not constitute a denial of human dignity and added that while he claimed for himself the right of maintaining his identity as a white person, he also conceded to every non-white nation living in South Africa the right to its own identity. He continued as follows:
"Here in South Africa a Bantu person has never got into trouble for having requested and demanded self-determination for his people. Quite the contrary! We are in fact guiding them along the road to self- determination; we are in fact preparing them for self- determination; we are in the process of training them and making them and their land receptive to self- determination. If honorable members or the outside world ask me when it will happen that they go their own way, I can merely reply once again that this Parliament has passed certain legislation and that any black nation is at liberty to come to this Parliament and say that the time has arrived for it to go its own way. This Government, or whatever other Government may be in power, will deliberate and negotiate with that nation.
"I want to make the principle very clear: if there is a desire to hold discussions, we shall be obliged and ready to enter into such discussions. It stands to reason that we would prefer these discussions to be deferred until greater development has taken place in those black territories so that they may be more viable and better prepared to stand on their own feet. But it is by no means my intention to make it a condition that they must be viable before they have the right to approach us. This is their inalienable right, which they can exercise tomorrow if they so desire."
13.	After the black peoples of South Africa have attained independence we shall not desert them. We shall continue to assist them in a spirit of good neighborliness. We shall continue to co-operate with them to our mutual advantage and, in the nature of things, on a much larger scale than we are already doing in the case of our other newly independent African neighbors. In the long term this political development could lead to a commonwealth of independent peoples and States, living side by side on a basis of sovereign equality. They will continue to be inter-dependent economically, but there will be no domination of any one people or any one State by others.
14.	To the skeptics who may still refuse to believe in the feasibility or practicability of the program I have outlined perhaps because of the size and economic viability of the Territories or homelands we are leading to independence let me say this: the populations of the Territories in question range between 300,000 and 3.5 million, populations which exceed those of many States which belong to this Organization and are represented here today. Their areas, too, exceed the areas of many Members of the United Nations. The gross national income of several of those Territories compares more than favorably with that of some Member States. Moreover, South Africa itself has one of the strongest and fastest developing economies in the entire world. In the light of our economic interdependence and our commitment to regional co-operation, economic stability in southern Africa will be guaranteed and development in all fields assured.
15.	Against that background we do not believe that we can legitimately be accused of denying the peoples of South Africa the right of self-determination. As I have said, our whole policy is aimed at avoiding domination of any one people or any one State by others. It is designed to enable each nation, while maintaining its identity, to realize its own ambitions to the full. That surely is the essence of self-determination.
16.	Apart from the right of self-determination, there are other equally important basic rights. Almost three decades ago President Roosevelt outlined his four "freedoms" which are today no less important than they were then. In those, and other fields mentioned in Article 55 of the Charter, substantial progress has been made in my country. Freedom of religion and speech, the liberty of the person, inviolability of person and property and free access to courts of impartial justice are assured. But here, too, the rights of the individual must not be exercised in such a way as to deprive others of that same right. Hence, those rights can be enjoyed only within the framework of an ordered and peaceful society. Only in such a society can high standards of living, full employment and conditions  of economic and educational progress and development be realized for the individual human being.
17.	Other freedoms are related to the fundamental needs of man, for example, freedom from poverty and want and the need for health, education and other social services. Freedom from poverty and want is directly related to economic advancement. It is significant in this respect that the real per capita income of South Africa rose by 66 per cent during the 20 years from 1949 to 1969. As regards other services, we have implemented an education program which will within one generation eliminate illiteracy and which provides opportunities for a university education to increasing numbers of students of all races; we have opened up avenues of technical instruction for non- white persons in all fields; we have established and staffed Africa's most outstanding hospitals and heavily subsidized them, so that black African patients are charged a single fee of 70 United States cents irrespective of the complexity of the treatment they receive or the period they remain in hospital; we have built 600,000 houses in 20 years, 400,000 of which were for black African persons.
18.	We do not claim that in the pursuit of the ideals set out in Article 55 we have reached the stage where we can be self-satisfied. We do not claim to be perfect; but neither are we hypocrites. We acknowledge the common ideals and aspirations of mankind and we have formulated our policies accordingly. We recognize the problems that we have to overcome; we do not, however, criticize others for their shortcomings, for we realize that no State can be perfect. But many others do not hesitate to condemn our policies on moral and practical grounds. These charges are, however, completely unfounded. How can a system be wrong which leads peoples to self-determination and enables and assists them in maintaining their national identities; which provides them with higher social, educational and economic standards that can be attained anywhere else on the continent; which prepares them for independence by providing them with technical assistance and administrative support, thus creating opportunities for all of them to gain valuable experience in the art of government at various levels; which guarantees security for all by avoiding a struggle for power between non-white and white in South Africa and also between competing and traditionally hostile African nationalisms? In the light of the realities of the world today and of the substantial progress we have made in South Africa in the field of human uplift and in the light of the premises and objectives of our policies as I have described them, I feel that the record of South Africa can be measured honorably against the ideals set out in the Charter.
19.	I now wish to refer briefly to the wider field of the individual Member's responsibility. Here it is the duty of Member States to reflect to what extent each of them, individually, has adhered to the basic purposes and principles of the Charter. Without this, all our efforts to promote the moral and social welfare of our peoples would be in vain. These provisions impose a duty on Member States not only towards their own peoples but also towards other States and their peoples. I wish to refer to only three of these provisions, which in present circumstances cannot be sufficiently emphasized: first, the call to the United Nations to be a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the purposes and principles of the Charter; secondly, the call to all Members to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered, and, thirdly, as a corollary to this, the call to all Members to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State.
20.	Unless Members, individually and collectively, are willing to apply these provisions in their daily relations with others, there can be little hope of achieving the ideals of the Charter, of making a reality of the better world envisaged in 1945.
21.	My Government, for its part, has made it clear time and again that we base our relations with other States, first, on acceptance of the rule of nonintervention in their internal affairs; and secondly, on acceptance of the principle that differences of political systems are no bar to peaceful coexistence and friendly relations.
22.	We are of Africa. It is in this continent, especially in the southern region, that our destiny lies. We believe it to be in everyone's interest that all the countries of the region should develop and prosper, that the real enemies of Africa disease, ignorance, poverty and misery should be conquered.
23.	It is of cardinal importance, moreover, that the security and stability of this region should be preserved. We are therefore dismayed to note the emphasis being placed in various United Nations bodies on the use of force as a means for attaining political objectives in southern Africa.
24.	The strengthening of international security and the preservation of peace and order throughout the world is a major preoccupation of the United Nations this year. How can these aims be reconciled with resolutions not only condoning but actually encouraging the use of force in an area of the world where it is least likely to solve any problems? It should not be necessary for me to point out that it cannot be in the interest of any of the peoples of southern Africa to have the stability and security of the region shattered, for without stability and security the future progress and prosperity of the region are in jeopardy. I wish to state in this connexion that I welcome the stand which the Secretary-General took in a statement a fortnight ago against subversive activities and inter-ference in the internal affairs of other nations.
25.	My Government has been obliged to take cognizance of the growing threat to the southern African region and it has a duty to ensure the security of its peoples. Having said this, I must emphasize, however, that South Africa has no aggressive designs. Indeed, any form of aggression is foreign to our history, our traditions, our outlook and our policy.
26.	Two weeks ago, my Prime Minister reminded Parliament of his statement on assuming office four years ago that the independent black States on the borders of the Republic had no cause to spend a single cent on arms for their own defense since they knew that South Africa would not attack them and that they had nothing to fear from us.
27.	Certain States persist, however, in questioning our good faith. In these circumstances my Prime Minister stated that he was prepared to negotiate a non- aggression treaty with any African State, whether that State was an immediate neighbor or was situated further away, such as Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania and other States in Africa. He added that he was prepared to take the initiative in negotiating a non-aggression treaty of this nature.
28.	From this rostrum I wish to invite other African States to give serious consideration to my Prime Minister's offer to conclude non-aggression pacts with them. It is our earnest hope that they will respond positively to this gesture. For my part, I shall be happy to discuss the matter further with representatives of any other African States who may be interested in our proposal or who may wish to have further information about it.
29.	We have heard a great deal in the last 12 months of the Lusaka Manifesto.1 If the spirit which this Manifesto has been said to symbolize does indeed reflect a genuine desire on the part of the African States to find a peaceful solution to the problems of Africa, one might have expected my Prime Minister's initiative to have been welcomed. This unfortunately has not so far been the case. I note with disappointment, indeed surprise, that certain African States have already rejected our offer. I hope very much that they will reconsider their attitude, for I know of nothing more that South Africa can do or say to convince them that any fears they may have of aggressive intentions on our part are totally unfounded. I trust, however, that if they should persist in spuming our offer they will at least refrain from accusing us of aggressive designs in future, for continued accusations of this sort cannot be reconciled with a rejection of a non-aggression pact.
30.	For our part, we are firmly resolved to pursue policies which will contribute to the maintenance of peace and the solution of the urgent problems which will face Africa in the years ahead. We would welcome co-operating with others in this great and challenging task. The Charter enjoins us to practice tolerance and to co-operate with one another. Surely in this commemorative year it is for us to respond positively. Let us all, therefore, rededicate ourselves to the ideals of the Charter and resolve to work together to achieve greater understanding and a better future for all mankind.



84.	  Within one month, when we celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of this Organization, we will emphasize its merits, too often ill-appreciated, recall the services that it has always rendered in spite of all its setbacks and redefine the hopes which we still place in it as a founding Member. "Patience," said a famous French moralist, "is the art of hoping".
85.	But today, as this anniversary draws near, is it not our duty to proceed to a certain examination of our consciences without hiding any truth, without masking any reality, carefully avoiding giving lessons that we are less ready to receive and especially taking
9
for our criteria not the interest of any given country no matter how legitimate but the future, the duties and the opportunities of the international community that we claim, that we want to be?
86.	If I had hesitated to choose this path, the character of the statesmen whom we have happily chosen to preside over our work after Mrs. Angie Brooks-Randolph whose competence and authority all of us greatly appreciated would have been enough to suggest it to me. This statesman not only represents the moral strength of a legal tradition; the name he bears, and I say this with emotion, is associated with the history of the founding of an international community. His father, whom I knew in my youth, was twice President of the Assembly of the League of Nations and represented Norway at the San Francisco Conference, in which you yourself, Mr. President, did take part. Finally, you remind us of the indomitable courage which earned the victory over Nazism without which the very name of the United Nations would never have found expression.
87.	What qualities do we need today, if not boldness in the face of challenge, and faithfulness to the principles of the law, so that we may justify our existence, that is, in the long run and in spite of every thing, successfully to counter violence with equilibrium? I shall try neither to cover every topic nor to mention every continent, nor to define once again the attitude of my country with regard to crises which are threatening or shaking the world, but merely to reply to the question which, as we all know, as we all feel in our hearts, and as was said by all the speakers this morning, the people, all the peoples of the world, are asking themselves and asking us as the spectacular ceremonies approach next month: Why so much disappointment in the face of so much hope? Why let us speak plainly this gnawing sensation of impotence to which none of us is resigned?
88.	I will give my three answers before I justify them. None of them grant me this at least is dictated by concern, fear or resentments special to my country or to a group of countries. In mentioning them I am referring only to the principles which, a quarter of a century ago, gave birth to the Charter.
89.	In three sentences here they are: our weakness, first of all, is the void caused by the absence from among us of a large part of mankind. Our weakness, secondly, is the inadequate effort made by the most fortunate peoples in aiding the struggle of the least favored peoples against hunger, disease, stagnation; and, lastly, our weakness is the resignation to a certain division of power which, unless we take care, will perpetuate the split in the world and, under cover of opposing blocs, condemn the majority of nations which paid so dearly to win the pride of their independence to choose one hegemony or submit to it.
90.	Must we then, in the first place, take the universality of the United Nations for an illusion? What is actually an illusion is to believe that the Organization can perform its task while remaining incomplete. Our Secretary-General, to whom I wish to pay a just tribute here, has never been more worthy of his lofty function than recently when he asked us in effect: Shall we, under the pretext that the debate on the question of China has been going on for twenty years, behave as if it could go on for another twenty years?
91.	Let us consider this carefully. On the one hand, the whole world recognizes as has just been done in Oslo in particularly felicitous terms by ti.e democracies of northern Europe, whose heartening vitality I noted once again last week in Finland that only a political solution, a negotiated solution, can bring an end to the unjust, interminable drama which has bathed South-East Asia in blood. On the other hand, everybody recognizes that this political, negotiated solution requires the participation of China. Everybody deplores the fact that the United Nations cannot bring an end to a tragedy which scandalizes the conscience and common sense of the world because the majority of those whom it concerns above all are unable to bear witness here to their suffering, their ruin and their dead.
92.	However, the debate on which, in the long run, the end of this artificial state of affairs depends is postponed from one year to the next as if it were a scholastic disputation or an oratorical joust. Avoiding the issue prevents the United Nations from assuming its responsibilities and the People's Republic of China from exercising its own.
93.	The Soviet Union and we congratulate it on this has renewed its dialog with Peking. The United States, in turn, can only feel a little more, with every passing day and year, the desire to resume the dialog. If the General Assembly encouraged them either to persist or to commit themselves more resolutely to this task, it might well be that the dynamism of peace would be released in Asia. Then the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Organization could almost do without our speeches. It would be celebrated by the gratitude of the peoples of Viet-Nam, Cambodia and Laos, beloved by France, and for whom the President of the French Republic would at last no longer have to ask for justice.
94.	But it is not in Asia alone that the service of the truth presupposes the recognition of realities.
95.	The conclusion of a non-aggression treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union  is in itself an element of detente, understanding and co-operation one of the basic steps that General de Gaulle had wanted, announced and prepared. But, at this point, we have one more reason to welcome it. It brings us closer to the day when "the whole of Europe" that Mr. Georges Pompidou spoke about at The Hague Conference  will be present here in this Assembly. Let us not say that we are still far from this, but let us rather say that we are less far.
96.	However, when we think of the United Nations as it should be, we must not divert our attention from what it is. Now, this shows up another weakness. Of course, it is not responsible for the growing disparity between the standards of living and the conditions of existence of countries which make up this Organization. On the contrary, to its credit, it has emphasized, analyzed, sometimes revealed, this increase in iniquity. One would have to mention twenty names to pay a just tribute to the intelligence, depth and generosity of the reports and studies that have made it possible to map out the problems without hiding the difficulties. This is all to the good. And now? Well, now the time has come to harness the goodwill of States. The time has come to obtain from each one of them commitments equal to its capacities. What the preliminary work shows is that it is no longer possible to mention any real reason, any acceptable excuse, to further delay this moment.
97.	As the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development forecast last month at Geneva, the "year 2000, without new collective efforts, will see the share of the developing countries in world exports drop to 10 per cent". It is easy to understand that those countries cannot, without a certain bitterness, compare this prophecy with the sentence I noted in the last annual report of the World Bank: "The work of the commission headed by Mr. Lester Pearson on joint action for the development of the third world has given rise to wide-ranging discussions in official circles."
98.	Is there anyone here who could possibly believe that the stage of discussion even wide-ranging discussions should not be over? France recently defined the objectives of her new Plan. Figures and percentages will hardly be found in it. It is a rule of conduct which will not surprise economists. But we did make one exception: whatever the circumstances, credits devoted to aid to development will remain above 1 per cent of our gross national product. More than half of these credits will be absorbed by public aid which itself comprises more than 80 per cent in grants.
99.	Those who have been associated with the work of General de Gaulle, and, primarily, the present President of the Republic, believe that decolonization itself creates obligations. That is why and I say so weighing every word they are and expect to remain attentive to all requests which reach them from Africa. That is also why they feel authorized to say to you: may common action for the development of the third world become our mutual obsession at last.
100.	But serious as they may be, the weaknesses resulting from certain absences and a certain deficiency are at least known and, most often, admitted. No one considers that the collective effort in favor of the peoples who have the right to claim it is sufficient or satisfactory. No one can regard it as normal that a quarter of mankind is outside the United Nations. On the other hand there is a third danger of which less is said but which should be squarely faced the danger that threatens the balance of responsibilities on which the Charter, and therefore the United Nations itself, is founded. I repeat: the balance of responsibilities. It would disappear if the strongest Powers shirked their own responsibilities; it would equally be upset if they pretended to assume the responsibilities of others, or if others relinquished the responsibilities which their status as Members of the United Nations gives them. Hegemony, exclusive or shared, is the surest way of preventing the United Nations from breathing and therefore from acting.
101.	Three consequences flow from this double statement. First the dialog and rapprochement of the major Powers are desirable and beneficial. Secondly, the international community cannot have guardians. Thirdly, due to the very fact that they are immune to the temptation of guardianship, a special duty falls to the countries which, though not among the highest ranking Powers, are permanent members of the Security Council.
102.	Those three principles are fully applicable to the crisis in the Middle East. All of us welcome with relief the determination seen in the leaders of the two Powers which possess the most fearful strategic weapons to replace controversy by negotiation. As for France, we find involved, on the one hand, our oldest ally and, on the other, a great friendly country with which France has developed closer and closer bonds of co-operation. The President of the French Republic, who has surely not forgotten his reception by President Nixon, was a few months ago the guest of Washington. In a few days, he will be the guest of Moscow. When, in one of the most troubled areas of the world, the movement towards peace receives a new impetus from the dialog happily re-established between Moscow and Washington, it is only natural that we should rejoice about it. That is our first point.
103.	And here is the second. The more we consider it to be indispensable, in view of reappearing and growing threats, to do everything possible to ensure respect for the cease-fire and to do away with obstacles to negotiations, the more we see that the sharing of power or influence cannot form a basis for peace. "If the situation is disturbing for the bordering countries", a high-level Arab official, the Foreign Minister of Tunisia, recently said, "it is because it makes the Mediterranean one of the centers of encounter or of confrontation of the two greatest world Powers as was Europe during the fifties which means that its destiny is not completely its own". Now is not our basic maxim precisely this: that no one, except that country itself, may decide the fate of a nation?
104.	How, then, to move away from trusteeships and guardianships, even involuntary ones, without losing the advantage of beneficial rapprochements? The third and last point gives the reply. It is necessary that recommendations be drawn up not for the advantage of one State or one ethnic group, one religion or one culture, but in order to re-establish, in a region which has already given so much to mankind, a zone of cooperation between all ethnic groups, all religions, all cultures which exist there side by side, in the respect for boundaries and the rights of all the States. It is also necessary that these recommendations be mutual. That is, far from becoming a means for one State to put pressure upon another, they should propose procedures of implementation which would be both substantial and well-balanced for all the rules laid down by the Security Council resolution [242 (1967)], whether it be a question of withdrawal from conquered lands or guarantees of peace, freedom of navigation or the rights of the Palestinian refugees.
105.	Now who can permanently defend the spirit and letter of this resolution? Who can somehow be the permanent representative of the international community, if not precisely the whole formed by the perma-nent members of the Security Council? "The area of agreement between the Four is much wider than the area of disagreement", our Secretary-General rightly said at a recent press conference. At the same time he thus reminded us that the agreement of the Four is the true way to arrive at our goal without divesting the United Nations as a whole of the irreplaceable responsibilities it assumes and should continue to assume in that part of the world.
106.	Without naming them I have just mentioned two European countries, my own and the United Kingdom. It is not by chance that I link them. The Conference of The Hague, as you know, opened up a new chapter. In making public its decision to make its work irreversible, the European Economic Community showed not once but twice that it wanted to be neither exclusive nor inward-looking. It showed this first by opening itself to all European States which accept its rules and goals Britain as well as Ireland, Norway as well as Denmark, to mention only the present candidates. It showed this also by affirming that its mission prevented it from transforming itself into a bloc confronting other blocs. It is not only for itself that it wishes to be an independent center of progress and prosperity. Today, everyone can see that the building of Europe is in fact inseparable from European detente and thus from world peace.
107.	Moreover, the bonds of solidarity which, thanks to the Yaounde Conventions,  join it to Africa are only one example of the mission which a reconciled Europe can assume in the world. It is right that, from the shores of the Mediterranean to the whole of Latin America, people should turn towards that Europe and place their hopes in it. For it is known that, fortified by its own originality, it will certainly not threaten but rather encourage the independence of others.
108.	The celebration of the awe-inspiring anniversary of which I spoke at the beginning may have started last week when a wholesome and significant unanimity was reached in the Security Council [see resolution 286 (1970)] in denouncing, in the face of a new form of premeditated violence, the hijacking of aircraft as well as any other interference with international civil air travel, and reprisals against innocent people. Respect for human rights is not an obligation only for States but also for peoples;, groups, individuals and especially those who may have cause to invoke it.
109.	The same moral strength of the collective con-science should be brought to bear to find a remedy through specific steps to the inadequacy of the international protection of basic rights. One example, among so many others, comes to mind. I am thinking of those journalists on dangerous missions who have often, by their very objectivity, contributed to the freeing and liberation of unfortunate peoples and whose fearless, professional conscience has led them to an unfair death. As long ago as 1968, the International Congress of Montecatini turned to the United Nations to ensure that these indispensable witnesses should receive legal protection suitable to their mission. Our forthcoming discussions regarding respect for human rights in times of armed conflict should make it possible for us to respond to this appeal.
110.	But the protection of human rights is indivisible. It obliges every Member of the United Nations to condemn discrimination, first and foremost racial discrimination, apartheid, whatever the pretext or method. We have not forgotten the words which the President of the Federal Republic of Cameroon used in speaking about this in the General Assembly last year [1756th meeting]. He would have proved to us, had it been necessary, that respect for the Charter and concern for its effectiveness are in the long run the true means to fight for the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
111.	In truth, these principles on which our Organization is founded have lost none of their vitality and power of attraction in twenty-five years. These principles are evoked by peoples everywhere in the world to defend their independence or to obtain, at long last, the right freely to choose their destiny. These are the principles in which today's youth, restless, boisterous and demanding, is trying to find an ideal again, as quite recently the World Youth Assembly  showed us here.
112.	May so much assembled hope give us the strength to overcome our weaknesses. The enjoyment of the rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights requires, first of all, that arms be silent. This is why, on the eve of a re-examination of our consciences, we are resolved are we not? to be worthy of the trust which people put in us, by placing more clarity, wisdom and boldness in the service of peace.



110.	 Mr. President, I should like first to say how glad I am to sit under you as President in this anniversary year. It is particularly appropriate, as we pass the quarter-century mark, that our President should be the representative of a State which has contributed so much to the United Nations and to the League of Nations before it; that he should have been a delegate at San Francisco; and that he should be one who has made so great a personal contribution to the analysis of that international law of which this Organization was intended to be the prime instrument.
111.	I should also like to say what a personal pleasure it is to me, after an absence of seven years from the United Nations, to find our SecretaryGeneral still at his post. Politicians come and go; the Secretary General remains. I am bound to say that that is the right way round.
112.	In what I have to say this morning, I start again where I left off seven years ago, talking about the rule of law.
113.	The commemorative session will be the right occasion for a general review, as we look back over our achievements and our failures since 1945. Two weeks ago I did not think that I would trouble this Assembly with an assessment, in view of the fact that my Prime Minister is coming here later on. But since then the attention of the world has been captured by a horrifying series of events.
114.	They began with a week of incidents which were properly described by our SecretaryGeneral as a "return to the law of the jungle". He was right. In the jungle there is fear; the law men know does not exist. In the same way, all people in the world have been frightened and lawful Governments have been almost helpless in the face of violence and threats of violence which are alien to the civilized world.
115.	If they had been isolated criminal acts, these events would not have deserved our attention here. But as it is, they have come as a portent to us a glimpse of the forces of lawlessness and anarchy that still exist a reminder of how very thin is the veneer of civilization on which we reply. These events therefore demand attention here in this General Assembly, above all, because they epitomize a danger which threatens the aim of every State, the aim of the United Nations and that is that law should rule both men and nations.
116.	This Organization was created to maintain the peace of the world by collective measures, and to provide for the peaceful settlement of disputes between States. The authors of the Charter of our United Nations did foresee one of the dangers ahead. That danger was the interference by force in the internal affairs of one country by another. But one development which the authors of the Charter did not anticipate was that the peace should be threatened by armed forces outside their Government's control. The anarchy produced by force in that guise can be just as wrecking to peace as direct aggression.
117.	When I last spoke to the Assembly, I felt optimistic. It seemed to me that the cold war might be drawing to an end. I recalled a television broadcast which I had made in Moscow at Mr. Gromyko's invitation to the people of the Soviet Union, when I said that a renunciation by the Soviet Government of the use of war and force to impose a political doctrine was the key which would open the way to genuine coexistence.
118.	Looking back over those seven years, we can note that there have been some very serious setbacks to that optimism, but nevertheless it seems partially to have been justified. The new willingness to negotiate which we had then begun to perceive has continued, and through negotiation some of the darkest of the clouds which used to menace us have started to lift.
If the United States and the Soviet Union can reach agreement on limitations to their nuclear arsenals, that will be a long step forward. I say that, even as a European on whom the missiles will still be concentrated. But we hope for the success of the strategic arms limitation talks. It will not free us from the recurring nightmare of global destruction. That possibility will remain as long as States have access to the ultimate weapons. But such an agreement could slow down the growth of the means of destruction, and so give new life to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which has up to now been almost totally frustrated. On its ability to achieve positive results much of the happiness and, it may be, the survival of man hangs.
119.	Other negotiations are taking place on issues which have threatened peace in Europe since 1945. There is the recent treaty between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany", and the Federal Republic's negotiations with its other neighbors to the East. They hold the key to constructive coexistence in Europe.
120.	The test, of course, as always, is not in words but deeds, and in that area Berlin is still the key to real coexistence. If we cannot agree to take the humanitarian step of lowering the barriers between two halves of a city, what hope is there for two halves of the European continent to live in peace? Berlin therefore will be the touchstone of the will of the peoples of Europe to achieve detente between East and West, It was in Berlin that the ordeal of 1939 to 1945 ended for Europe; and it is in Berlin that Europe is still waiting for a release from the aftermath of war and the beginning of a peace which is real.
121.	No one should underestimate the importance of such a release. Europe cannot throw stones at others. It was in wars which spread from Europe over the whole world that this Organization and its predecessor were both conceived. But a new Western Europe is emerging now, and as Mr. Schumann said here last Friday [1842nd meeting, this Europe will inevitably be more outward-looking a more powerful center of economic growth carrying a fertilizing process far outside the borders of that particular continent. That is why our negotiations in Europe have a significance for every country represented here.
122.	We must note with honesty that all these negotiations are going on outside the framework of the United Nations. Nevertheless, their importance is fundamental to us here. When our predecessors at San Francisco framed the Charter, they based their hopes of peace on the collective determination of what were then the major Powers, and there are two ways in which these hopes have since been undermined.
123.	The first, which has already been mentioned by one or two speakers this morning, is that not all the major Powers are represented in the United Nations. This has made it undoubtedly more difficult for us to tackle effectively in this forum some of the most pressing and dangerous problems that trouble the
c Signed in Moscow on 12 August 1970.
world. I am thinking as have others, and as did Mr. Schumann of China. The Chinese are increasingly involved in those very situations around the world which engage our attention here.
124.	If the representatives of Peking were seated here their influence would be greatly felt. I cannot forecast what it would mean. They could well, by the rigidity of their political doctrine, make our tasks more difficult. But they have more than many to gain from expanding trade, from prosperity and from interdependence. They could add immensely if they chose, along with the rest of us, to real coexistence. Their intentions, in the opinion of the British Government, should be put to the proof in this assembly of nations.
125.	The second disappointment for the hopes of 1945 has, very simply, been that it has so seldom been possible for the major Powers to reach a collective view on any important issue of world politics. Until now, our collective postures have at best been negative. That is why the negotiations in Helsinki, in Vienna and in Berlin are so important for us here in the United Nations. Because if the 1960s saw the beginning of an era of negotiation, the 1970s could see at last the beginning of an era of collective action for the maintenance of peace collective action based on the common desire of the most powerful nations in the world to work together for political stability and for the settlement of disputes. That opportunity is there.
126.	The authors of the Charter assumed harmony between the leading Powers. But, of course, the ink was scarcely dry on the signatures of the Charter before that hope and trust were falsified. The lesson of the years since then is unmistakable, and it is that there can be no collective action without a collective aim and a common interest. If there does begin to emerge at last, out of all the negotiations now in progress, a common interest in peace and stability, it will transform our work in the next Twenty-five years, both in the Security Council and in the Assembly of this Organization, and that transformation would immediately be reflected in the relationship between countries in many parts of the world.
127.	There is one challenge, above all, which such determination would help us to meet. Provided a balance of strength a balance of terror, if you like is kept, the old-fashioned war of the Charter is a receding threat. States are less inclined today to pursue their political objectives through alliance and ultimatum, through mobilization and declared belligerency. To this extent, one of the ideals of San Francisco is being realized, even though this has been due in part and the admission is shameful in a civilized world at this time to the fearsome growth in the destructiveness of total war.
128.	Nevertheless, in many parts of the world today men are fighting. Victims are falling to the bullet, the shell and the grenade. All too often those victims are innocent civilian bystanders, and it is not much comfort to the widow or the orphan that no war has been declared. It is time for us in this Assembly squarely to face the fundamental, unacceptable dangers of condoning those who take the law into their own hands. We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down and once again to submit themselves to the rule of law.
129.	There is and it will be readily perceived by this Assembly and it has been touched upon by several speakers a cruel dilemma here. For force is so dreadful a weapon in modern terms that one has to add: "... lay down their arms, even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice".
130.	The Charter of the United Nations visualized this dilemma. Our predecessors insisted on the proclamation of human rights consistent with the dignity of man, of which the representatives of Gambia and Zambia both spoke just now. And it is undoubtedly our duty to do all we can by example to secure that countries practice social justice. There are today, and we have heard them mentioned, political systems where social injustice rules, and it is right that they should be exposed, whether it is suffering under communism, or suffering under apartheid, or suffering under any other of the creeds which do not square with the practices of true democracy.
131.	But the authors of the Charter perceived another and an equal truth; that if the nations tried to impose upon each other their own notions of justice and to do it by force, that would be the finish of international order. That is why an appeal to arms, except for defense against external aggression, was expressly forbidden under our rules. If that was right then, it is a hundred times more so now. For if the end can justify the means, then more and more groups of unknown men will take up arms; they will put themselves above and beyond the law and, what is more, they will put themselves above the legal Governments of countries represented here.
132.	Kidnapping and hijacking make that lesson plain and the nations must deal with them. In the case of the. hijackers, the duty of individual Governments is clear. We should all ratify the Tokyo Convention  and support the new Convention at the forthcoming Hague Conference. We should all make hijacking a crime in our own countries, and allow it to be punished by any Government in whose territory a hijacked aircraft lands. If we could agree on these and other measures which may result from the international conference now to be held, perhaps this new and dreadful illegality could be brought under control. It is, however, a most vivid and contemporary example of how force used on a small scale can spread its repercussions far and wide, and when that happens in this modem world it is almost always the innocent who are the victims.
133.	But the dangers of the overspill of force go far beyond hijacking. This week we have an example before us of how people, who act sincerely in the name of justice as they see it and take to arms, can start a bloody widespread war beyond the control of legal Governments.
134.	After Twenty- years of intolerance and bloodshed in the Middle East, the hopes of coexistence in place of belligerency began to grow. We took a British initiative, and as a result of it we have now a Security Council resolution which sets out the essential terms of a settlement. A Special Representative for the Middle East has been appointed in whom we all have full confidence. In that forum, the four Powers in New York, we in Britain are ready to play a full part. Mr. Maurice Schumann last week [ibidj gave a most penetrating analysis of this work, which was started by his Government, and so I need not repeat what he said. The world began to breathe again when, on the United States initiative which the rest of us support, a ceasefire was agreed upon.
135.	But there has been a breakdown, which could be fatal. Violations of the conditions for an end to the fighting have been alleged. I am not judging that issue today, except to say this, that the minimum basis of trust has, for the moment, been destroyed and ways must be found to repair it. Otherwise we shall get back into the situation where we were a few weeks ago, with the danger of the Middle Eastern conflict always spreading to something much wider than a battle or confrontation between Israel and Egypt.
136.	But all this ambition for the greater peace and security of the area has been overlaid by the civil war in Jordan and it is a doubly tragic development. These refugees in whose interest this Organization has worked so hard now find themselves not only in conflict with the Government of a country which has given them refuge; they are also in declared and violent opposition to a settlement whose basic elements have been endorsed by the Security Council of the United Nations.
137.	The degree of desperation to which these people have been driven is, in some way, a measure of the failure of our Organization over the years to solve this problem in which it has been so deeply engaged. But the use of force to try and solve it has already left a deep scar on Arabia.
138.	The immediate priority must be to make an end to the tragic strife in Jordan and in that context we can welcome the apparent withdrawal of foreign intervention yesterday from Jordanian soil and to ensure humanitarian treatment for all those who have been wounded or made homeless by the conflict. We are relying on the Arab Governments to achieve these minimum objectives.
139.	The larger task, though, is still before us, and the events of the past two weeks have only added to its dimensions and complexity. The surest basis for any hope of settlement in the end must still be this; that all those concerned will support our efforts here in the United Nations to achieve and guarantee a peace that will bring security and justice to those concerned.
140.	It was that consensus which so recently seemed to be bringing a settlement within our reach; it is that consensus alone which can enable the United Nations to reach any major achievement; and it is that consensus alone which can resolve the tragic history of the last generation for all the people who live in that area of violence, intolerance and hate.
141. But there is another condition which is even more fundamental and which has also been underlined this month in Jordan. The truth is, and this must be understood by the legally established Governments of the world, whether we live in Europe, or Africa, or the Americas, or Asia, that force to achieve political ends can never pay, in the modern world, a dividend in terms of justice and peace.
142. Our theme for the next Twenty-five years is fundamentally the same as the last. It is to outlaw force; it is to sustain law. And because in recent weeks we have got somewhere near to looking into the abyss of what international anarchy can mean, we must give a new sense of urgency to our counsels in the United Nations and in this Assembly.
40.	 Mr. President, I offer you our congratulations on your election as the President of the current session of the General Assembly. You represent Norway, a country which can take pride in its reputation as peaceful, just and progressive. Your personal qualifications and your family's dedication to international effort are well known. I should also like to express our appreciation of the services of your distinguished predecessor, Mrs. Angie Brooks Randolph. I would also repeat our admiration for U Thant, whose skill and dedication have won him our respect.
41.	Today is Mahatma Gandhi's one-hundred-first birthday, and we in India will take a fresh pledge to dedicate ourselves once again to the ideals for which the Mahatma lived and died, peace and nonviolence being the foremost among them. We may not fully succeed in living up to his ideals but we must continue to try.
42.	There are many developments in India which give us satisfaction. Our people are expecting a better life through our development plans. We have had a sizable increase in agricultural and industrial production. Our trade is also showing signs of improvement. India has once again demonstrated its faith in full-fledged democracy. Alongside this there is a growing desire of the common man to share more equitably in the distribution of national wealth.
43.	twenty-two days ago a great conference ended at Lusaka, and in 22 days from now we shall be celebrating the signing of the Charter of the United Nations. The Conference of Lusaka owes much of its success to the efforts and organization undertaken by the Government and people of Zambia, and once again we should like to thank them. The final declarations and resolution s of that Conference are being circulated as United Nations documents. They represent the consensus of 53 Members of the United Nations, representing about half the human race. I would urge that everyone read them.
44.	The Conference at Lusaka highlighted several key points. These are: international peace and security, peaceful coexistence and friendly relations, solution of international problems by negotiations, the value of the United Nations as a universal forum, decolonization, development, disarmament and the pursuit of the principles of nonalignment. In order to fulfill the objectives we subscribed to at Lusaka, we seek the widest support and cooperation of the Members of the United Nations.
45.	In assessing the achievements of the United Nations over the past 25 years, the major factor that strikes us is that, while another world war has been avoided, insecurity still prevails and that, while tension between the great Powers has eased and negotiations between them in certain fields have begun developments which are welcome armed conflicts are still raging in many parts of the world. This situation requires attention from the world community. A positive step in that direction that has been taken is the adoption by the Sixth Committee last week [1184th meeting] of the Declaration on Principles of international law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [A 18082, para. 8]. A further step to strengthen the edifice of peace that this Assembly could take is to adopt a declaration on the strengthening of international peace and security.
46.	Such a declaration should particularly include prohibition of the threat or use of force to settle international differences, scrupulous respect for existing international frontiers, inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by military conquest, settlement of disputes exclusively by peaceful means, regional cooperation, reduction of the gap between the developing and the developed countries, disarmament, and the right of self-determination for people under racist and colonial regimes.
47.	The developing countries particularly face innumerable threats to their independence and identity. They also face impediments in their economic development. Pressures continue from countries better organized, better developed and better equipped militarily. This has come to be known as neocolonialism and one of our efforts in the coming years should be to arrest these trends. In this context may I draw your attention to what our Prime Minister said at Lusaka about intellectual and cultural emancipation. She said:
"Those who dominated the world's political affairs and manned its economic controls also imposed a monopoly of ideas. For years we accepted their values, their image of the world and, strangely enough, even of ourselves. Whether we liked it or not, we have been pushed into postures of imitation. We have now to break away from borrowed models of development and evolve models of the worthwhile life, which is more relevant to our conditions not necessarily as a group but as individual countries with distinctive personalities."
48.	There has been a great deal of success in the United Nations program for bringing new territories and new countries to independence, but much remains to be done. Portuguese colonialism in Africa, South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia, defiance by the racist regime in Rhodesia and the continued colonial status of a large number of territories and areas remind us of how much more needs to be done.
49.	South Africa denies the fundamental rights to the majority of its citizens and its policy of apartheid poses a threat to the peace. The alliance which has emerged there between the forces of colonialism and racism in an effort to preserve "white supremacy" is an affront. We deplore the attitudes and actions of certain countries which encourage the regimes in Salisbury, Pretoria and in the Portuguese possessions.
50.	We are concerned at the declared intention of the Government of the United Kingdom to resume the sale of arms to South Africa. Any accretion to the military strength of South Africa will increase the threat not only to the neighboring countries in Africa, but also to the Indian Ocean area. We should like this area to be a zone of peace free from great Power rivalry.
51.	Much has been said about the United Nations peacemaking and peacekeeping operations. We believe that in the changing and evolving political scene of the world, the United Nations should occupy a central place. The expectation of the Charter that in the field of peace and security the great Powers would work in concert has not, unfortunately, materialized,. We hope that in the coming years this cooperation will be forthcoming for the benefit of all.
52.	We believe that in order to bring about a better atmosphere and eliminate many difficulties which persist it will be necessary to give all Members in the United Nations a feeling of participation in all decisions that may be made. Whether it be the issues of war and peace, economic development or independence and sovereignty, all Member States should participate in decision making. We welcome the cooperation among the great Powers, but are anxious that whatever decisions they may arrive at should be subject to discussion among all of us and that no decision should be implemented until it has received significant support, or consensus, if you like, of the United Nations as a whole.
53.	We regret that the universality of membership of the United Nations has not been achieved. In particular, there is a general realization that without the rightful participation of the People's Republic of China this Organization will continue to face difficulties in solving several basic problems.
54.	It is a matter of concern that the United Nations and the SecretaryGeneral have been handicapped for lack of adequate funds. We would, therefore, urge that all Members should cooperate in ensuring that the important problems in various fields undertaken by the United Nations do not suffer for paucity of funds. The Indian delegation will do whatever it can to strengthen the hands of the SecretaryGeneral in this respect. Equally, we are concerned about our procedures and methods of work. We would support any steps which may be suggested to bring about improvements in these matters. We attach great importance to suitable geographical distribution, not merely for the Organization as a whole, but in all its departments and at all levels.
55.	We consider that the Charter, if faithfully implemented, would overcome many difficulties which the Organization faces. Mr. Lester Pearson, a noted winner of the Nobel Peace Prize and a former Prime Minister of Canada, said recently that "It is the sheerest hypocrisy for Governments to flee from their own responsibilities by blaming the world Organization". We regret that it is becoming increasingly a fashion to denigrate the importance of the United Nations by what Mr. Pearson calls the tendency of Governements "to flee from their own responsibilities".
56.	India has made its contribution to the various United Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope that the differences on the initiation, control and financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations will be speedily resolved so that the United Nations can contribute more effectively to preserving peace. India accepts the principle of strengthening the machinery of peacekeeping by the United Nations and would consider concrete action after the modalities have been agreed upon.
57.	General and complete disarmament under international control is even more urgent today. The nuclear arms race and innovations in sophisticated delivery systems are making life on the planet daily more precarious. It deflects resources and energies from constructive work. It also leads to deadly competition, military blocs and spheres of influence.
58.	The Indian delegation will strive to ensure the success of the Disarmament Decade through a comprehensive program of disarmament for the next 10 years. We must concentrate our attention on general and complete disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament. We realize that it may not be possible to achieve progress all at once and that collateral measures are expedient. We are aware of the tremendous contribution which the technology of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including peaceful nuclear explosions, can make to the economy of the developing world. The benefits of this technology should be available to all States without any discrimination. At Lusaka the nonaligned nations indicated a general order of priorities which should be followed in drawing up the program for the Disarmament Decade.
59.	It is obvious that measures of nuclear disarmament such as cut off in the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes, a comprehensive test ban, reduction and destruction of stockpiles of nuclear weapons and so forth, should receive the highest priority. The next priority should be for other measures in the disarmament field, such as an agreement prohibiting the development, production and stockpiling of chemical and biological weapons and providing for their elimination from the arsenals of all nations.
60.	I should like to refer briefly to the de-nuclearization draft treaty relating to the seabed and ocean floor . The approval of the agreement on non-emplacement of weapons of mass destruction on the seabed beyond the twelve mile limit is to be welcomed, but it is only a limited disarmament measure in this field.
61.	My delegation is convinced that the seabed and the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that the potential wealth of the area and its resources should be developed and used for the benefit of mankind as a whole. I should like to appeal to all representatives to make a sincere and determined effort to define the regime of the seas and to create an international machinery to regulate it before a mad rush to expropriate the resources of this last frontier sets in.
62.	As regards the conference on the law of the sea, my delegation supports the viewpoints expressed at the nonaligned summit in favor of convening a conference on the law of the sea at an early date, after adequate preparations have been made for it by a preparatory committee. We are of the opinion that all the questions, namely, the regimes of the high seas, the continental shelf, the territorial sea and the contiguous zone, fishing and conservation of the living resources of the high seas, etc., should be dealt with at the same time in a comprehensive manner, rather than in a piecemeal fashion.
63.	On the occasion of this twenty-fifth anniversary session of the United Nations we can derive some satisfaction from the contribution of this Organization in placing economic cooperation for development on a sound, rational and dynamic basis. We have a long way to go, however, in order to realize the fundamental objectives of the Charter for creating conditions of stability and wellbeing and for ensuring a minimum standard of living necessary for human worth and dignity.
64.	The gap separating the affluent and the poor nations has been widening rapidly; this is a serious threat to the independence of the developing countries and to international peace and security. Some of the recent trends in the field of international economic cooperation indicate that there has been a retreat from the high ideals of 1950s. Despite the endeavors of the developing countries to contribute their due and rightful share in the world economic life, the process of their continuous alienation from the mainstream of the world economy remains unabated.
65.	India views with favor, and looks forward with great expectation, to the effort of the international community to adopt an international development strategy for the seventies as a basis for solving the problem of poverty in a concerted manner and on a rational and comprehensive basis. My delegation would, therefore, commend to the Assembly the strong recommendation of the nonaligned nations that the General Assembly, at its commemorative session, should adopt a declaration on international development strategy for the 1970s.
66.	Such a concept does not admit of halfhearted measures undertaken in an isolated manner. What we need is a definition of goals and objectives and time bound policy measures to achieve them. The adoption of a mere declaratory resolution by the General Assembly, launching the Second United Nations
Development Decade, would not I repeat, not represent any point of departure, and hence our plea for a strategy of development which not only would provide for policy measures to enable the developing countries to overcome their current economic difficulties, but would also be l decisive move towards the objective of restructuring international economic relations on a just and equitable basis.
67.	The primary task for the implementation of the strategy would rest on the developing countries themselves. One of the most hopeful features of the past decade has been the determination shown by the developing countries to try to achieve economic and social progress through their own efforts. At the same time they have progressed also towards broadening and diversifying economic relations among themselves, with a view to imparting strength, to their national endeavors. It is our sincere hope that, consistent with the commitments undertaken by the developed countries in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other forums, and as reflected in the draft international development strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [A',7982, para. 16] now under consideration by the General Assembly, the developed countries will assist in the implementation of concrete and specific schemes to be put forward by developing countries in the field of economic cooperation, and regional and sub regional integration among themselves.
68.	While we attempt to build the edifice of a secure peace at the United Nations we cannot overlook the conflicts that are currently raging in the world. The situation in VietNam continues to cause us deep concern. We recognize that all parties to the conflict have declared their adherence to the Geneva Agreements and their desire to achieve a peaceful solution in VietNam. The cessation of the bombing of the Democratic Republic of VietNam has been appreciated generally, as also the desire of all sides to continue the talks in Paris to find a peaceful settlement. In our view those talks can progress if there is an indication that all foreign forces will be withdrawn from VietNam. The United States Government already has withdrawn some troops, and we believe that a firm timetable, together with a date for final withdrawal, will help the negotiations in Paris. A broad based Government, comprising all elements of South VietNam, would be another factor which could contribute to the success of the negotiations.
69.	The eruption of fighting in Cambodia has increased the tension in that area. We earnestly hope that the people of Cambodia, with whom the Indian people have historic ties of culture and friendship, will be able to overcome all their internal difficulties and will be allowed to live in peace and friendship with their neighbors, without any interference from outside.
70.	In Laos the proposed negotiations between the parties are not making much headway.
71.	The conflict in the States of Indo-China has brought much distress and suffering to their people.
As a result of this series of conflicts the people of those countries have suffered grievously through death and destruction over the years. India has an abiding interest in peace and stability in that area. Everything should be done to put an end to this human misery.
72.	At present it would be difficult to discuss separately the problems of the States of Indo-China, and we believe that once the fighting in Indo-China is stopped it would be necessary to have an international conference to resolve the complex situation now gripping those States. India is prepared to join other States and interested parties in working out arrangements to ensure respect for the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and neutrality of all the States of Indo-China.
73.	West Asia is another region which is torn by bitter conflict and has not seen peace for many years. Israel continues to occupy large Arab territories seized in the 1967 conflict from which they must withdraw. The human problem of Arab refugees exiled from their homeland cannot be ignored and the just rights of the Palestinian people must be respected.
74.	The determination of the international community to take concrete steps to respect and protect the just and reasonable rights of the Palestinian people would provide the most effective and durable check against many desperate measures, including hijacking, which we all deplore and which cause much needless suffering to so many innocent people. We are glad that all the hostages have been released.
75.	The foundations of a just and lasting peace in West Asia were laid three years ago when the Security Council adopted resolution 242 (1967). This resolution must be fully implemented. My delegation hopes that the talks under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral's Special Representative will take place without further delay or procrastination. We share the general concern for peace in this area and hope that the proposed talks will result in the implementation of the Security Council resolution of 1967 and a just and lasting peace in the area.
76.	While conflict and tension continue in Asia, there have been certain positive developments in Europe which we welcome. I refer to the nonaggression Treaty recently signed between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany.  We hope that this development will open the way for further agreements to strengthen security in Europe. I should also like to express the hope that the bilateral talks between the United States and the Soviet Union on the limitation of strategic arms will bear fruit. This will not only be an important arms limitation measure but also a positive contribution to the general relaxation of tension in the world.
77.	International relations are entering a phase characterized by increasing interdependence on the one hand and the desire of States to pursue independent policies on the other. Scientific and technological innovations, rapid communication, increased commerce and ecological considerations are lowering the barriers between States and encouraging cooperation. Side by side, the international community remains separated by political, economic and racial barriers and prejudices; the weak continue to live in the shadow of the more powerful, and neither peace nor prosperity nor the right to independence and equality have yet become the integral attributes of all mankind. The United Nations is at the center of the world, attempting to restrain the aggressor, fighting greed and prejudice and promoting international cooperation on a just and equal basis.
78.	I am certain that the Heads of State and Government attending the commemorative session, beginning in a fortnight's time, will give the requisite lead to make our Organization more effective.
79.	The world today seems full of strife. Conflicts and conflagrations are unfortunately continuing. This naturally saddens us all especially when we meet to celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. However, the situation is not entirely full of gloom and despair. Let us not fail to take note of the many areas in which significant progress towards peace and prosperity is being made. World peace has been maintained for a quarter of a century even though we have been unable to stop local wars. The pace of development in many parts of the world is gathering momentum. The threat of starvation has been lifted. The production of food grains in countries like India is not only matching current needs but also rising faster than the growth in the population. Each year more and more countries are throwing off the colonial yoke and declaring their determination to play their full part as independent, free nations.
80.	As the United Nations completes its twenty-fifth year, we can look to the future, not with despair and despondency but with hope and confidence.




93.	: Mr. President, your country, Norway, has a warm place in Israel's heart. Our common sacrifice drew our peoples together in the darkness of the Nazi age, and friendship has lit up every road that we have trodden ever since. Your erudition and integrity enlarge the respect which your country's name evokes across the world. In carrying out your charge you have before you the recent example of your predecessor, Mrs. Angie BrooksRandolph, who graced henPresidency with charm, originality and deep international convictions.
94.	The twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly has been chosen as a commemorative occasion. What we need most is not a festive celebration but a lucid exercise in self-criticism. The United Nations has fallen on hard days. Its resonance is diminished and its flame is burning low. It exerts no more than a marginal influence on the main issues of conflict in our times, and the central currents of international thought and action flow outside its walls. There is a sharp paradox in that turn of fortune, for there has never been a greater objective need for a unitary framework of international relations to express the common interest of mankind. For the first time in history distance has become irrelevant, and all peoples are bound together in danger and opportunity. Thus, international institutions seem to be declining in the very conditions which logically favor their success. The United Nations should be asking itself with implacable candor: "what went wrong?".
95.	The trouble lies, of course, mainly in the discordant policies of the States which compose international society. But this does not absolve the Organization from the duty to analyze its own experience and to take a rational and effective view of its priorities and procedures in the coming years. This Organization is young in relation to the immensity of the vision which it serves. Yet the rhythm of change has been so intense that the world in which the United Nations was born now belongs to receding memory. There is urgent need for Governments to determine the place which the United Nations occupies in their policies, and for the United Nations itself to modernize its concepts, structures, and its methods of operation. Only thus will the gap between the brilliant hope and the harsh reality be reduced.
96.	The main international preoccupation is now focused on the region where the Arab and Israeli nations were born and in which they must forever live side by side. In the summer of 1967 the Security Council and the General Assembly were the inactive spectators of a war that they did nothing to prevent. In recent weeks, they have watched a Member State in the Middle East pass through its most destructive and agonizing ordeal. It may be that in its present strength and condition our Organization is unable to restrain violence and ensure security as its Charter envisaged. But it need not renounce its role as the central forum from which the policies of its Members may be communicated to the opinion of the world. In that spirit I come to this rostrum to state Israel's views on the tensions which convulse our region and hang heavy on the conscience and concern of all mankind.
97.	The point of reference is still the unforgotten drama of 1967. Forty months have passed since a resolute attempt was made to bring about the destruction of Israel's peace, sovereignty and very life through the strangling grip of belligerency, blockade, encirclement and aggressive assault. Israel's policy is still dominated by the recollection of the brief moment when its extinction was a real and vivid prospect. The defeat of that attempt by its solitary effort and independent sacrifice is inscribed on Israel's unfailing memory. Beyond its place in Israel's history, that victory was a landmark in the human journey towards justice, law and peace. We still recall the relief and consolation which gripped the enlightened world when Israel tore the strangling fingers from its throat.
98.	Israel remembers. It cannot forget; it cannot forget the horror from which it barely escaped or the sense of salvation which came from its successful resistance. From then until now our national policy has been inspired by two central purposes: to build a structure of permanent peace with the neighboring States, if their policy makes that possible, and, in any case, to avoid a return to the conditions of anarchy and vulnerability out of which the war exploded.
99.	In its tense debates during 1967, the United Nations developed the contours of an international policy designed to meet the new conditions created by the 1967 war. It rejected all proposals for reproducing the situation which had led to one war and which, if renewed, would lead inevitably to another. It voted down five proposals for a return to the old armistice lines, and in November 1967 it called for the establishment of a just and lasting peace, based on the total renunciation of belligerency and war, the liquidation of maritime blockade and hostile acts, and the explicit recognition by the Arab States and Israel of each other's sovereignty, independence and national identity. It also called for the establishment of "secure and recognized boundaries". These have never existed in our region; they must be established by agreement for the first time.
100.	The simple theme of this international policy was that the structure of peace should be built by agreement between the States of the Middle East. An international representative, held in universal trust, was appointed to assist the parties in the promotion of that agreement. Moreover, a ceasefire had been proposed by the Security Council and accepted by the parties on the morrow of the war. According to its terms, the ceasefire was to be unconditional, of indefinite duration, and could not be legitimately set aside before the attainment of permanent peace.
101.	In its sessions since 1967 the General Assembly has reviewed successive attempts to bring about agreement on the establishment of a final peace Now and then a prospect has glowed briefly, only W be extinguished almost before it could be discerned. But by the summer of this year the perils were great enough to compel new thinking and new effort on many sides. In March 1969 President Nasser had unilaterally repudiated his country's agreement to maintain the ceasefire. The resultant warfare across the Suez Canal was henceforward constant, destructive and of growing intensity. And it was achieving no purpose whatever. Attempts to bring about Israel's collapse through attrition had totally failed. Israel was aware of the loss and waste inflicted on it and, still more, on Egypt by the war. But neither the artillery assaults on Israel's forces from the south, nor terrorist attacks on helpless civilians from the north and east, nor the arrogant violence and piracy of Arab terrorists in countries remote from the conflict had prevented our national enterprise from going forward in swift growth. Above all, the attacks by regular armies and terrorist groups had not dislodged us from any point along the ceasefire lines which we were resolved and internationally entitled to hold until the attainment of peace. The war of attrition brought its authors neither victory nor honor. Indeed, it exposed the Arab States to tensions, frustrations and dangers far greater than those by which Israel was afflicted.
102.	In this dilemma Arab policy faced two choices. It could acknowledge the futility of war, accept the reestablishment of the ceasefire and embark on the negotiation of a final peace; or it could appeal to forces outside the region for help to continue and intensify hostilities. The first choice would have meant to work with Israel for the establishment of peace; the second meant the pursuit of Soviet aid for maintaining the war at a higher level of intensity. Alas, it is clear that in the early months of 1970 the second choice was taken.
103.	Thereafter, the conflict was extended with every passing month beyond its regional context. It now took on a global dimension. A system of SAM2 missiles had been erected so that the artillery bombardment of Israeli forces could be carried out without fear of aerial response. The weapons were defensive only in the narrow tactical sense; they were geared to an offensive strategy, the elimination of the ceasefire and its replacement by a constant war of attrition. The missiles stand guard in order that the guns should be free to speak. When this strategy failed, through Israel's successful response, the more complex SAM3 missiles, this time manned by Soviet personnel, were introduced. And by early summer Soviet pilots were flying operational missions in the battle zone. Now, this was more ominous than anything that had gone on before. This aroused a worldwide concern. Nothing of the kind had happened anywhere since the end of the Second World War, apart from the unhappy participation of Soviet pilots in the bombardment of villages in Yemen in 1963. But Soviet involvement in the Suez Canal hostilities had far graver implications. It is bad enough that regional conflicts should rage unsolved through a rejection of the normal principles of ceasefire and negotiation. It is far worse when a great Power intervenes to aggravate a regional conflict, to widen its scope, to risk counteraction by other Powers and thus to extend the perils of a local war to all mankind. The Soviet intervention does not concern Israel alone. It has other aims. Its other aims are to win predominance in the Mediterranean; to outflank the European defense system from the south; to establish a large foreign army on African soil in contempt for the principle of African independence; and to bring about a general disturbance of the international equilibrium. Thus, President Nasser's repudiation of the ceasefire and the increasing scope of Soviet intervention have results which the world can ill afford.
104.	It was in the light of those conditions that my Government studied the United States peace initiative in June and July 1970. We knew that some Arab States and all the Palestine terrorist organizations had rejected that proposal because it spoke of peace, to which they are in principle totally opposed. We knew that Egypt and Jordan had accompanied their acceptance of the initiative by a statement of terms and conditions incompatible with its principles and with its authors' stated intentions. There were other features of the proposal which raised difficulties for us within our parliamentary and democratic system. But we saw this initiative with all its defects and complexities as an opportunity to explore the conditions of a final peace. These considerations prevailed above all the others. And so, on 4 August, the Government of Israel determined and formulated a policy to which it still adheres. We decided to designate a representative to discussions to be held under Ambassador Jarring's auspices with the United Arab Republic and Jordan.
105.	We stated that:
"Israel's position in favor of a ceasefire on the basis of reciprocity on all fronts, including the Egyptian front, in accordance with the Security Council's ceasefire resolutions remains unchanged. On the basis of clarifications given by the United States Government in this matter, Israel is prepared to reply affirmatively to the United States proposal for a ceasefire for at least three months on the Egyptian front."
We further agreed:
"to hold discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices within the framework of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) on the basis of the expression of readiness by the parties to carry out the Security Council's resolution in all its parts, in order to achieve an agreed and binding contractual peace agreement which would ensure:
"(a) Termination by Egypt and Israel of all claims or states of belligerency and respect and acknowledgment of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of each other and their right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries, free from threats or acts of force. Each of the parties to be responsible within its territory for the prevention of all hostile acts by regular military forces or paramilitary forces, including irregular forces, against the armed forces or against civilians living in the territory of the other party;
"(ft) Withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict to secure, recognized and agreed boundaries to be determined in the peace agreements."
That was the text to which we agreed.
106.	And, finally, we made clear that:
"Israel will not claim the prior acceptance by the other party of her positions, as Israel does not accept in advance the positions of the other parties as communicated publicly or otherwise. Each party will be free to present its proposals on the matters under discussion."
107.	The ceasefire agreement, as members will see, held a central place in our response to the United States peace initiative. The United Arab Republic had limited its acceptance of the ceasefire to a period of ninety days. That restriction raised issues which would not have existed with comparable force in an unlimited ceasefire which would have brought the military phase of the conflict to a permanent end. Instead of this we now had an explicit prospect that after three months the United Arab Republic might regard the ceasefire as having expired. And the futile but destructive war of attrition would be resumed. Since that was the United Arab Republic position, its implications had to be seriously weighed. We had to ask ourselves whether the short negotiating period would be devoted to a genuine quest for peace; or whether it would be used as a respite for the United Arab Republic, with Soviet aid, to improve its prospect for a military solution by a massive missile concentration which would be brought up without Israeli interference under cover of the ceasefire. In short, what were the ninety days designed to promote: an EgyptianIsraeli effort at peace, or a SovietEgyptian deployment for a more effective war?
108.	Decisive reassurance on this question was found for us in that part of the American peace initiative which provided for a "standstill" in an agreed area on each side of the Suez Canal ceasefire line. The purpose was to stabilize the local military balance, so that our Governments could go forward in easy mind to negotiate, without fear lest their security would be undermined during the talks. And the standstill, more than any other part of the United States peace initiative, supported our cautious hope that the United Arab Republic might be ready for an authentic peace effort, and not merely for a maneuver designed to prepare a new phase of war.
109.	In the early days of August we were informed by the United States that the United Arab Republic, with the support of the Soviet Union, had given agreement and endorsement to the following pro visions. This is the text of the standstill agreement:
"(a) Israel and the United Arab Republic will observe a ceasefire effective at 2200 hours GMT Friday 7 August;
"(ft) Both sides will stop all incursions and all firing on the ground and in the air across the ceasefire lines;
"(c) Both sides will refrain from changing the military status quo within the zones extending 50 kilometers to the east and to the west of the ceasefire line. Neither side will introduce or construct any new military installations in these zones. Activities within the zones will be limited to the maintenance of existing installations at their present sites and positions'' the maintenance of existing (installations at their present sites and positions 4 'and to the rotation and supply of forces presently within the zones;
"(d) For the purpose of verifying observance of the ceasefire, each side will rely on its own national means, including reconnaissance aircraft which will be free to operate without interference up to 10 kilometers from the ceasefire line on its own side of the line;
"(e) Each side may avail itself as appropriate of all United Nations machinery in reporting alleged violations to each other of the ceasefire and of the military standstill;
"(0 Both sides will abide by the Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War and will accept the assistance of the International Committee of the Red Cross in carrying out their obligations under that Convention."
110.	It was to this that we agreed. And I draw special attention to the phrases:
"Neither side will introduce or construct any new military installations in these zones. Activities within will be limited to the maintenance of existing installations at their present sites and positions."
111.	Not a single hour passed between Egypt's acceptance of that agreement and its violation of it. Within a few days those violations had been physically ascertained not only by Israel, but by the Government which sponsored the peace initiative. At the very time when the Israeli Cabinet was hopefully formulating its approach to the forthcoming peace talks, the missile buildup became conspicuously massive and intense. It is going forward to this very day. In the "standstill" area, which is fifty kilometers west of the Canal, but mostly within an area thirty kilometer of the Canal, at least twenty- SAM2 and SAM3 batteries, many of them operational, have been introduced. Tens of additional missiles have been advanced into that zone. This has been made possible by Israel's observance of the ceasefire. Rarely has there been a more perfidious violation of an international agreement through the exploitation of the good faith and pacific intention of the other side. I have circulated to delegations this morning, a graphic representation comparing the position which should exist under the 7 August agreement with that existing a few days ago, a situation created by headlong violation.
112.	I now come to analyze the implications of this development.
113.	First, through Israel's acceptance of the ceasefire standstill agreement the United Arab Republic has achieved a substantial and illicit change of the military situation to its advantage.
114.	Secondly, in these conditions Israel would be negotiating under the intimidating effects of a growing threat to its forces along the ceasefire line, and therefore to its national security.
115.	Thirdly, there has been a collapse of confidence in the validity of Egypt's pledge. The proposed peace talks, after all, would be designed to produce an agreement, on the strength of which Israel would withdraw on the establishment of peace to secure, recognized and agreed boundaries which are not yet determined, but which would be determined in the peace negotiations. The object of the talks would be agreement. But what would be the worth or weight of a new agreement negotiated and concluded while an existing agreement is being torn cynically to shreds. Thus, the violation of the standstill agreement has cast an anticipatory shadow on the validity of any peace agreement that we hope to conclude. This is, in the last resort, the gravest result of all. The question, what binding force will a peace agreement have, overshadows every other question affecting the Middle East in future.
116.	Fourthly, the standstill agreement was not only accepted by the United Arab Republic; it was also endorsed by the Soviet Union, which, as I have said, mans many of the missile bases. Therefore, the violation of that agreement with Soviet acquiescence is a major international event. Its repercussions go far beyond the Middle East; they affect the crucial issues of peace and security in other continents of the world. They shed a disturbing light on Soviet policy everywhere. Member States in all continents would do well to take this to heart and mind.
117.	In making a firm stand for the integrity of agreements we defend an international interest wider than our own. It is still our desire and policy to explore the terms of a final peace by discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices in accordance with our statement of 4 August. In a dialog on peace we shall have much to say and to propose for the common benefit of our region. I must add, in frankness, that even when the violations are corrected, the memory of them will not swiftly vanish from our minds and hearts. A new burden has been laid on the eventual negotiating process which, at best, will be complex, arduous and long. When we reflect on our experience with the hopes and expectations of 1957 and with this latest incident, we become fortified in our resolve to insist that all peace engagements be direct, explicit, signed and sealed in the most precise contractual form. Israel is ready to resume discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices as soon as the violations are rectified and the situation prevailing on the day of the ceasefire restored.
118.	The Egyptian violation of the ceasefire agreement is only one of the obstacles which now impede progress towards peace. Others have come into sharp relief during the hectic events of the past few days. The Palestinian Arabs on both sides of the Jordan are in urgent need of peace. They have been the primary victims of the hostile policies whereby neighboring Arab States have for twenty-two years sought to prevent the establishment of peaceful and constructive relations between Israel and the Arab States. Palestinian Arabs, west of the river Jordan, are at this very time creating new processes of coexistence and commerce between themselves and the Israeli people. Their situation in recent days has been in sharp contrast with the immense havoc which came upon their kinsmen east of the Jordan in the recent fighting. No constructive interests of Palestinian Arabs can be served by the small gangs commanded by Arafat, Habash and others whose ideology consists of nothing except the prevention of peace between Israel and the Arab States. As we watched the torrents of shells, grenades and bullets pouring from and into streets and homes across the river Jordan last week, we could not fail to reflect what the fate of every Israeli home would be if our nation's security were not maintained and defended with the utmost tenacity and zeal.
119.	Let us have a frank understanding of what every one of the Palestine terrorist organizations portends. There is no distinction between the means they use and the aims they seek. The means and the aims are equally to be condemned. What is the aim? The aim is to fulfill an exclusive fantasy under which Israel would have no existence in the Middle East as a State embodying its specific Jewish heritage and its particular national and social vocation. Their doctrine is based on the wild absurdity that there can ever be a Middle East without a State of Israel at its heart and centre. They turn away in flight from the central truth that Israel is organic to the past, the present and the future of the Middle East. The Arab nation has a very large place in the Middle Eastern region, but it has no monopoly on the right to statehood, independence, sovereignty and specific national identity. The Middle East is a concept which cannot be exhaustively understood in Arab terms alone. In 1970 Israel's statehood is not something to be explained, defended, or submitted to approval or dissent. It is something to be proclaimed as an absolute and inexorable reality, deep rooted and authentic, on a level of absolute equality with the statehood, sovereignty and national identity of any nation, great or small, old or young, represented in this hall. We do not seek what is called "recognition of Israel's right to exist", for that right is independent of any recognition of it. What we seek is a reciprocal recognition by the Arab States and Israel of each other's right to peaceful life and unreserved sovereignty. In denying this axiomatic right, the terrorist organizations commit the most disruptive heresy at work in the life of our age. There are now fourteen Arab sovereign States, with a population of a hundred million, an area of four million square miles, and unlimited wealth and opportunity. Facing them alone in the scales of equity is the small State of Israel. There is, therefore, only one nation which stands or fails in history by the way in which this conflict is resolved. By its solitude and uniqueness, Israel's secure existence is the overriding moral imperative in this dispute. International peace demands an equitable distribution not only of wealth and material resources but also of sovereignty and national freedom. To suggest a distribution whereby all Arabs must be sovereign everywhere and all Jews nowhere is to fall into an abyss of paradox and discrimination.
120.	So much for the aims of the terrorist groups. The aim is politicize the murder of a state and the method is piracy and murder. The moral quality of the struggle is illustrated by assaults on housewives in a supermarket, on students in a cafeteria, on humble citizens, Jews and Arabs, in crowded markets and bus stations, on innocent travelers in vulnerable civil aircraft. No other political movement in our days has chosen its victims so exclusively amongst defenseless, unarmed civilians in many lands. Therefore, it is a movement not of liberation but of enslavement. Its aim is not to win freedom for the Arab nation, whose freedom is amply and lavishly assured, but to liquidate the national liberation which another nation, the most ancient of nations, has already achieved. Such honourable words as "liberation", "resistance" and "commando" have no application and have never before been applied to attempts to liquidate a lawful sovereignty, to compound the Nazi assault on Jewish survival and to wage a campaign of indiscriminate attack against civilians in the Middle East and elsewhere.
121.	Having failed in their assaults on Israel, the Fatah organization, the "Palestine Liberation Organization" and other kindred groups have directed their main threat against the independence and sovereignty of Arab States. Early this year they were hard at work attempting to turn Lebanon away from its peaceful vocation and to subvert its specific national personality. Last week we saw the most recent of many attempts to bring about anarchy and disintegration in Jordan in order to shatter any hope of peace between Israel and the Arabs nations.
122.	Arab Governments which are the victims of these acts are, ironically, often the sponsors of them. The terrorist groups do not spring out of the empty air. They do not work in a vacuum. They could not exist, still less function, without the shelter, support, endorsement, financial aid, arms, training facilities and territorial base supplied to them by sovereign Arab States. Nor could they endanger life and limb outside the Middle East if certain Governments, especially in Europe, did not grant them excessive indulgence and immunity. Surely the time has come for the world community to turn in wrath not only against the specific outrage of aerial piracy but also against the other activities of the terrorist groups. All these activities, without exception, violate the principles which the signatories of the Charter, including its Arab signatories, have pledged themselves to defend. Any action which aims to destroy or violate a legitimate sovereignty is a form of international hijacking. Therefore it is important that these acts be resisted. They were successfully resisted ten days ago by those who foiled the hijacking of an El A1 aircraft by using righteous force against an odious pair of pirates. They were resisted by Jordan, which but for that resistance would have lost title to be regarded as a sovereign authority. The main adversaries of peace suffered another setback when the invasion of Jordan by regular armored units of the Syrian 
Army was repelled. The Syrian invasion of Jordan was too brief for its full implications to be seized. Here we have a member of the Security Council violating an international frontier in order to impose its will and policy upon a neighboring State. A Syrian representative at the United Nations, attempting publicly to justify this aggression, has taken refuge in a doctrine which denies the international character of boundaries between States of kindred cultures.
123.	The General Assembly will recall that after the Soviet aggression against Czechoslovakia two years ago Soviet representatives asserted that the boundaries between socialist States did not have a full international character, so that the unprovoked invasion of territory across them had a kind of domestic intimacy. Something of that kind was asserted by Syria last week. The doctrine is that, if two States have a similar ideology or language or national culture, it is not the business of the world community if one of them invades the other without provocation. There are dozens of
States represented here which would be well advised to reflect deeply on the consequences for them if a doctrine of "invasion through kinship" were condoned.
124.	Israel followed recent events in Jordan with vigilance, restraint and a keen sense of the developing human tragedy. We could not have been indifferent to violent changes in the regional balance which would have put Israel's security in jeopardy. But it is for Arab Governments to determine their regimes and institutional structure. Israel will never move its forces in any cause except its own legitimate security. We hope that the scars of battle will be healed in Jordan and that a concerted humanitarian effort will be made to allay the vast suffering of which we have been the close witnesses in recent days. The trucks bearing medical aid dispatched by the Israeli authorities eastward across the Jordan illustrate how humane solidarities should prevail over political and military tensions. We hope that the Jordan Government will not make the error of encouraging or condoning activity by the terror groups against Israel across the ceasefire lines. This would be contrary to Jordan's international obligations, including the ceasefire, and would of course encounter Israel's firm resistance.
125.	The capacity to repeat error is revealed in the communication which the Arab Governments and the terrorist organizations signed in Cairo yesterday. There is not in that document a single, peaceful, civilized, lawful word. The talk is not of peace but of victory over an enemy ind the liberation of Israel, which means of course its extinction. That document violates the engagement which the United Arab Republic and Jordan made to Ambassador Jarring, promising to establish a just and lasting peace with Israel and to acknowledge its sovereignty and independence. The question is: which document commits the policy of those two States?
126.	Many Members have spoken here about the necessity for international action against the hijacking of aircraft. In Israel's view an agenda item on that subject would only be of value if international law came out reinforced. It is not enough to exhort parties to adopt the Tokyo Convention  or a new Convention expressive of existing law and morality. We should recall that the cooperation and States in the struggle against piracy preceded all other developments in the realm of international law. The pirate was regarded as the enemy of the human race, hostis humani generis. He was an outlaw from human society and every nation had the right and duty to apprehend and punish him with full vigor. Over a century ago, an outstanding maritime judge in Britain, Lord Stowell, expressed the current contemporary law and morality as follows:
"With professed pirates there is no state of peace.
They are the enemies of every country and at all
times and therefore are universally subject to the
extreme rights of war."
127.	It follows that aerial piracy, which involves even more horror and peril than piracy at sea, should never be indulged, condoned, or, above all, rewarded. A firm attempt should be made to secure the unconditional release of all captives. Physical methods of prevention should be adopted without limitation or reserve. What a victory would have been won for international order if all the aircraft assaulted on 6 September had been defended as effectively as was the El A1 airliner and if all the pirates had met a similar fate. But responsibility does not lie on the terrorists alone. Some Arab Governments have given practical and moral support to successful pirates. Thus, in July 1970, we find President Nasser of Egypt himself extending a welcome to men who had hijacked a Greek aircraft and to criminals released from a prison to which Greek law had properly consigned them. At meetings last year of the United Nations General Assembly and the Organization of African Unity, Arab delegations prevented the unanimous adoption of resolutions which would strongly have condemned hijackers and required firm measures to insure their extradition and punishment. When an Arab pirate lands in certain Arab countries, he is more likely to get fuel facilities, praise and reward than arrest and punishment. The recent experience and the present debate can only be useful if condemnation is unequivocal and even then only if it leads to practical measures. I have in mind that the General Assembly might endorse the proposition which was recently made by the United States in the International Civil Aviation Organization, calling for joint international action "to suspend all international civil air transport services to and from any State which, after the unlawful seizure of an aircraft, detains passengers, crew and aircraft contrary to the Tokyo Convention (including the destruction of such aircraft) or any State which fails to extradite or prosecute persons responsible for such acts of unlawful seizure". Since then we have seen other drafts. The point is that only measures which lead to practical and automatic action have validity.
128.	The avoidance of reward for hijackers sometimes requires the maintenance of strong nerves. At an early stage in the recent episode there was a precipitate tendency to offer the release of convicted hijackers as a recompense for the liberation of innocent hostages. This would have saved present victims but it would have endangered other travelers on whom the released hijackers would try their skill again. It is satisfactory that this course has not been followed, and that the four countries whose aircraft or citizens had been kidnapped accepted the principle advocated by the United Kingdom and the United States, according to which solidarity should be maintained and each airline and Government would be responsible for all passengers without distinction. Faced by attitudes of principle and strengthening nerves, the hijackers understood the uselessness of their victory and gave up its fruits to the Jordanian Government and the Egyptian Embassy, which we hope will act with correct promptitude.
129.	But the release of hostages who were wantonly submitted to hardship and peril should not dull the edge of international vigilance. Israel proposes international action along four lines:
| (a) To increase security measures at airports and ! in aircraft. Israel is prepared to cooperate by sharing the knowledge and experience that it has accumulated ! in this sphere;
(b)	To call upon The Hague Conference that will convene in December 1970 to adopt the proposed convention, and to strengthen it so that the illegal capture of an aircraft, its passengers and crew will be considered an international crime calling for maximum punishment;
(c)	To establish sanctions against States that aid or provide asylum to hijackers or criminals who attack aircraft. These sanctions should include: cessation of aerial communications with the States which aid hijackers, and withholding of services from the national carrier of a State that aids or provides asylum to those who hijack or attack aircraft;
id) To call for the establishment of a special body that will deal continuously with acts of hijacking or attacks on the international level.
130.	But what about the larger issue of peace? Before we fall into despair let us recall that there are no irreconcilable conflicts in history. The ArabIsraeli conflict, for all its rhetorical bitterness, has had no results comparable in absolute or relative terms with the carnage and mass suffering of many other wars.
131.	But peace has too often been considered by international bodies in semantic formal terms, and too little in terms of human realities. It is not enough that Egypt, Israel, Lebanon and Jordan should agree on a form of words; such agreement may even be an illusion if it conceals a wide gap in intention and interpretation. What is needed most is that they, and all concerned with their deeper interests, should have a clear vision of what our region would look like and how its people would live ones hostility was replaced by peace. The most conclusive evidence, the most conclusive hallmark of peace is the open frontier. A peaceful Middle East is a Middle East in which a man would be able to travel by road and rail from Cairo through Israel to Beirut and Amman, in which Egyptian civil aircraft could traverse Israel eastward while Israeli shipping passed unimpeded through the Suez Canal. Israeli and Arab civil aircraft would land in Cairo, Lod and Amman. Railways for the transportation of heavy goods would pass from the Suez area through Kan tarah, across the Israeli coast northward. The ports of Eilat and Aqaba would plan their expansion and development in neighborly coordination. This is not a dream. This summer 55,000 Arabs from neighboring countries visited their relatives west of the Jordan. Thousands passed from Israel and the west bank across the Jordan to remote parts of the Arab world. This year nearly half a million tourists came to Israel and an approximately similar number to Egypt. Under conditions of normality and peace, the ancient splendors and the modern amenities of our countries would attract millions more, who by their very pilgrimage would join us closer to them and to each other.
132.	In the last resort, a nation's strength and greatness will be measured not by the number of its missiles but by the quality of its scholars, scientists and technicians. Why should not Israeli and Arab doctors and scientists cooperate in the common quest for learning, visit each other's institutions, lecture to each other's students, meet face to face the opportunities and the ills which are common to our region? It was no credit to the Middle East in recent weeks when cholera disease broke out in many parts and when the appeal of the Israeli Minister of Health for cooperation with his colleagues in neighboring countries went unheeded.
133.	And the senselessness and tragedy of war are most vividly expressed in the inexcusable waste of resources. In twenty-two years the Arab States and Israel have spent more than $20,000 million for military purposes. If one-tenth of that sum had been invested in a refugee solution, the problem would have been solved long ago in a way that would have promoted economic progress in all the countries in which the resettlement was made.
134.	At the present time Egypt and Israel are spending $2,000 million every year for military purposes.
135.	It would be a delusion to believe that a formal peace agreement would be followed by a relaxation of vigilance or an abandonment of security; but there would certainly be a more rational distribution between the security and the economic needs of the signatory countries.
136.	Every year the population of the leading Arab State grows by 1 million, that is to say, by a number greater that that of those in refugee camps. In conditions of war and conflict, neither the refugee problem nor the problems of increased populations can be solved, since there is no rational use of resources for human needs. My point is that peace is not a word, it is not a juridical phrase; it is a total revolution in the meaning, style and content of life. It is not a documentary device; it is a human condition, the like of which our generation in the Middle East has never known.
137.	The question is whether Arab leadership can break loose from an obsolete routine of conflict in order to explore this prospect. It is in peace and not in violence that the Palestinian Arabs will find their true destiny. For in conditions of peace Israel's eastern neighbor would be an Arab State, a majority of whose population would be composed of Palestinian Arabs, and a majority of all the Palestinian Arabs would be citizens of that State. In other words, peace settles the problem of self-determination.
138.	What I have said has always been true of the Kingdom of Jordan, whose structure, name and regime were determined not by Israel but by its Arab citizens. But most of them are Palestinian Arab citizens. Wherever the boundary is determined in the peace agreement the Palestinian Arabs on both sides of the Jordan will find a better future than that which Arafat and Habash and the hijackers can offer them.
139.	There will always be a sizable Palestine Arab community in Israel. But this will have no negative significance when close cooperation across an open frontier exists between Israel and its eastern neighbor. The original former Palestine area the Mandated area  on both sides of the Jordan will accommodate two States, Israel and an Arab State, while the area regains its natural economic unity and advances towards new forms of integration. That, at any rate, is what Israel means by peace. If we have a clear vision of our aims, it will not be difficult to work backwards from the desired result towards the process that leads towards it.
140.	In the territorial negotiation, Israel's aim will be the determination of new, secure, agreed boundaries, offering a firmer security than the old armistice lines could ever provide. In short, there are no solutions without peace, and there are no problems which peace cannot resolve.
141.	The deep humane issues which preoccupy Israel are not only those which revolve around the Middle Eastern conflict. Our Jewish destiny and responsibility inspire our concern for the plight of small Jewish minorities still lingering in Arab lands, held as hostages, forbidden to depart, discriminated against, humiliated, their property confiscated, their communal and cultural life paralyzed. The hard facts are now well known and there has been a broad international echo in recent years. Yet the suffering and misery continue and in some countries have become more intense. We therefore welcome the recent reiteration by the Secretary General, in his address on 15 June to the Royal Commonwealth Society in London, of his call for the evacuation of Jews from Arab countries and of the conviction, expressed in the introduction to his report to last year's session of the General Assembly,  that the United Nations has a moral obligation to act for their rescue. I hope that States Members of the United Nations will join the call to save these doomed communities.
142.	Of very deep concern to enlightened world opinion is the grave situation of Jews in the Soviet Union. Year after year, the representatives of Israel and other Member States have raised their voices against the discrimination to which Soviet Jews are subjected, in particular the denial of the right of those who desire to join their kinsmen in Israel. In recent years ominous antiSemitic propaganda in the Soviet Union has been intensified under the cloak of a campaign against Zionism, which is the Jewish people's liberation movement. Thousands of slanderous articles and documents, reminiscent of medieval times, have been circulated by the information media controlled by the Soviet authorities.
143.	The plight of Jews in the USSR is dramatically illustrated by the appeals for permission to leave for Israel which Jews from all parts of the Soviet Union addressed to Heads of the Soviet Government, to the Government of Israel, to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and to others. Those appeals, giving the full names and the addresses of the signatories, have been published in the international press; they speak movingly of the suffering of separated families and of thew longing to unite their lot with the mainstream of the Jewish people. Some of the signatories have been arrested; their only crime is a desire to emigrate to Israel, which does not infringe any Soviet law. Indeed, Prime Minister Kosygin made a public statement in December 1966 promising that no obstacles would be placed in the way of Soviet Jews who wish to be united with their families in Israel.
144.	Humanity and justice call upon the Soviet Government to recognize the human rights of its Jewish citizens and to permit them freely to exercise those rights.
145.	In conclusion, let me recall that much of the work of the United Nations in its first twenty-five years has revolved around this modern encounter between the national revolutions of Israel in its small State and of the Arab nation in its expanse of multiple sovereignty. Whether the anniversary year will open a better act in the drama depends less on the General Assembly's debates than on the initiatives and decisions of Middle Eastern Governments. Israel will maintain the policy on which it decided on 4 August and reiterated on 6 September. It will fulfill its special role in the advancement of developing countries through which it has already offered training and development techniques to 12,000 future leaders of emergent societies in eighty lands. It will raise its voice and hand for the equality of nations and against discrimination and the remnants of colonialism. Above all, it will keep its mind and heart open to the prospect of a negotiated peace. Its people has the strength, the tenacity and the will to withstand the violent forces which assail its life and threaten its future. But its deepest aspiration is to deploy its energies in the service of a peaceful order of relations in the Middle East.
146.	The key to that future lies in a negotiation explicitly directed to the establishment of peace, and the key is now in Arab, and particularly in Egyptian, hands. It can be opened by restoring the original ceasefire situation and by treading the road of negotiation. I am prepared to use my presence here for talks with heads of Arab delegations on the establishment of peace and on the creation of an atmosphere and conditions in which a fruitful negotiation can take place. There is no rational or defensible reason for refusing such an opportunity. We do the United Nations no service if we confine ourselves to public debate and neglect the normal contacts without which no international problem has ever been or will ever be resolved.
147.	Mankind may either have a peaceful future or no future at all. Our 126 Governments will all have a share in deciding how the choice is made. If we can recapture the youthful spirit which moved the United Nations twenty-five years ago, we may yet convert past dreams into reality and present disappointments into enduring hopes.
180.	 At the outset, I should like to refer to the dark shadow which the tragic and untimely death of President Gamal Abdel Nasser has cast over this Assembly and the world. In a statement made in Wellington yesterday, my Prime Minister referred to the late President as one of the most significant political figures of the post Second World War era. He was a constant source of inspiration to his people and he helped to mold and fortify a new sense of national identity and dignity.
181.	The profound sympathy of the people of New Zealand has already been conveyed to the Government and people of the United Arab Republic. To the delegation of the United Arab Republic, I should like to add my own expression of deep sympathy at the tragic loss suffered by the Egyptian and, indeed, by all the Arab peoples.
182.	President Nasser's statesmanlike acceptance of the American proposals had raised hopes that the long awaited negotiations might at last have begun. We must all hope that his generous spirit will prevail and that peace will soon come to this troubled area of the world.
183.	Mr. President, it is always a pleasure to congratulate the incoming President of this Assembly. It is a singular pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, a representative of a country which sat with New Zealand at San Francisco, on the honor of presiding over the session which takes place in this twenty-fifth anniversary year. Your career has been marked by your close association with the advancement of international law and of this Organization. It is a fitting symbol that the direction of this session should have been placed in your hands at a time when the world needs from the United Nations a strong and renewed assertion of the rule of law. I also take this opportunity to pay a well-merited compliment to your distinguished predecessor in office, Mrs. Angie BrooksRandolph of Liberia.
184.	May I also at this point say how much New Zealand looks forward to welcoming Fiji a South Pacific country with which New Zealand has many close associations to membership in the early part of this twenty-fifth session.
185.	There are many features of the world situation today which could not have been foreseen at San Francisco, even though the Charter adopted there contained a wealth of insight, and has proved to be an instrument of great flexibility. But one must ask as well whether some of our purposes in banding together in the United Nations have not been neglected to the point where confidence in the Organization is gravely diminished.
186.	Who could have foreseen that, as a backdrop to the opening of the twenty-fifth anniversary session, we should have the spectacle of international piracy, the spectacle of nations held to ransom and subjected to blackmail by those whom we treat too respectfully by using the term "hijackers". We must place this in conjunction with another remarkable phenomenon: the lightning rapidity with which the shock waves of events, and particularly of violent events, are felt around the world in this age of instant communication. We cannot allow the epidemic of hijacking to be condoned. It is, I suggest, time to combat the ingenuity and ruthlessness of those who use such methods to serve their own political or personal ends. Hundreds of years ago, international law was equal to the challenge posed by piracy on the high seas.
187.	Today all the nations of a technologically advanced world will need to use all their skill and determination to stamp out the scourge of piracy in the air.
188.	In a recent address the SecretaryGeneral proposed that all nations should pledge to extradite hijackers, irrespective of their nationality or political affiliation, for trial before an agreed international tribunal. My Government welcomes the boldness of the SecretaryGeneral's approach. It believes that strong measures are required. It urges all Governments to give the most serious consideration to international action which would effectively put a stop to hijacking. Important work to this end is being undertaken in the International Civil Aviation Organization, but there may well be room for this Assembly to encourage and accelerate this urgent task.
189.	The communications revolution to which I have referred is one of the reasons why in recent years vast problems of global dimensions have been perceived so much more rapidly and universally than in the past.
190.	The United Nations today is applying itself to these problems. The solutions which are found will determine for us and future generations the quality of life. They will also be a mark of the vigor and adaptability of our Organization.
191.	The relationship between population and development is one of these problems. Its solution is essentially dependent on decisions taken at the national level within the framework of the circumstances of each country, including its economic structure and its social and spiritual aspirations. But there exists also a global responsibility. The United Nations, through its Population Commission and its Population Fund, has an important role to play in focusing attention on the world problem and in providing assistance to countries which seek it.
192.	The scope for international action to conserve the human environment is even more obvious. New Zealand, as a country in an early stage of industrial development and in an isolated geographical position, does not have the acute problems experienced by more heavily industrialized and populated countries. We have had, none the less, to develop active policies in such fields as land conservation, and are conscious of the growing risks of pollution of various kinds. A national organization in the form of an Environmental Council has been set up, and New Zealand is anxious to contribute to work in this field through participation in the Stockholm conference,  in the specialized agencies and, as we hope, in the Economic and Social Council.
193.	Of equal importance and of special interest to New Zealand is the question of establishing a just and effective regime for the deep seabed. There are fewer than ten countries with a longer coastline than New Zealand. We are isolated and surrounded by a vast area of ocean. By any definition we have an exceptionally large continental shelf. In short, we have as great a stake as any other Member of the United Nations in the work of the seabed Committee. 
194.	All these questions of global scope relate to the work of the United Nations on development generally, and all Members stand to benefit from this work.
195.	We recognize and respect the fact that for the great majority of delegations the overriding preoccupation is with the mainstream of economic development. The preparations for the Second United Nations
Development Decade, to which priority has been accorded at this session, have come to be regarded as a touchstone, and attitudes to it as a test of good faith. As my Prime Minister said in this debate last year, the first Development Decade taught that sound economic development is a continuous, complex ana longterm process in which the willing cooperation of all developed and developing countries is essential. We continue to believe that it is correspondingly important that the goals or targets set should be realistic. The New Zealand Government has stated its readiness to work towards the target of one per cent of gross national product for external aid. Its ability to do so, however, is in strict relation to its ability to maintain and expand the level of its exports, consisting almost exclusively of primary commodities. This is a factor which my Government hopes will be borne in mind during consideration of international commodity arrangements for the forthcoming decade. There is nothing unique in the problems which particular countries face. It is only by approaching them together in a spirit of common aspiration that the highest factor of benefit to all can be achieved.
196.	The opportunity to pursue a common approach to international trade problems arises most obviously through regional economic groupings. The potential for development which these can present has been amply demonstrated. Caution is needed, however, to ensure that benefits accrue both within the grouping and in trade with the outside world. The net result must not be to inhibit external trade through the growth of restrictive trade practices and protectionism.
197.	For New Zealand the problem is far from theoretical. For a decade it has faced the prospect of seeing its largest market, the United Kingdom, become part of the world's most powerful regional economic grouping, the European Economic Community. In spite of our continuing efforts to find new export markets, the British market still represents the only outlet for nearly half New Zealand's total exports and almost all our exports of certain key agricultural products. Now that negotiations for British entry to the European Economic Community have begun, my Government is confident that New Zealand's position has the full sympathy and understanding of all parties concerned and that adequate safeguards to enable this trade to continue will be adopted. In a very real sense the role of regional groupings in world trade is on trial in this test case. New Zealand appreciates and fully supports the motivations behind the drive for a united Europe which could be so powerful a force for good in the world. However, it would be tragic if, as a result of enlarging the European Economic Community, one of the world's most efficient agricultural producers were driven to the wall. This would be a sad irony in a world facing grave potential shortages of food.
198.	I have devoted my remarks thus far to economic and social questions and to some of the new areas in which the United Nations is active. It would be a mistake, however, to believe that in pursuing these important questions the United Nations is achieving the primary objectives of the Charter. As my Prime
Minister suggested last year [1757th meetingJ, we are all to some extent guilty of self-delusion for as long as we fail to achieve the essential goal of international peace and stability.
199. The occasion of the commemorative session will, I hope, provide an opportunity for an analysis of some of the reasons for the Organization's inability to control international conflicts and of steps which might lead towards the diplomatic reactivation of the United Nations. This was a theme stressed by the Foreign Minister of Brazil in the traditionally eloquent intervention with which he opened our general debate [1841st meeting].
200.	In one critical area the Middle East we have followed the patient efforts of Ambassador Jarring on behalf of the United Nations. We fervently hope that the cautious expectations engendered by the United States peace initiative, and by the stated willingness of the parties to enter into negotiations, have suffered only a temporary setback. It seems to us that the minimum conditions for further progress towards a settlement are an agreed extension of the ceasefire and the resumption within that time of endeavors to bring the parties to negotiations. In these endeavors the four permanent members of the Security Council will doubtless have to play a continuing, honest and persuasive role in accordance with the principles of the Security Council resolution of 22 November 1967 [242 (1967)].
201.	In relation to the VietNam war, however, the failure of the United Nations to play any real part is notorious and a matter of regret. The last four months have seen the involvement in that war, from no volition of its own, of a small country which has consistently sought to avoid such involvement. My delegation asks this Assembly today whether it will choose to remain indifferent to the situation in Cambodia, which has deeply concerned my Government.
202.	From the outset Cambodia refused to take sides in the VietNam conflict and tried to prevent the war from spilling across its borders, but in vain. Over a period of years the armed forces of North VietNam and the VietCong took advantage of Cambodia's neutrality to establish bases and supplylines within its territory. The then Head of State of Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk, became increasingly alarmed at that situation but was unable to persuade the North VietNamese to withdraw their forces. In March 1970 he was dismissed as Head of State by a unanimous vote of the Cambodian Parliament. The Government of General Lon Nol, which Prince Sihanouk himself had appointed, demanded the withdrawal of the communist forces, while making clear that it was prepared to negotiate on the question. Instead of taking up that offer, the communist forces immediately began to attack the forces and installations of the Government of Cambodia to make war on the country whose territory they were already making free of,
203.	That action of the North VietNamese was a clear case of aggression, of an attack on one State by the armed forces of another. It has continued right up to the present time. Indeed the communist forces have expanded their activities throughout Cambodia and have virtually annexed a large part of it. They have, it is true, used the name of the deposed Prince Sihanouk as a cover, but the forces involved in the fighting have been almost entirely VietNamese, either North VietNamese or VietCong.
204.	Some time after the communist forces had begun to attack the Cambodian Government forces, the forces of South VietNam and the United States launched a series of operations across the South VietNamese border into Cambodia. These were designed to destroy the bases from which the communist forces had so long operated with impunity against Saigon and the surrounding areas. They were welcomed by General Lon Nol and undoubtedly helped him to survive the military pressure that the North VietNamese and their supporters were putting on him. But it should be noted that the Cambodian Government had previously appealed in vain for help to the Geneva Conference coChairmen, to the members of the International Control Commission, and to this Organization. The Security Council took no effective action to deal with this clearcut case of North VietNamese aggression in Cambodia and there is no sign that it will do so.
205.	Cambodia's neighbors were more forthcoming. The Foreign Ministers of eleven Asian and Pacific countries, including New Zealand, met in Djakarta on 16 and 17 May and expressed grave concern over the situation in Cambodia. They called for an end to all hostilities there and for the withdrawal of all foreign forces. They also recommended the reactivation of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in Cambodia and supported the idea of an international conference to consider the Cambodian problem. The moderation of the Djakarta Conference was widely recognized and its outcome met with the approval of many countries which were not represented at it. Yet it was condemned out of hand by North VietNam and by Communist China, and it evoked no positive response from the Soviet Union.
206.	The Djakarta Conference was a remarkable demonstration of regional solidarity. My Government attaches great importance to the development of regional cooperation in Asia and we welcome the determination of the countries in the area to find an Asian solution for an Asian problem. We are confident that the spirit of the Conference will persist in spite of the hostile reaction from some quarters.
207.	But regional cooperation is no substitute for action on a wider basis, and the fact that action is being taken regionally is not a reason for the international community to do nothing. The great Powers  and in particular the Soviet Union and Communist China bear a heavy responsibility for the continuation and extension of the conflict in IndoChina, and no settlement can be reached without their collaboration. But what is even more relevant in this Assembly is that the fate of Cambodia is a matter of concern to small nations everywhere. All of us have an interest in ensuring that a small country cannot be invaded and attacked by stronger neighbors under whatever pretext. This Assembly may not be able to do much on its own to end the conflict and restore the integrity and neutrality of Cambodia. But that is no excuse for indifference. At the very least, the Members of this Assembly should take heed of the true nature and the implications of the situation with which the people of Cambodia are confronted.
208.	There is one other related matter I would briefly add, on which this Assembly has a humanitarian duty to fulfill. I refer to the fate of those prisoners of war held by the North VietNamese. The appeals of the International Red Cross, meeting at Istanbul in September 1969, and the reiterated efforts made by the International Committee of the Red Cross have elicited no response. Yet all that is sought is that these men be treated in accordance with international humanitarian law and, more specifically, that North VietNam honor the minimum undertakings which it gave in ar ceding to the Geneva Conventions of 1949. There is an inhumanity in the attitude displayed which must awaken this Assembly's deepest concern. How can it deal sincerely with an item such as that on human rights in armed conflicts without renewing at the solemn level of the General Assembly the appeals already made?
209.	Consideration of the ability of the Organization to discharge its responsibilities in the field of peace and security leads on to wider questions. How adequate is the structure of the United Nations to permit it to perform its functions in this twenty-fifth year of its existence? That is a matter which requires examination on two different levels. We are all conscious of the problems involved in proposals for the Charter review. The best must not, however, be the enemy of the good. If that wider reform should not prove possible, there is still scope for more modest and practical innovations. For that reason my delegation has joined in co sponsoring the item on the rationalization of the procedures and organization of the General Assembly.
210.	We do not approach this subject with preconceived ideas. We believe the Assembly could benefit from the recommendations which might come from a small group, rich in direct personal experience. We have in mind, for example, that the functioning of Assembly committees has become more formalized than was originally contemplated. Do they now serve their purpose in meeting as frequently as they do? There are a number of questions on which attitudes have become rigid. This, in turn, suggests that there may be a case for reviewing the agenda with a view to avoiding automatic inscription, or annual discussion, at least of those items where the outcome does not vary from one year to the next. How, on the one hand, can the Assembly's procedures be shaped to recognize the increasing practice of negotiation between, and within, groups which is now an abiding feature of the General Assembly and some other bodies? And how, on the other, can it be ensured that, in the larger forum of the General Assembly committees, countries which are not members of such specialized bodies as those dealing with outer space, disarmament, the seabed and the like, may still participate meaningfully in discussion of matters on which real negotiation tends to be restricted to an initiate circle? These are but some of the issues perhaps some of the more difficult issues which we should like to see debated.
211.	Finally, as part of a program to enable the Organization better to meet its responsibilities it is all too clear that its financial situation the precarious state of affairs with which the Organization has lived too long must be remedied. This is a matter to which our SecretaryGeneral has made pointed reference in the introduction to his annual report [A/8001/Add. 1 and Corr.l]. There is something incongruous about a world body which can stem insolvency only by borrowing. It is well to remind ourselves that the Organization is faced with a shortfall of some 190 million dollars in assessed contributions. It is surely not unreasonable to hope that those who perpetuate this situation could make a gesture in this anniversary year to help put the Organization back on a sound financial footing.
212.	The growth of the budget is a financial problem of a different order. The question must be asked whether the present rate of growth is not excessive. Growth must be accepted, but it must be carefully managed and apportioned to make the most effective use of our limited resources. In many countries, including my own, serious thought is being given to new forms of budget planning and presentation. We welcome the international studies carried out on this topic. There is much to be said for budgeting by program rather than by object of expenditure as at the present time.
213.	But technical measures of rationalization and consolidation are only part of the answer. What is needed above all is a willingness on the part of the membership as a whole to eliminate the conflict between what it wants and what it is prepared to pay. This is a basic conflict as much political as budgetary. The blame does not lie entirely with the Fifth Committee, which is largely ineffective in the face of the financial implications of substantive decisions. These decisions, often of a political nature, emanate from the legislative organs of the Assembly and the subsidiary bodies. Nor can the Secretariat, as the author of the budget document, be held solely responsible, nor indeed is inflation the sole culprit. It is we, the Member States, who hold apparently irreconcilable views about the desirable rate of growth, the level of overall expenditures and the use to which funds are put. As a consequence, no really effective budgetary control exists. This is a problem which the Secretary General himself has singled out in a plea for urgent action in his foreword to the budget estimates for 1971.
214.	While we must bear in mind the objectives of the Second Development Decade, a serious effort is needed in this year of stocktaking to reach common ground on these questions. The failure of the Committee on Conferences has illustrated an apparent absence of willingness effectively to empower an organ to exercise determined control. Surely we must deduce from this that there remains only the spirit of compromise if there is to be a healthy development of the budget, the administration of the Organization, and the programs which it services.
215.	I have dealt with some themes of current concern and with some pervasive questions of United Nations reform. All of us have, I am sure, been struck by the new strains to which international life is now subject, and with the correspondingly urgent need for our Organization both to strengthen its role in world order and to adjust itself to the times. In an address given in London some months ago our SecretaryGeneral said that:
"The news is so full of stories of conflict and violence that not enough attention is paid to the steady undercurrent of decency and commonsense in the affairs of nations, and people increasingly have the impression that in international affairs nothing ever goes right."
216.	For New Zealand's part I urge that we all show in this anniversary year our determination to give effect to the spirit which at San Francisco gave rise to the Charter of the United Nations. Our Prime Minister then spoke of that historic conference as "a moment of time which will not recur in our lives and which may not recur again". Now, 25 years later, we have the opportunity and the necessity in this anniversary to take stock, and to add to the stature of the Organization. Let us use this chance.1.	 It is my privilege to extend to you once again the warm congratulations of the United States delegation on your election to the Presidency of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly. Your country has few peers in the contributions it has made to the work of this Organization. Your father was a leader in the League of Nations, and now, in this session of the General Assembly, you are adding a new chapter in the family tradition. In the United Nations community we have long known you as an able spokesman of your country, as a participant in the life of the United Nations from its very beginning and an authority on the Charter, as a leading scholar and practitioner in international law, and as one whose personal outlook is strongly humanitarian and imbued with hope and determination for a better future. We are indeed fortunate to have you to lead us in this session devoted to the strengthening and improvement of the United Nations.
2.	During this session we shall commemorate with fitting ceremony one of the most creative and hopeful events of this century, the founding of the United Nations twenty-five years ago. It is right that this commemoration should be held. It is far more important, however, that the nations gathered at this session should so act together as to strengthen the United Nations for the future, to ensure that we are closer to "peace, justice and progress" five, ten and twenty- five years hence than we are today. The world is unlikely to care much what we say about the past. It will care a great deal what we do about the future.
3.	The problems the world faces today are no less grave than those it faced twenty-five years ago. Indeed they are in many respects far graver. Unless and until the Members of the United Nations demonstrate their willingness to deal effectively with these problems, the confidence of the world's peoples in the United Nations will remain uncertain and precarious.
4.	In the view of the United States, the most critical international problem today is the same as that which faced the founders of the United Nations: the need to build a reliable framework for peace and security among nations. As President Nixon said in this Assembly a year ago: "... there is no nobler destiny, nor any greater gift that one age could make to the ages that follow, than to forge the key to a lasting peace". [1755th meeting, para. 45.]
5.	In this conviction the United States has sought in the last two years to frame foreign policies which would help to make the international scene less destructively competitive, less strident, more cooperative and orderly. We have sought, in the spirit of the Charter, to pursue peaceful settlement of all conflicts and confrontations, and we have urged others to do likewise.
6.	The most significant of these efforts has been the strategic arms limitation discussions between my country and the Soviet Union. If at last we can check the nuclear arms race, the world will have been helped to move away from its gravest danger and toward new and more rational relationships.
7.	The United States also seeks, through a process of serious negotiation, to ease the tensions that arise from the division of Europe. We have welcomed the efforts of the Federal Republic of Germany to normalize relations with its eastern neighbors; we are seeking in fourPower talks to assure the security and wellbeing of the residents of Berlin; we have joined our NATO allies in proposing exploratory talks on the reduction of forces in central Europe. We hope these efforts will find the Soviet Union and its allies forthcoming.
8.	In VietNam, over eighteen months ago, the United States reversed the trend in American involvement in the war. We began a steady, uninterrupted reduction in the number of our troops. We have made a negotiated peace our highest priority. Although North VietNam has as yet shown no serious intention to negotiate a solution under which the South VietNamese people can freely decide their own future, this remains our goal and we shall not be discouraged in seeking it.
A/PV.1854
9.	My Government has likewise sought ways to move toward a constructive relationship with mainland China. To this end, we have taken a number of unilateral steps to ease tensions. We are ready at any time to resume the talks in Warsaw.
10.	Finally, nowhere in the world today is there more urgent need to move from confrontation to negotiation than in the Middle East. The legacy of bitterness, hatred and suspicion there contains the seeds of even greater tragedy not only for the Middle East but for the world, unless there is early progress toward reconciliation and peace based on the legitimate interests of all the States and peoples of the region.
11.	As the United Nations community well knows, the United States has made major diplomatic efforts in recent months and weeks to help bring about peace at long last in the Middle East. While recent developments in the area, including the tragic death of President Nasser, have cast a shadow over the high hopes of just a few weeks ago that a beginning toward that goal had been made, those hopes have not been extinguished. For the most part, the guns remain silent along the ceasefire lines. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) stands as a beacon pointing the way to peace, and the parties concerned, in accepting the United States initiative of June, have committed themselves to carry out that resolution in all its parts. Ambassador Jarring is ready to resume his mission whenever conditions permit. We earnestly hope that the parties themselves and all others concerned will now bend every effort to the task of building on the beginning that has already been made.
12.	This will require above all serious steps to restore and strengthen confidence in the integrity of the ceasefire and military standstill agreement along the Suez Canal. It will also require, if negotiations are to move forward, a willingness by the parties to move from their maximum positions on the elements of a realistic and equitable peace settlement. In this spirit, my Government is prepared to contribute to renewed efforts toward peace in the Middle East.
13.	In this anniversary year the United States, like many other Members, has given especially careful thought to means by which the United Nations can be better enabled to fulfill its purposes.
14.	My delegation has listened, and will continue to listen attentively, to the suggestions of others in this regard. In the same spirit the United States will offer proposals, or support the proposals of others, with these objectives among others: first, to put United Nations peacekeeping operations on a firmer and more reliable basis; second, to make the United Nations more effective in the peaceful settlement of disputes; third, to promote new steps in the field of disarmament; fourth, to move closer by peaceful means to the goals of decolonization and human equality; fifth, to support the Second Development Decade; sixth, to help slow down too rapid rates of population growth; seventh, to promote the exploitation of the seabeds and outer space for human benefit; eighth, to organize common action within the United Nations to safeguard the global environment; ninth, to encourage young people from all parts of the world to devote themselves to international service; tenth, to improve the organization, administration and procedures of the United Nations.
15.	If the twenty-fifth General Assembly were to move forward substantially in these directions, this session would indeed rank as one of the most fruitful in United Nations history.
16.	Let me now comment briefly on these points.
17.	We shall all of us on this podium and in the First Committee have much to say during this session about strengthening international peace and security, and about the need to live up to the Charter. This is quite proper. However, what is needed most in this respect is not still more sweeping declarations that merely restate the purposes and principles of the Charter. What is needed is more effective United Nations action on the concrete issues before us, on the Middle East, on United Nations peacekeeping procedures, on means of pacific settlement. Until we demonstrate our willingness to take such effective action, world opinion will continue to be skeptical, no matter what ringing declarations we may make, as to whether the Members of the United Nations are really serious about strengthening international peace and security.
18.	I now come to a subject which should be at the very center of our concern if we wish in fact to strengthen peace and security through the United Nations. I speak of United Nations peacekeeping.
19.	Because the world situation in the past twenty- five years developed differently from what the founders of the United Nations foresaw, it has not been found possible to create forces for the maintenance of international peace and security along the lines laid down in certain articles of Chapter VII. We would hope that at some point the provisions of the Charter designed for enforcement action can be implemented.
20.	In the meantime, however, a modus vivendi has been built up, entirely consistent with the Charter, which has carried out significant and successful peacekeeping operations, sometimes with observers, sometimes with substantial forces, in the Middle East, in Kashmir, in the Congo, in Cyprus and elsewhere. Still it is all too clear that these ad hoc and improvised arrangements need major improvement in several respects if future peacekeeping is to be effective.
21.	The Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, under the able and patient leadership of Ambassador Cuevas Cancino of Mexico, has been laboring for nearly two years at the task of developing peacekeeping guidelines. During the past year the United States has put forward concrete proposals for new procedures that would meet the political concerns of all and yet allow United Nations forces to move rapidly to carry out decisions of the Security Council. But the broad agreement that all desire is still lacking.
22.	It is high time however that the General Assembly, in this twenty-fifth anniversary year, demanded significant movement on this problem. It would be a mistake not to move at all until all are agreed to move all the way. There is strong reason and sufficient consensus for some forward movement at this Assembly. The United States will be prepared to join with others in concrete proposals to this effect.
23.	In this connexion we welcome the statement made at Lusaka in the Declaration of the nonaligned countries concerning the United Nations, that measures should be taken at this session of the General Assembly to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping, and we look forward with interest to proposals that may be made by those present at that meeting.
24.	Of course, peacekeeping without peaceful settlement is only an expedient, necessary but incomplete and inconclusive. The most potent preventive of conflict is not machinery but the will of disputing parties to show restraint and a spirit of conciliation, and to persist in peaceful methods until settlement is reached. This is a solemn obligation of every United Nations Member under the Charter, and no nation deserves more honor than those who have lived up to it in spite of every obstacle.
25.	In this past year such peaceful settlements, or major steps towards them, have been recorded in a number of situations which reflect great credit on the statesmanship of those involved. I have in mind, for example, the progress made, with the assistance of the Organization of American States, toward resolving the dispute between El Salvador and Honduras; and also the recent peaceful decision on the future of Bahrain, in which good offices provided by the Secretary General played a major role.
26.	As these cases show, where the will to settle exists, effective machinery can do much to help. This is true of regional organizations, and it is no less true of the relevant organs of the United Nations, above all the Security Council.
27.	In this connexion we have welcomed the Security Council's decision [see 1544th meeting] as proposed by Finland, to hold periodic high-level meetings under Article 28 of the Charter. My country looks forward to taking part in the first such meeting later this fall. We welcome likewise the valuable suggestion of Brazil committees of the Council, including the parties to a dispute, might be created to help settle particular disputes.
28.	To the same end, the United States would favor the reactivation of certain machinery for peaceful settlement which has long been dormant. Many years ago the General Assembly created a Panel on Inquiry and Conciliation [resolution 268 (III)], and more recently a register of fact-finding experts. My Government will soon nominate qualified individuals for both of these bodies. We believe fact-finders should be available to
1 Third Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non Aligned Countries, held at Lusaka, Zambia, from 8 to 10 September 1970.
the SecretaryGeneral or other organs of the United Nations, or directly to Member States, to report on the facts of situations of international concern at the request or with the consent of one or more of the parties.
29.	Finally, it is most important that we rejuvenate and strengthen the highest organ of judicial settlement, the International Court of Justice. The United States recently joined with others in the Security Council in referring to the Court for its advisory opinion certain aspects of the Namibia situation. We have also joined with others in submitting to this General Assembly an agenda item calling for a review of the role of the Court. We hope this review will suggest ways to enable the Court to make a more substantial contribution to the establishment of the rule of law among nations.
30.	The world has witnessed in recent weeks shocking examples of the consequences of failure to abide by this rule of law examples which have been alluded to by numerous previous speakers on this podium. Hundreds of innocent individuals engaged in peaceful international travel have been brutally seized as hostages in a conflict in which they were in no way involved. Not only their safety and convenience have been placed in jeopardy but their very lives. As President Nixon pointed out in this forum a year ago, this issue "involves the interests of. . . every air passenger and the integrity of that structure of order upon which a world community depends" [1755th meeting, para. 74].
31.	That this view is widely shared is evident from the almost universal condemnation of these most recent acts by Governments the world over and by the resolution on this matter adopted unanimously by the Security Council [286 (1970)]. But condemnation is not enough. It is time to act. The Tokyo Convention, providing for the prompt return of hijacked aircraft passengers and crew, requires the broadest international support. The same is true of the International Civil Aviation Organization's draft multilateral convention for the extradition and punishment of hijackers. In addition, the United States has submitted new proposals to the ICAO, for which I urge your most earnest consideration and support.
32.	The General Assembly's extensive annual debates and resolutions on many aspects of arms control and disarmament have long played, and continue to play, an important part in international negotiations on this most critical of all our problems. I need only mention the partial nuclear test-ban Treaty,  the outer space Treaty [resolution 2222 (XXI)] and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)]. The disarmament conference at Geneva has this year registered significant progress by achieving wide consensus on a draft treaty to prohibit the emplacement of weapons of mass destruction on a vast area of the earth's surface the seabed beneath the oceans.  We hope this draft treaty will be supported by the General Assembly at this session and opened for signature shortly thereafter.
33.	I can assure the Assembly that the United States Government is unceasingly aware of the worldwide concern and need for an end to the arms race and the perilous burden of armaments in all its forms, and that we shall do whatever one negotiating partner can do to bring about new agreements on new steps toward the ultimate goal of general and complete disarmament.
34.	Permit me to say a word about a matter of quite different but equally wide concern that of human rights throughout the world.
35.	In addition to the basic responsibility of Governments to maintain human rights for all their citizens, the United Nations under the Charter has a clear responsibility in this regard. To strengthen the implementation of that responsibility my Government hopes the General Assembly at this session will create a new post, that of High Commissioner for Human Rights, to advise United Nations organs in this field and to assist States, at their request, with human rights problems. This proposal has been thoroughly studied and fully justified. It deserves a high priority at the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
36.	A particular issue of human rights that is of acute concern to my Government, among others, is the protection of the rights of prisoners of war. While these rights have long since been internationally guaranteed, they are in practice still denied to many prisoners of war, as American wives and families of such prisoners know to their great sorrow. The United States strongly hopes that this Assembly will press for worldwide observance of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, verified by impartial inspection. It is intolerable that the tragedy of armed conflict should be compounded by additional inhumanities in violation of international norms.
37.	In no field have the aims of the United Nations found more dramatic fulfilment during its first quarter of a century than in the field of decolonization. Before the Second World War a third of mankind lived in colonial dependencies. Today the proportion is less than 1 per cent. A revolution of independence has created some sixty new nations and has been the main factor in increasing the membership of the United Nations from 51 to 126.
38.	However, the situation in much of southern Africa is still characterized by the denial of self-determination and of racial equality. The United Nations and its member States must continue to exert peaceful efforts to defend and advance these basic human rights of the peoples concerned. Their cause is just and must in time prevail.
39.	Against these evils the United States in recent months has taken further steps. We put into effect last May a new policy designed to discourage United States investment in, and trade with, Namibia so long as South Africa remains in unlawful occupation. We urge other Governments to join us in this policy. My Government continues strictly to observe resolutions in regard to sanctions against the illegal regime in Rhodesia and in regard to the sale of arms to South Africa. We have closed our consulate in Salisbury. We shall continue in every peaceful and practicable way to pursue the ends of justice, equality and self determination.
40.	High on the list of the United Nations contributions to human progress is its longstanding effort to assist in comprehensive global development. That effort is being continued and, we hope, improved and strengthened through the launching of the Second United Nations Development Decade.
41.	The success of the Decade will depend most of all on the policies of Member States, both developed and developing. To bring all these policies into effective focus is the ambitious aim of the development strategy. The United States strongly supports the strategy which is before this Assembly [A 17982, para. 16] and intends to participate fully in this common enterprise.
42.	I wish to leave no doubt of the serious commitment of the United States to the Second Development Decade. President Nixon, in a series of policy decisions and especially in his recent announcement on the new focus of United States economic assistance, has made clear our intention:
(a)	To reverse the downward trend in United States development assistance;
(b)	To increase substantially United States contributions to multilateral development institutions including the World Bank, the International Development Association, the regional development banks and the United Nations Development program so that, as the capabilities of these institutions increase, we may be able to channel through them most of our official development assistance;
(c)	Further to encourage the efforts of donor nations to "untie" their bilateral aid to developing countries from the obligation to import products of the donor country;
(<d) To bring United States science and technology more effectively to bear on the problems of development, and for this purpose to create a new United States International Development Institute;
(<?) To take new steps to stimulate American private investment in developing countries within the framework of the developing countries' plans.
43.	These approaches are already reflected in the new policies my country has announced toward Latin America and Africa, which stress continued assistance, greater multilateral participation, and increased trade and investment.
44.	Finally, bearing in mind the crucial connexion between trade and development, the United States is pressing for a liberalized system of generalized tariff preferences for products of developing countries, with preferential access to the American market, and we are urging that the developing countries receive similar access to the markets of all developed countries.
45.	I wish to add a particular comment on the role of the United Nations Development program. This program, in cooperation with the specialized agencies, has done important pioneering work in development assistance. Its machinery, however, was built for a smaller program and must be reorganized to meet its growing responsibilities. With the aid of last year's excellent "capacity study" ,  the program is now preparing to put the necessary reforms into effect. In planning our future contributions to this important program we in the United States will give major weight to the progress actually achieved m undertaking these reforms.
46.	In recent years people all over the world have suddenly awakened to the inexorable and tragic fact that excessive population growth can, if continued much longer, frustrate all our hopes for peace, justice and progress. There can be no progress for the majority of mankind if population growth outstrips all available means of development. There can be no justice for the majority of mankind where population expands faster than production and social services. There can be no peace for the majority of mankind where progress and justice are unattainable because of unrestrained population growth.
47.	This is not a problem confined to either developed or developing countries. In my own country, although our growth rate has recently slowed to about 1 per cent a year, we have adopted as a national goal the availability within five years of family planning services to every citizen.
48.	Clearly, the need is equally urgent in many nations striving for development whose annual population growth in some cases approaches 4 per cent which means a doubling of the number of people in less than twenty- years. The care and feeding of such enormous numbers of dependent children, their upbringing in conditions compatible with human dignity, could constitute such a burden as to nullify progress in economic development and to cause living standards to remain at past low levels or even to fall lower.
49.	The United States is convinced that the vigorous pursuit of family planning policies is an indispensable element in the strategy of development. In this conviction we have pledged this year $7.5 million to the recently established United Nations Fund for Population Activities, whose services to requesting Governments are rapidly growing.
50.	In the context of development I wish also to emphasize the enormous potential of the world's deep seabeds, whose exploitation is just now beginning to come within the reach of our technology.
51.	Last May President Nixon, in a farreaching announcement concerning the oceans, proposed that an international regime be established by treaty for the exploitation of seabed resources beyond the depth of 200 meters. He further proposed that this regime "should provide for the collection of substantial mineral royalties to be used for international community purposes, particularly economic assistance to developing countries". Early in August the United States circulated in the United Nations seabed Committee  a draft convention [A18021, annex V], embodying these and other important proposals in the President's announcement.
52.	These proposals, if carried out, will amount to a new departure in the history of nations. Never in history has the exploitation of resources of such great potential value been placed under the supervision and regulation of an effective international authority. Never in history has assurance been offered that the international community could have a substantial, independent source of revenue to be equitably divided to serve the interests of mankind as a whole.
53.	The United States hopes that the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly will advance this important enterprise so that a sound and workable international seabed regime, backed up by effective machinery, can come into being as soon as possible. To this end it is important that States refrain from making further claims to jurisdiction over the seabeds or over the waters of the oceans. We believe that a conference on subjects related to the law of the sea, including seabeds, should be called as soon as practicable and that preparatory steps should be initiated by this session of the General Assembly.
54.	I come now to an issue of critical and rapidly growing importance the protection of the human environment. Development and protection of the environment are not mutually contradictory; indeed, they must go hand in hand if the world is to be a fit place in which to live. The United Nations is in a key position to foster the necessary cooperation so that the needs of the environment, as well as those of development, receive the energetic attention they require.
55.	Already the plans for the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972 have begun to take shape and have helped to focus the attention of United Nations Member Governments on this worldwide challenge; but we should not wait for the Stockholm Conference before launching necessary initiatives.
56.	Therefore the United States urges that all of us here, representing both developed and developing countries, work together to enable the United Nations to take the following steps. Firstly, it should identify those environmental problems, especially those pollutants in the atmosphere and the oceans, which are or may be dangerous on a global scale. Second, it should make plans for a coordinated world monitoring network to keep track of these environmental dangers. This network should build on existing programs, particularly those of the agencies of the United Nations family, and should use the most advanced data processing and satellite technology, such as the earth resource survey satellites which my country has been developing. Third, it should collect and analyze the suggestions of governments concerning environmental guidelines for States, both developed and developing, as well as for international institutions engaged in development programs. Fourth, it should explore the possibility of establishing international air and water quality standards. The United States hopes the Assembly at this session will act to advance those important objectives.
51. A newly acute problem which threatens a growing number of societies is the epidemic spread of addiction to dangerous drugs, especially among young people. This phenomenon has mushroomed in a very few years, not only in my own country but in a number of others, both developed and developing. It creates untold misery, violence, lawlessness and economic and human loss.This menace must be stopped. To do so it will be necessary to reinforce existing international agreements and to strengthen the longstanding and excellent work of agencies in this field, especially those of the United Nations. We are glad to note that the Commission on Narcotic Drugs is meeting now to deal with the whole range of problems involved, from the poppy field through the international syndicate to the needle in the vein. My Government hopes that an adequate action program will emerge from this process and will command the energetic support of the community of nations. The United States has already offered, subject to Congressional approval, a contribution of $2 million to such a program.
58.	Finally, it is important that we make better use of the talents of young people in international service, especially the service of the United Nations. Many delegations to this session, including that of the United States, contain youthful members as suggested by the General Assembly a year ago. That is entirely fitting, because the fate of the United Nations and indeed of world peace will soon be in their hands.
59.	With that in mind President Nixon, in his address to this Assembly a year ago [1755th meeting], pledged the enthusiastic support of the United States for Iran's proposal to establish an international volunteer service corps [see 1695th meeting, para. 75], to work in the cause of development and to be recruited on an individual basis from the people, principally young people, of many countries. We hope that proposal will be given final approval in the current session. We hope also that the United Nations will seek new ways to encourage able young people to find careers in its Secretariat and those of the other agencies of the United Nations family.
60.	In these remarks I have discussed only a few of the major tasks facing the United Nations in the years ahead. Even those, however, are enough tc make it obvious that, if we indeed address ourselves to such tasks, the effectiveness of this Organization will be tested more severely than ever. To meet this test we shall have to be far more attentive than has been our habit to many matters of structure, organization and procedure. For example, I would mention the following.
61.	In considering applications for membership by very small States, we must make sure that they are not only willing but also, as the Charter stipulates, able to carry out the Charter's obligations. As the SecretaryGeneral has for years pointed out, many Territories now moving towards independence are too small, either in population or in resources or both, to carry out the minimum obligations which membership requires. Yet these very small entities need more than most the assistance that the United Nations system can provide. Where the burden of membership would be excessive, we should provide a form of association with the United Nations which would enable such States to enjoy the benefits without the burdens of the system.
62.	The persistence of the United Nations financial deficit undermines confidence in the Organization, threatens its capabilities in many fields and casts a cloud over its future. The United States welcomes the SecretaryGeneral's recent call for "a concerted effort to restore the financial solvency of the Organization". We hope that he will himself take a lead in such an effort, in which we shall certainly play our part.
63.	In the annual choice of non-permanent members of the Security Council, it would be well that, as the Charter requires, due regard be specially paid, in the first instance, to the prospective member's contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security, rather than merely to rotation among the members of geographic groups.
64.	The primary consideration in selecting individuals for posts in the Secretariat, above all for senior posts, should be fully to meet the Charter's "paramount consideration" namely "the highest standards of efficiency, competence, and integrity".
65.	We must at long last take decisive steps to streamline the excessively time-consuming organization and procedures of the General Assembly, as Canada has wisely proposed, or else we shall either "drown in a sea of words" or suffocate under an avalanche of paper.
66.	We must take more effective measures to ensure that the entire United Nations system is so organized and managed that it responds efficiently to the directives of its governing organs and to the priority needs of the world. That will require much better administrative and budgetary coordination and control than we have yet achieved.
67.	The United States offers these suggestions in the spirit of the twenty-fifth anniversary session, which we understand to be a spirit of sober determination to make this Organization more effective, to make its future more responsive than its past to the imperative needs of men, women and children everywhere. Many other delegations have offered or will offer their proposals in the same spirit. The test of our seriousness and our success will be how much of this agenda of objectives we can begin to carry out.
68.	We are assembled from the four corners of the earth. The interests of the Governments we speak for often seem to be and sometimes are in contradiction. But by our presence here, by our commitment to the United Nations and its Charter, we have acknowledged that we also have interests in common, interests in peace, justice and progress, interests in the continued habitability of our planet, common interests which we are at last beginning to recognize are inescapable and overriding.
69.	The question now is, do we have the wit not only to perceive these common interests in some vague rhetorical way, but also to act upon them together realistically and decisively even at the cost sometimes of older and narrower interests? If we do not do so, history may sweep aside not only this Organization but also the nations that compose it.
70.	The SecretaryGeneral has said that we may have only ten years left to cope effectively with the problems of our times before they become so staggering as to be beyond our capacities. As we enter the Disarmament Decade and the Second Development Decade, let us keep that warning foremost in our minds and let us be determined to act together to avert catastrophe.




1.   Mr President, my delegation has already extended to you from this rostrum its warm congratulations on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly and has assured you of its co-operation at all times. I wish to associate myself with those remarks and extend to you my personal congratulations and good wishes.
2.	This Assembly is no ordinary Assembly. It marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and is a significant milestone in the story of the international community. It is a time for looking forward and a time for looking back. We must look back at the past quarter of a century to identify the successes and failures, to examine where our procedures have been sound and where we have been misguided, to recognize where we have tried too hard and where not enough, and to assess the correctness of our priorities, emphasis and direction. The information we derive from this necessary process of introspection must be carefully weighed so as to enable us to produce a sound program for the future attention of the Organization, one that will help it to achieve its most important aims more effectively.
3.	On looking back, the unfortunate but unavoidable conclusion is that the achievements of the Organization have not matched the high hopes of its founders. A crisis of confidence has been experienced by Members and even noted by the Secretary-General. Dissatisfaction with the lack of progress by the Organization is
reflected in the call from many quarters for a revision of the Charter with a view to improving the effectiveness of the Organization as an instrument for promoting peace and international security.
4.	It is understandable that this prescription for the maladies of the Organization should appeal to some, but it seems to my Government that treatment of this kind would be misdirected; we should be attempting to cure a symptom instead of the disease. Despite its imperfections, it is not the Charter which is basically at fault, but the lack of will on the part of Members to apply it constructively. Chapter I of the Charter embodies the highest common denominator of the aspirations of the peoples of the world acting in community; but when Member States have participated in the proceedings of organs created by the Charter, they have generally acted as individuals, promoting their own or narrow sectional interests only. The rights, interests and sensitivities of other States have been relegated to a position of subordinate importance, and this has given rise to friction between nations, and the dissemination, even by the Secretariat, of political propaganda directed against Member States. This pattern of behaviour of States diverges fundamentally from the vision of the architects of San Francisco, who would "save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". The conclusion to which we are drawn is that in order to enable the world body more effectively to fill the role it was originally designed to play in world affairs, Member States must return to the spirit of San Francisco. My Government believes that this is the first essential step towards restoring the authority and prestige of the United Nations. The second is that States should honor the letter and the spirit of the existing Charter, being guided by the broadly defined purposes and principles set out in Chapter I.
5.	It has been said, increasingly of late, that the United Nations is merely a mirror of the realities of the existing world situation. There is no disputing that. Nations tend to reach decisions, and act, outside the framework of the United Nations, according to the dictates of self-interest, and then to seek to justify their actions in this forum, or, alternatively, to find a scapegoat to divert attention. In that way Member States have tended to neglect their individual responsibilities.
6.	By signing the Charter, Member States undertook, for instance, to strive for the creation of the conditions of stability and well-being which are essential for peaceful and friendly relations among nations. Article 55 of the Charter deals with that aspect. The creation of these conditions is a responsibility which falls
primarily within the sphere of action of individual States, which should ardently pursue the goals of economic and social development and the well-being of their own peoples. Signatories of the Charter, however, have also committed themselves to act, in their relations with one another, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter, and they have thereby accepted a responsibility vis-a-vis other States and their peoples. Membership has, therefore, brought with it both domestic and international obligations.
7.	It is the appropriate time for Members to take stock of their domestic and international achievements, measured against the standard of the Charter. I am not suggesting that the United Nations should take upon itself the task of weighing up the achievements and/or failures of any particular State or States, a course which would be in violation of the provisions of the Charter. I am suggesting rather that Member States should themselves, in this anniversary year, in the spirit of Article 56 of the Charter, direct their inquiring scrutiny at their own achievements over the past 25 years. It is not merely the question of where they stand today that is relevant, but also of where they are today in comparison with 1945. Accordingly, States should first assess their progress domestically in the fields referred to in Article 55. They might ask themselves to what extent they have succeeded in promoting higher standards of living, full employment, conditions of economic and social progress and development and respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms among their own peoples. Secondly, they should consider whether in their behavior towards others they have acted, and are continuing to act, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
8.	As for my own Government, we know that much remains to be done in the future. But I am glad to say also that much has been accomplished in the past 25 years. The general advancement on all fronts of our diverse peoples has been such that their well-being in 1970 certainly exceeds the most optimistic expectations of 1945. We, therefore, are satisfied that we are making significant headway in acquitting ourselves of our commitment under Article 55 of the Charter. Let there be no doubt that we are as concerned as any other State about the realization of the objectives expressed in that Article. We are furthermore satisfied that we shall continue to make progress in the manner which is best suited to, and is dictated by, "the particular circumstances" existing in the area under our jurisdiction to borrow a phrase from Article 73 of the Charter.
9.	Article 55 emphasizes respect for the right of self- determination of peoples. This does not mean that in multinational countries or groupings, one group or nation which happens to be in the majority should be allowed, in the exercise of its right of self- determination, to deprive other numerically smaller nations of the same right. Accordingly, in the exercise of self-determination in such multinational countries, the history and diversity of the peoples living there should be taken fully into account.
10.	South Africa is a multinational country. Our population does not consist of only two elements, a black nation and a white nation. It is composed, in fact, of a white nation and several non-white nations or peoples and the distinction between them is based on the fact that their language, culture, history and traditions differ from one another as markedly as day does from night. In other words the distinction is not based solely on race or colour. We believe that in applying the principle of self-determination, the rights of each of these nations should be preserved. Since 1948, when it first came to power, my Government has actively promoted self-determination for those of our peoples not yet enjoying it, on this basis.
11.	Today all peoples in South Africa possess self- government in varying forms and at various levels of development. Most of our black African peoples, for instance, already have their own legislative and executive assemblies, or councils, with the necessary administrative departments. The Xhosa people of the Transkei were the first to receive a modern parliament and their own Government after their first general election was held in 1963. During the past two years no fewer than eight new territorial Governments have been established with their own legislative and executive councils and with approximately 50 state departments already under their control. In this process of evolution towards independence the peoples of each of these territories have acquired a representative and responsible Government which is actively engaged in planning their own future and preparing them for independence in co-operation with the South African Government, in a peaceful and orderly manner.
12.	On the 15th of last month, in the South African Parliament, my Prime Minister restated government policy in that respect. He reaffirmed that our policy does not constitute a denial of human dignity and added that while he claimed for himself the right of maintaining his identity as a white person, he also conceded to every non-white nation living in South Africa the right to its own identity. He continued as follows:
"Here in South Africa a Bantu person has never got into trouble for having requested and demanded self-determination for his people. Quite the contrary! We are in fact guiding them along the road to self- determination; we are in fact preparing them for self- determination; we are in the process of training them and making them and their land receptive to self- determination. If honorable members or the outside world ask me when it will happen that they go their own way, I can merely reply once again that this Parliament has passed certain legislation and that any black nation is at liberty to come to this Parliament and say that the time has arrived for it to go its own way. This Government, or whatever other Government may be in power, will deliberate and negotiate with that nation.
"I want to make the principle very clear: if there is a desire to hold discussions, we shall be obliged and ready to enter into such discussions. It stands to reason that we would prefer these discussions to be deferred until greater development has taken place in those black territories so that they may be more viable and better prepared to stand on their own feet. But it is by no means my intention to make it a condition that they must be viable before they have the right to approach us. This is their inalienable right, which they can exercise tomorrow if they so desire."
13.	After the black peoples of South Africa have attained independence we shall not desert them. We shall continue to assist them in a spirit of good neighborliness. We shall continue to co-operate with them to our mutual advantage and, in the nature of things, on a much larger scale than we are already doing in the case of our other newly independent African neighbors. In the long term this political development could lead to a commonwealth of independent peoples and States, living side by side on a basis of sovereign equality. They will continue to be inter-dependent economically, but there will be no domination of any one people or any one State by others.
14.	To the skeptics who may still refuse to believe in the feasibility or practicability of the program I have outlined perhaps because of the size and economic viability of the Territories or homelands we are leading to independence let me say this: the populations of the Territories in question range between 300,000 and 3.5 million, populations which exceed those of many States which belong to this Organization and are represented here today. Their areas, too, exceed the areas of many Members of the United Nations. The gross national income of several of those Territories compares more than favorably with that of some Member States. Moreover, South Africa itself has one of the strongest and fastest developing economies in the entire world. In the light of our economic interdependence and our commitment to regional co-operation, economic stability in southern Africa will be guaranteed and development in all fields assured.
15.	Against that background we do not believe that we can legitimately be accused of denying the peoples of South Africa the right of self-determination. As I have said, our whole policy is aimed at avoiding domination of any one people or any one State by others. It is designed to enable each nation, while maintaining its identity, to realize its own ambitions to the full. That surely is the essence of self-determination.
16.	Apart from the right of self-determination, there are other equally important basic rights. Almost three decades ago President Roosevelt outlined his four "freedoms" which are today no less important than they were then. In those, and other fields mentioned in Article 55 of the Charter, substantial progress has been made in my country. Freedom of religion and speech, the liberty of the person, inviolability of person and property and free access to courts of impartial justice are assured. But here, too, the rights of the individual must not be exercised in such a way as to deprive others of that same right. Hence, those rights can be enjoyed only within the framework of an ordered and peaceful society. Only in such a society can high standards of living, full employment and conditions  of economic and educational progress and development be realized for the individual human being.
17.	Other freedoms are related to the fundamental needs of man, for example, freedom from poverty and want and the need for health, education and other social services. Freedom from poverty and want is directly related to economic advancement. It is significant in this respect that the real per capita income of South Africa rose by 66 per cent during the 20 years from 1949 to 1969. As regards other services, we have implemented an education program which will within one generation eliminate illiteracy and which provides opportunities for a university education to increasing numbers of students of all races; we have opened up avenues of technical instruction for non- white persons in all fields; we have established and staffed Africa's most outstanding hospitals and heavily subsidized them, so that black African patients are charged a single fee of 70 United States cents irrespective of the complexity of the treatment they receive or the period they remain in hospital; we have built 600,000 houses in 20 years, 400,000 of which were for black African persons.
18.	We do not claim that in the pursuit of the ideals set out in Article 55 we have reached the stage where we can be self-satisfied. We do not claim to be perfect; but neither are we hypocrites. We acknowledge the common ideals and aspirations of mankind and we have formulated our policies accordingly. We recognize the problems that we have to overcome; we do not, however, criticize others for their shortcomings, for we realize that no State can be perfect. But many others do not hesitate to condemn our policies on moral and practical grounds. These charges are, however, completely unfounded. How can a system be wrong which leads peoples to self-determination and enables and assists them in maintaining their national identities; which provides them with higher social, educational and economic standards that can be attained anywhere else on the continent; which prepares them for independence by providing them with technical assistance and administrative support, thus creating opportunities for all of them to gain valuable experience in the art of government at various levels; which guarantees security for all by avoiding a struggle for power between non-white and white in South Africa and also between competing and traditionally hostile African nationalisms? In the light of the realities of the world today and of the substantial progress we have made in South Africa in the field of human uplift and in the light of the premises and objectives of our policies as I have described them, I feel that the record of South Africa can be measured honorably against the ideals set out in the Charter.
19.	I now wish to refer briefly to the wider field of the individual Member's responsibility. Here it is the duty of Member States to reflect to what extent each of them, individually, has adhered to the basic purposes and principles of the Charter. Without this, all our efforts to promote the moral and social welfare of our peoples would be in vain. These provisions impose a duty on Member States not only towards their own peoples but also towards other States and their peoples. I wish to refer to only three of these provisions, which in present circumstances cannot be sufficiently emphasized: first, the call to the United Nations to be a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the purposes and principles of the Charter; secondly, the call to all Members to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered, and, thirdly, as a corollary to this, the call to all Members to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State.
20.	Unless Members, individually and collectively, are willing to apply these provisions in their daily relations with others, there can be little hope of achieving the ideals of the Charter, of making a reality of the better world envisaged in 1945.
21.	My Government, for its part, has made it clear time and again that we base our relations with other States, first, on acceptance of the rule of nonintervention in their internal affairs; and secondly, on acceptance of the principle that differences of political systems are no bar to peaceful coexistence and friendly relations.
22.	We are of Africa. It is in this continent, especially in the southern region, that our destiny lies. We believe it to be in everyone's interest that all the countries of the region should develop and prosper, that the real enemies of Africa disease, ignorance, poverty and misery should be conquered.
23.	It is of cardinal importance, moreover, that the security and stability of this region should be preserved. We are therefore dismayed to note the emphasis being placed in various United Nations bodies on the use of force as a means for attaining political objectives in southern Africa.
24.	The strengthening of international security and the preservation of peace and order throughout the world is a major preoccupation of the United Nations this year. How can these aims be reconciled with resolutions not only condoning but actually encouraging the use of force in an area of the world where it is least likely to solve any problems? It should not be necessary for me to point out that it cannot be in the interest of any of the peoples of southern Africa to have the stability and security of the region shattered, for without stability and security the future progress and prosperity of the region are in jeopardy. I wish to state in this connexion that I welcome the stand which the Secretary-General took in a statement a fortnight ago against subversive activities and inter-ference in the internal affairs of other nations.
25.	My Government has been obliged to take cognizance of the growing threat to the southern African region and it has a duty to ensure the security of its peoples. Having said this, I must emphasize, however, that South Africa has no aggressive designs. Indeed, any form of aggression is foreign to our history, our traditions, our outlook and our policy.
26.	Two weeks ago, my Prime Minister reminded Parliament of his statement on assuming office four years ago that the independent black States on the borders of the Republic had no cause to spend a single cent on arms for their own defense since they knew that South Africa would not attack them and that they had nothing to fear from us.
27.	Certain States persist, however, in questioning our good faith. In these circumstances my Prime Minister stated that he was prepared to negotiate a non- aggression treaty with any African State, whether that State was an immediate neighbor or was situated further away, such as Zambia, the United Republic of Tanzania and other States in Africa. He added that he was prepared to take the initiative in negotiating a non-aggression treaty of this nature.
28.	From this rostrum I wish to invite other African States to give serious consideration to my Prime Minister's offer to conclude non-aggression pacts with them. It is our earnest hope that they will respond positively to this gesture. For my part, I shall be happy to discuss the matter further with representatives of any other African States who may be interested in our proposal or who may wish to have further information about it.
29.	We have heard a great deal in the last 12 months of the Lusaka Manifesto.1 If the spirit which this Manifesto has been said to symbolize does indeed reflect a genuine desire on the part of the African States to find a peaceful solution to the problems of Africa, one might have expected my Prime Minister's initiative to have been welcomed. This unfortunately has not so far been the case. I note with disappointment, indeed surprise, that certain African States have already rejected our offer. I hope very much that they will reconsider their attitude, for I know of nothing more that South Africa can do or say to convince them that any fears they may have of aggressive intentions on our part are totally unfounded. I trust, however, that if they should persist in spuming our offer they will at least refrain from accusing us of aggressive designs in future, for continued accusations of this sort cannot be reconciled with a rejection of a non-aggression pact.
30.	For our part, we are firmly resolved to pursue policies which will contribute to the maintenance of peace and the solution of the urgent problems which will face Africa in the years ahead. We would welcome co-operating with others in this great and challenging task. The Charter enjoins us to practice tolerance and to co-operate with one another. Surely in this commemorative year it is for us to respond positively. Let us all, therefore, rededicate ourselves to the ideals of the Charter and resolve to work together to achieve greater understanding and a better future for all mankind.



