1.	  Mr. President, it is my pleasant duty, on behalf of my Government and delegation, as well as on my own behalf, to extend to you our most sincere felicitations on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. This is a fitting tribute both to your distinguished diplomatic career and to the country which you represent. We of the Chinese delegation wish you every success in the discharge of the great responsibilities of your high office.
2.	Notwithstanding the atmosphere of euphoria which seems to have pervaded the current scene, the world is still confronted by war or threats of war. The war in Viet-Nam has now been escalated to embrace the whole of Indo-China. The situation in the Middle East continues to be explosive. Conflicts of one kind or another prevail in various parts of the world. Although some of these may be said to be disputes of a domestic nature, their continuance could endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.
3.	In Viet-Nam the Communists continue to seek a military solution. They count on the pressures of world
public opinion to force the withdrawal of United States forces. The Paris peace talks have served, as far as the Communists are concerned, more as an instrument for political warfare than for serious discussions. Always with an eye on the anti-war sentiments in the United States, the Communist negotiators have been skillful in stirring up popular opposition to United States involvement in Viet- Nam. Division within the United States has made the eventual American pull-out inevitable. But the withdrawal of the United States military establishment from Viet-Nam, however, should not mean the disappearance of United States interest and influence from South-East Asia. We are confident that the United States will continue to fulfill its commitments in that part of the world, even though a nation directly threatened by aggression must now, in the light of the Nixon Doctrine, assume the primary responsibility for providing the manpower for its own national defense.
4.	In terms of Viet-Nam this means that the brunt of the war must henceforth be borne by the people of the Republic of Viet-Nam themselves. Indeed, the South Viet-Namese people have been doing just that for over two years. All evidence points to the fact that they have given a pretty good account of themselves. There is every reason to believe that they will be able to safeguard their independence and freedom against subversion from within and aggression from without after the withdrawal of United States armed forces.
5.	It is gratifying that, in the midst of war and crisis, the Republic of Viet-Nam has continued to make progress in the social, economic and political fields. A general election has just taken place. Bitter fighting on the battlefields and terrorism in the rear failed to keep the voters from the polls. Given the divisive social and intellectual climate, and the disruptions of the war, no one should expect the Republic of Viet-Nam to master the mechanisms of the democratic process overnight. Of the fact that Saigon has done its best to make democracy the dominant element in its future there can be no question. One is doing no favor to the people and Government of South Viet-Nam if one allows oneself to expect too much to happen too soon. In any case, the Republic of Viet-Nam does not merit the kind of abuse and vilification which some critics have been in the habit of meting out. It is ironical that the same critics, while condemning South Viet-Nam for its undemocratic ways, do not hesitate to pay craven homage to the North Viet-Namese Communists, who have nothing but contempt for bourgeois democracy. Obviously, they are less interested in the development of democratic institutions in South Viet-Nam than in sowing the seeds of dissension among the Viet-Namese people. The last thing they want to see is the creation of conditions in which healthy political institutions can flourish and the Viet-Namese may be enabled to work out their own destiny in their own way. 
6.	In the Middle East, guns have for the most part been silent since the acceptance by Israel, Egypt and Jordan in August last year of the United States peace initiative. The cease-fire, while no longer formally in effect after its lapse in March 1971, has by and large been observed. It is to be regretted, however, that the maintenance of the precarious cease-fire has not been accompanied by any progress towards the resolution of the basic issues which have so long embittered the relations between Israel and the Arab States. It is all too obvious that, unless the parties concerned are prepared to accept reasonable and practical compromises or the major interested Powers are willing to bring their influence to bear on the parties, peace in the Middle East will remain unattainable.
7.	There are conflicts which are technically matters of a domestic nature but whose significance for international peace is beyond question. A case in point is the recent civil strife in East Pakistan. As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report on the work of the Organization, the problems generated by the conflict "are necessarily of concern to the international community" [A/8401[Add.l, para. 177].
8.	In purely human terms the magnitude of the tragedy is staggering. In the six months since March several million refugees have poured into India. The terrible plight in which millions of destitute and helpless people find themselves cannot but arouse the sympathy and compassion of us all. We of the Republic of China know how serious the problem can be in terms of human misery and suffering. Ever since the Communist take-over of the Chinese mainland, millions of our brethren have suffered the same fate as that whicn has now befallen the East Pakistanis. We therefore urge the international community to do everything possible to give relief to the innocent people who, through no fault of their own, have been deprived of their homes and possessions and have been thrown upon the mercies of an alien world.
9.	Lasting peace cannot be built on the foundation of a world community in which the greater part of mankind sinks ever deeper into the miseries of under-development and over-population. It is, of course, no easy matter to close the gap between rich and poor nations. There is no question, however, that there are available material resources for this task. The question is whether there is the will to use the available resources to meet the pressing needs of development. In the view of my delegation, the United Nations is in a special position to create that will. The International Development Strategy for the new Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] is an important step in the right direction.
10.	The third session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development [ UNCTAD], scheduled to convene in a few months, should provide an excellent opportunity for co-operation between developed and developing countries. It is hoped that the developed countries will find it in their own interest to remove the barriers which they have set up and which have operated to the great disadvantage of the developing countries.
11.	The Republic of China is a developing country. It faces many of the problems which plague other developing
 
countries. In so far as lies within the limits of its capabilities, it has always been ready to contribute to the solution of problems which confront countries in various stages of development and to share experiences with them.
12.	It must be admitted that the United Nations has in recent years lost much of its prestige and influence. In Viet-Nam it has contented itself with playing the role of a helpless bystander. In the Middle East its attempts to bring about a settlement have achieved no outstanding success. The advance towards disarmament is being decided not so much in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament meeting at Geneva as in the direct Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] between the Soviet Union and the United States. The recent agreement on the status of Berlin  was concluded outside the walls of the United Nations. The inescapable conclusion is that on the main currents of world events the United Nations has exerted only a marginal influence.
13.	As a free association of sovereign States the United Nations can be only as strong and effective as its Members make it. All too often short-range national interests are allowed to prevail over the common interests of the world community. All too often the United Nations has not hesitated to resort to expediency at the expense of vital Charter principles. Its readiness to yield to force, to disregard justice, or to neglect human rights, has been to a large extent responsible for what has often been called "a crisis of confidence".
14.	It is sad to reflect that, at a time when the effectiveness of the United Nations is being called into question, there are those in our midst who press for the replacement of the Republic of China, a Member of impeccable standing, by a regime whose declared policy has been the destruction of the Organization as an instrument for peace.
15.	I shall have occasion to speak on the so-called question of Chinese representation when the item comes up for debate in the Assembly. I wish to make here a few observations which may help to clarify certain issues in respect of the Chinese Communist regime.
16.	The first observation I wish to make is that it is erroneous to assume that the Communist regime and the Chinese people are an indissoluble whole. The fact of the matter is that the regime and the oppressed millions are two distinct and mutually hostile entities. The overwhelming majority of the people are anti-Mao and anti-Communist. Twenty-two years of unremitting regimentation and brainwashing, torture and terror have failed to make them accept tho Communist regime as anything more than a transient tyranny which, like other tyrannies in Chinese history, will in time pass away. The Chinese people have never ceased to thirst for freedom, and they will struggle on until freedom is won.
17.	In recent months Western journalists who have visited the Chinese mainland have painted a glowing picture of progress and achievement. It is difficult to believe, however that a brief conducted tour to a few cities and villages in a vast land could provide any genuine insight into the real conditions of the country. The Chinese people arc too well experienced in the ways of the world to reveal their true feelings to an outsider. Yet it is possible to get glimpses of the real situation from some of the dispatches. Not a few correspondents, for example, have written admiringly about the wonderful discipline of the common people. Some have reported the existence of a new species of human being on the Chinese mainland the “Maoist men”-austere, self- controlled, all dressed in the same drab clothing, all relating their every activity to the thought of Mao Tse-tung, all shouting the same slogans, all vowing undying fealty to Chairman Mao. What all this amounts to is that, by means of terror and ruthless regimentation, the masses of the people have been reduced to the level of robots, apparently with no will or mind of their own.
18.	Yet it would be a grave mistake to view them as nothing but robots. They conform because conformity is the only way to survive in a world in which life is regulated by harsh decrees, intimidating exhortations, punishment without crime. But below the surface of seeming docility, there is a boiling and ultimately irrepressible mass of resentments and suicidal despairs. No one should give them up as irretrievably lost to the Mao regime. Despite Communist news black-out, bloody anti-Communist and anti-Mao uprisings are still going on in many parts of the mainland.
19.	Nothing is more indicative of the people's profound opposition to the Communist regime than the floods of refugees who have fled, and continue to flee, the mainland. They number in the millions. Today, the border between mainland China and the outside world is closely guarded by army and militia patrols. Yet thousands have daily risked death to escape Communist tyranny. It is estimated that in the first eight months of this year, 12,500 to 15,000 made good their escape. Most of them have done so by swimming, spending up to 10 hours in the water, usually at night, and covering four to six miles. This was reported in The New York Times on 12 September 1971. Clearly, only hatred and revulsion of the first order can account for their decision to leave behind their loved ones, friends and possessions for the uncertainties of life in an inhospitable world.
20.	If the Communist regime and the Chinese people are mutually hostile entities, it follows that the Communist regime cannot possibly represent the Chinese people in the international community. It is thus ridiculous to assert that to bar the Communist regime from the United Nations is to deny 700 million people, a quarter of the world's population, of their representation.
21.	This brings me to the second point I wish to make, namely, that the Chinese Communist Party, whose total membership represents only about 2 per cent of the population, is torn by dissension and factional strife, and that it faces an uncertain future, As is well known, during the Cultural Revolution, the Party apparatus was completely demolished and hundreds of thousands of Party members were subjected to all kinds of indignity and inhuman treatment. Many of them have since been purged. Chou En-lai, in an interview with Arab newsmen in May of
 
this year, said that the number of Communists who had been purged in the Cultural Revolution amounted to about 1 per cent of a total of 17 million, that is, 170,000. In the same breath, however, he added:
“There are still Communists whose problems have not been solved. We are conducting direct investigations with them. They amount to about 50 per cent of the Party membership.""
In other words, the loyalty of no less than 8.5 million Party members is still in doubt. Obviously, something must be basically wrong with the Chinese Communist Party. It seems that the cancer cf fear is gnawing at its vitals. Leaders are suspicious of one another, suspicious of the rank and file. The rank and file live precariously under the whip-lash of their superiors and at the mercy of lick-spittles and informers among their own comrades. It is not surprising that in recent weeks so much speculation should have centered on the cancellation of the customary 1 October military parade and on other developments on the mainland. There is every reason to believe that a new and serious power struggle is braiding up within the Maoist ranks. The schism within the Communist Party militates against the regime's ability to stabilize itself and consolidate control.
22.	The third point I wish to make is that the world should never mistake Peiping's tactical zigzag for a basic change of policy. The cold fact is that both in words and in deeds the regime remains what it has always been oppressive at home and aggressive abroad.
23.	It is easy to understand why Peiping's change of style has been received with so much fanfare and enthusiasm. Weariness with recurrent crises and fear of nuclear holocaust have engendered in the minds of men a yearning for normality and a craving for world-wide detente. They are conditioned to accept Peiping's gestures of goodwill at face value.
24.	It seems to my delegation, however, that this is a dangerous delusion. There is nothing to suggest that the Chinese Communist regime is ready to give up its policy of world domination. It continues to promote the violence of war; it continues to make a fetish of force. It continues to foment armed insurrection in neighboring countries. It continues to supply arms and ammunition to rebel bands in Thailand, Burma, Malaysia and Indonesia. It continues to train, equip and finance guerillas on a global scale. Rhetoric and friendly gestures notwithstanding, there is no evidence that the regime now intends to pursue a course of action consistent with the United Nations Charter. Indeed, all signs point the other way.
25.	The quest for international peace and security is, and will continue to be, the dominating purpose of our age. It is to the Governments represented here that the peoples of the world look for the peace and security that they so desperately long for. So, let us whole-heartedly pledge ourselves to the noble and challenging task of translating the ideals and goals of the Charter into reality. Let us hope that this great international body will remain steadfast and true to the purposes and principles for which it was founded. Let us hope that the Assembly will refuse to subject itself to the humiliation of bowing before force. As 
the Organization enters the second quarter-century of its existence, let us remind ourselves that the road to peace is indeed tortuous and long, and that lasting peace will come only when it is built, not on the quicksand of expediency and appeasement, but on the rock of moral strength.




34.	It is toward Asia where all the problems of the world are in ferment, but whose ancient wisdom never shuts out the possibility of dialog, that our thoughts turn, Mr. President, in welcoming your election. The example given by your country strengthens our hopes. The age-old nature and quality of the relations which unite Indonesia and Europe and which the recent visit to your islands by the Queen of the Netherlands again illustrates, cause us to welcome- even more the choice the Assembly made in naming you to succeed a great European, Mr. Hambro, that great President of the twenty-fifth session.
35.	However, I do not wish to mention the eminent role played by the President of our Assembly during the . twenty-fifth anniversary session without also paying the same tribute to a man who has preserved and guided our Organization for 10 years with patient and serene energy. May U Thant accept our gratitude. It is yet too early to bid him farewell.
4	Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and under Water, signed at Moscow on 5 August 1963 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 488 (1963), No. 6964).
5	See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda items 27, 28, 29; 30, 31, 93 and 94, document A/8191.
36.	A former French diplomat recently wrote: "One cannot say that politics, the realm of means, is identical to ethics, the realm of ends. But a policy which did not have ethical ends and a certain conception of good and evil, would have no sense. It would be, literally, senseless." I did not mention these three short sentences to proclaim the superiority of one "certain conception" over another, or to give myself the right to trace the boundary between the realm of ends and the realm of means. More modestly, I shall have attained my goal if I succeed in showing members the meaning France wishes to give its policy.
37.	We belleve-as everyone here knows-that the affirmation of national independence of nations, far from being the expression of nationalism, that is, egotism, is on the contrary the manifestation of a profound solidarity: solidarity which brings people together-regardless of distances or differences-people whose sole ambition is not to part with the choice of their own destiny. We believe-as everyone here knows-that refusing to accept any kind of hegemony is the best contribution a country can make to the birth of a truly international community. We must, however, to justify this conviction, assume the consequences and the risks it entails.
38.	Let me take as the first example monetary relations between nations. We are, in fact, here to increase the chances for peace. Now, no one questions the fact that one of the best ways to achieve this is to bring about, for all world economies, the set of conditions needed for truly balanced growth. In the face of this immense task-and the poorest peoples feel this urgency most deeply the major countries have a special responsibility. How can they and how should they undertake it? Recent history gives us the beginnings of an answer.
39.	The Bretton Woods Agreement, the Marshall Plan, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade: one would be pushing forgetfulness or ingratitude very far indeed in failing to mention the benefits and farsightedness of the initiatives which substituted equality of rights, stability, freely endorsed rules of truly international codes for the evils of compartmentalization, that is, shortsighted egocentricity and unchecked competition, which is anarchy. Once and for all, history has given a large part of the credit to the United States. But two cracks have successively threatened the order of this magnificent structure.
40.	First, it has always been obvious that world equilibrium presupposed -even demanded- the participation of the countries of Eastern Europe, and foremost that of the Soviet Union, in the main currents of exchange. This is one of the goals and this is already, to a certain degree, one of the results of the detente whose political advantages it is superfluous to stress. A great Power or group of Powers could no more be kept .on the sidelines by an outside agency than they themselves could remain aloof from circuits of communication, whether technical or scientific, economic or cultural.
41.	However, the other crack is moire disturbing, because it is threatening the structure from within: respect for the international rules which were accepted by Common agreement by all countries, large and small, led the West to make. an unprecedented leap forward. These rules are called free trade and fixed exchange rates. They are irreplaceable. No one has the power, however strong he may be, to substitute other rules for them. To violate them is therefore to replace them by the absence of rules.
42.	So, if the industrialized States reached a point of preferring anarchy or-and this amounts to the same-the unstable law of the strongest to a set of agreed conditions for harmonious development, who, in the long run, would benefit? The betting-dangerous, like all betting-is open. But, while it is difficult to be a winner in this game, it is easy to pick out the first loser. It would undoubtedly be all the victims of under-development. Let us reread the text relating to the International Development Strategy which was solemnly adopted on 24 October 1970 by the General Assembly [resolution 2626 (XXV)] and which should in principle determine-let us not forget-the relations between industrialized and developing countries throughout the present decade. It rests entirely on the idea that the drive against under-development must be a concerted action, undertaken jointly and in close co-operation by the two groups of nations. What will remain of this fine plan if one of the two groups on which the major responsibilities fall begins by dividing against itself and in some way denying or destroying itself?
43.	In those conditions one can imagine the anxiety in the third world caused by the recent announcement of certain trade restrictions. Because they strike indiscriminately at all States, it is in fact the weakest among them which may be hurt the most.
44.	My country, guided by the experience it has been able to acquire in its relations with the African countries to which it is attached by ever-closer ties of friendship, has made itself and will continue to make itself the untiring advocate of a real organization of markets for basic commodities, where the essential goal is to seek stable, just and remunerative prices. As I have once said:
"The problem is not to throw a few provisions into the abyss of hunger, but to throw a lifeline to enable millions of human beings to climb out through their own effort."
We are here-why not say so? -on the level of principles. We put ourselves on this level as early as 1964, when we suggested that a system of preferences such as the one which had been set up between the associated African States and the European Economic Community should become generalized. We are striving to stay on that level when we insert into our own plan the goal proposed by the United Nations, in other words, when we set our rate of participation in development at 1 per cent of the gross national product.
45.	What are we trying to say? Simply that the responsibility of the industrialized States is committed and cannot be denied.
46.	On several occasions during this analysis we have mentioned the European Economic Community. We have observed that its very structure keeps it from becoming inward-looking. That will be even more true the day it brings together 250 million men and women to whom several million others will be joined through more or less close ties.
47.	Latin America can bear witness to this. I had the honor of presiding over the Council of Ministers of the Community when a colloquium-which should not be the last-both reminded us of our affinities, to which France attaches such importance, and encouraged us to continue increasing our exchanges on all levels.
48.	Nevertheless, how can one talk today of Europe before the nations which comprise it, and also before those which observe it, without being struck by the parallel progression of two phenomena which is its present day characteristic?
49.	On the one hand, the European Economic Community is being enlarged, which means that it has an ever-stronger attraction, that it will henceforth be considered irreversible and that its internal difficulties are the manifestation of growing pains. On the other hand, the progress and consolidation of detente justify this reference to "the whole of Europe" that the six countries meeting in The Hague nearly two years ago took care-on France's initiative to include in the final communique of their summit conference. This I repeat, is parallelism, not coincidence.
50.	'	Western Europe was for a long time a community of suffering and anxiety. Through economic integration and political co-operation it is becoming a community of hope. By setting the example, it has shown first that the decisions and rivalries which seemed so persistent could be overcome, then that the refusal to accept any kind of hegemony was, for peoples too long torn by divisions, the best justification and the most effective stimulus for a necessary rapprochement. In learning that Berlin had become the place and the symbol of agreement, everyone said to himself that the time had come for "the whole of Europe" to keep its appointment with destiny.
51.	What name will history give this conference for which preparation must now enter the decisive stage? "East-West Conference"? Certainly not that. Our plan is certainly not to endorse or even to organize a confrontation of the two camps, but on the contrary to reduce it enough to make it fall into disuse. "European Conference"? That title would be incorrect; everyone agrees-and has agreed for some time now thai the two great North American countries should have a place in it. I hope, then, that we would try to live up to the title which summarizes a great design: "Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe". "Security", "co-operation" it is important that those two words remain linked together, because the concepts they encompass are complementary and indivisible.
52.	To reinforce existing ties between all the countries of Europe on the level of economy, culture, science or technology; to open new paths for their co-operation; to lower the barriers which here and there still prevent or hinder the movement of people, the exchange of information, the movement of ideas; to bring about a genuine mutual interpretation, without impairing State Sovereignty, which would by drawing the peoples closer together, enable them to improve their intellectual and material living standards: is not all this contributing at the same time to increasing the security of the continents, and we think that mistrust, lack of understanding, and even glaring inequalities in development, are also factors of instability;
we note that these still exist in Europe, and not only between what is still called the East and the West. We consider that the multiple development of co-operation extended to everyone in order to reduce those factors is imperative if one intends to deal with the problem of European security in depth.
53.	But this problem is also, of course, political and military. France, in so far as disarmament is concerned, neither can nor will be content with words or appearances. Disarmament must be the elimination of existing arms under effective international control, and the prohibition of any new manufacture of them. And yet, the result of all the efforts made in New York, Geneva and elsewhere since the end of the Second World War is that no arms have in fact been destroyed. On the contrary, we are witnessing the most fantastic arms race the world has ever known. Several bans, whose effectiveness remains to be demonstrated, have been declared on the proliferation of nuclear arms or on their deployment in areas which were up to now inaccessible to man.
54.	Those bans, whatever their individual merits, are unfortunately misleading and can give rise to the belief that disarmament has begun, while the existing arsenals and their power to destroy never stop growing. A "disarmament" carried out in this way can only promote the development of hegemonies and would tend to divide the world by installing an order in which only the super-Powers would retain the ability to exercise their sovereignty.
55.	France has obviously not acquiesced in such a prospect. That is why it has insisted on keeping the possibility of providing itself with the necessary means to secure its defense and maintain its independence. But it remains nonetheless highly in favor of any undertaking for true disarmament, which in an age of nuclear armaments demands, first of all, settlement of the problem of those armaments. How can that be achieved, if not by consensus between the States which possess them? That is why France just recently again recalled that it favored a conference of the five nuclear Powers. It hopes that the requirements for such a conference will one day be met.
56.	Is this to say that for the moment nothing can be done to reduce the threats which weigh on humanity? The United States and the USSR have, for their part, begun talks to lessen the risk of nuclear confrontation between them. To that end, in Vienna and in Helsinki, they are planning to set mutual limits on the development of their strategic arms. But the balance they hope to reach that way is not the only thing which could be called upon to avert the risk of nuclear war. In the absence of a true disarmament agreement between the five, but in the hope of opening ways towards it, would it not be possible as of now also to plan nuclear-Power co-operation to prevent accidental, mistaken or surprise release of the terrible weapons at their disposal? Establishing such a security system will surely provide a practical means of moving toward a world where the risks accompanying the existence of nuclear arms, while not yet eliminated, could at least be reduced. France, for its part-and I confirm and announce this formally-is ready to contribute to that.
57.	For it is only to avoid submission to any system of blocs and I deliberately repeat myself of hegemony that we have had to provide ourselves with the means of deterrence, after having asked in vain for an internationally controlled ban on nuclear arms. In this field as in others, the desire for independence is a contribution to world equilibrium and, consequently, to peace. However, our experiments -I voluntarily refrain from mentioning experiments for which other countries are responsible- would, in our view, cease to be legitimate if they were to endanger life-first of all, of course, the life of man, but also the life of the flora or fauna on land and in the sea.
58.	Have we set ourselves up as the sole judges of the adequacy of the precautions taken, and first of all the remoteness of the test sites? Not at all. We have not been satisfied with the installation of a system, now five years old, to survey the development of radio-activity at various points of the globe on our own.
59.	We have invited scientists and researchers from the countries concerned to take part in our observation and surveillance work. This is a unique and unprecedented effort of international scientific cooperation. Each year we report the results of these observations to all the Members of the Organization, without concealment or hindrance.
60.	We have duly reported to the United Nations committee qualified, as its name indicates,  to evaluate the harmfulness or harmlessness of atomic radiation. Consequently, those who would charge us, not only without proof but against all proof, with risking pollution which our experiments, and ours alone, might entail would be taking to task not us, but the indisputable and indeed undisputed authority and the conscience of a scientific committee of the United Nations.
61.	Let me add that those explosions-by the very fact that they take place in the atmosphere-are not registered by even the most sensitive seismographs on the American continent, which respond to all variations, however weak, in the earth's crust; consequently, they cannot have any , relation to any seismic shock. You will then understand that we trust good faith and common sense to do justice to the simple truth.
62.	But the accumulation of forces in the European theater is the consequence, not the cause, of political tensions there. What chance is there of dealing with the effects without troubling to go to the roots?
63.	It is not too early to look beyond the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin,' which is sure to be supplemented soon by the necessary arrangements between the German authorities-a must for its entry into force. A larger settlement will then appear, since the Treaties of Moscow and Warsaw,  Which convey an equal desire to surmount the obstacles built up in the path of reconciliation between peoples by the horrors of war, are going to take effect in their turn. May we not hope that those three elements of a true political reconstruction in the very center of Europe -the Berlin accord, the necessary arrangements between the German authorities, and the entry into force of the Treaties of Moscow and Warsaw-will culminate in a lasting agreement between the two German States? Nothing would contribute more effectively to guaranteeing the stability of the continent as a whole.France, which bears a part of the responsibility regarding this problem, and which as I said right here last year [1842nd meeting], is anxious to see the Organization become universal, will not spare its encouragement and support for the efforts the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany intends to make in order to -come to such an agreement soon, with all the consequences that this would, I believe, entail for the United Nations.
64.	From then it will only be a matter of organizing the relations between European States in such a way that the alliances, as long as they are held necessary, do not take the form of blocs turned in upon themselves, that for each country the right to belong to one alliance or to belong to none will be respected, as well as the right to territorial integrity, the right to sovereignty with all the accompanying prerogatives, the right to be exempt from all forms of pressure, from wherever it comes, from all interference or external attempt at interference. One of the tasks of the conference on security and co-operation in Europe will be to define these rules with the greatest precision and to ensure that their binding force is clearly understood. At stake is the confirmation of a detente which-I purposely repeat myself-is based on respect for and development of national independence, through free co-operation, a detente which, in a continent so rich in possibilities-for the best and for the worst-means both progress and peace.
65.	In bringing up the universality of our Organization a moment ago, I was thinking of Asia, for I see there something which causes great hope, great fear and great impatience.
66.	The hope springs from the awareness that, as France has always hoped, the People's Republic of China and the Unites States of America have entered into a necessary and difficult undertaking whose effects, we strongly feel, will have repercussions on international relations in their entirety. Doubtless the process will be long. But if, as I am convinced, it is not directed against anyone, it will not fail to serve the cause of detente and peace in that area as well as beyond. Will we then finally see the completion, this year, of the debate on the question of China which our Assembly has continued for too long? Logic and realism would point this way, for although it is said that all roads lead to Rome, there is only one, as far as I have been informed, that leads from Peking to New York. No stratagem can change this, any more than it is possible to make our Charter say something it does not say.
67.	Great fear also. How can one not feel it in the face of the horrible drama 'which has already caused one of the most tragic exoduses in modern times and which anyone feels is perhaps only the prelude to more terrible sufferings still to come? Of course, the response the international community gave to the appeal launched by the Secretary-
General for those unfortunate people of East Pakistan shows that the voice of U Thant was not sounded in vain. But if the wrong is not righted at the root, will the flow of people stop? And will it be possible to reverse the flow? We must hope that the wisdom and generosity of some people will respond to the moderation of others and that a political and constitutional solution based on the consent of the Pakistani people will make it possible to come out of the crisis; for, if the tension is not relieved soon, we shall have to expect tragic consequences for peace in Pakistan and in the subcontinent as a whole.
68.	Lastly, great impatience. Impatience caused by the absence of any progress in settling the Indo-Chinese conflict. However, new proposals have recently been advanced. Could they not be discussed? This question, as the Assembly has surely understood, is actually a wish. I have three reasons for making it: my Government is the host for the Paris Conference; it has, for the people of Indo-China, a friendship which it is always ready to express: it believes, lastly, as we all do, that the only lasting solution to this long-drawn-out tragedy is one which will ensure the independence of each State in South-East Asia, a zone which, after so much suffering is yearning at last for peace and neutrality, sheltered from the competition of all the major Powers.
69.	The same moral -if not the same formula- is applicable to the Middle East, with one basic difference however. Here the responsibility of the United Nations is directly committed. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) will be four years old in a few weeks. Will we spend this anniversary in silence? Will it be for us a time to draw up a report of our lack of success? We are not about to be limited to this alternative! Once again, faithful to our maxim, we will not confuse the means with the end. There is, on the one hand, the cease-fire, for which we can never be thankful enough, if only out of horror for the bloodshed though we see how inevitably precarious it is. There is, on the other hand, .the object of the cease-fire, which can and must be only the mutually accepted implementation of the resolution, that is, evacuation of the occupied territories in exchange for guarantees of real peace. Also, we must be grateful to the United Kingdom and its Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, for having warned us against a certain thinking pattern from which we may soon be painfully awakened. We have two good reasons for fearing and refusing to let time run out: elementary prudence and, above all, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Observing our impasse, Africa responded. I wish here to pay tribute to its decision. To the four Heads of State who will make contact with the parties concerned  Presidents Senghor, Ahidjo, Mobutu and Gowan France offers its warmest wishes.
70.	However, the fears and the hopes of the international community as well as the latter's determination for a peaceful settlement must all be expressed, and this can only be done here. Our appeal last year was heeded. Mr. Jarring was able to resume his mission within the desired time- limit. Our hopes, alas, were quickly dashed. Without the required answer, dialog could not begin. Without unanimous determination, the permanent members of the Security Council has so far not been able to formulate their recommendations for a settlement or make known as agreement whose persuasive effect could be decisive. So here we are again faced with the same alternative: either the Assembly speaks out or the international community is doomed to silence. We should lose our raison d'etre if we did not opt for the first choice. The voice of the General Assembly is thus to be heard: with moderation, equity and firmness. May its appeal inspire in all those who carry more direct responsibilities in this sad affair, the desire to act together so that peace can be established-a peace whose durability is guaranteed by respect for justice.
71.	Is it futile to hope that 12 months after having celebrated the foundation of the United Nations we might, on the occasion of this session of the General Assembly, make a new start in some way? Actually, everything prompts us to do this, above all this striking but necessary observation: we have entered a new era. When we compare the world of 1971 with the post-war world or with what was called the "cold-war" era, we see clearly that the dissimilarities far outweigh the similarities: no continent is invulnerable any more; no ideology is sufficient any more to guarantee the monolithism of all the countries which adhere to it; no nation can be subjected to dependence any more.
72.	These changes point to simple and fruitful guidelines: on the one hand, the world community lives and prospers only through national entities-that is, organized, sovereign and ultimately equal nations. On the other hand, national independence is meaningful and final only through its contributions to the community task. The conference of the non-aligned countries in Lusaka  was correct in taking this principle as its motto: "Unity in diversity." General de Gaulle was no less far-sighted almost 30 years ago when he said to us in a voice we shall never hear again:
"Henceforth there cannot be even the slightest connexion between independence and isolation; no State can maintain itself or, still less, develop without support and help."
73.	Given those two rules, is it possible to construct a world where there would be more solidarity and more security? Europe torn asunder for so long has now the best chance of proving the reverse. As we have seen, the union of Western Europe and detente in international relations in Europe as a whole have gone hand in hand. The year 1972 should see both the summit conference, which was proposed by Georges Pompidou on behalf of France and which will strengthen the solidarity of 250 million Europeans, and also the first conference on the security and co-operation of all Europeans.
74.	Yet co-operation, the guarantee of security, -can. neither stop at the frontiers of Europe, nor do without justice. Recently, before the Conference of the InterParliamentary Union, the President of the French Republic termed racism-of which apartheid is only one manifestation-the "scourge of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the most distressing form of.man's scorn for man". But the threats and the violence which cause millions of human beings to flee their homes, extreme poverty and
hunger, are no less incompatible with the dignity, and indeed the very mission, of man.
75.	May I add that those men whose magnificent life's work is to keep the collective conscience alerted by the pen or by the word have never been more necessary; never, consequently, has the protection of journalists on dangerous missions been more pressing or more urgent. Of course, there are countries where industrial civilization has developed in such a way that the public wonders about the effects and about the very goals of this civilization, awed as it is by the scope of the resulting difficulties and disorders: destruction of the natural environment, pollution, moral and social crises chiefly affecting the young. In these countries the idea of economic growth is sometimes called into question.
76.	This obviously does not apply to the majority. The countries of the world, for the most part, strive to ensure that their populations have the basic requirements and that the opportunities for what is too often difficult and precarious progress are preserved.
77.	Before concluding it would be well to re-emphasize the obligations of the industrialized nations for in our hearts we know that the success of our efforts does not depend on any arrangement or mechanical adjustment of our institutions-even though improvements in means and procedures are welcome. We must above all imbue our undertakings with more soul and more action.
78.	Today, new and inspiring horizons are being spread before our weary, burdened nations and the impatient youth of the world, who are astonished at our quarrels and are already tempted to break rank. Away with hegemonies, therefore and the thirst for power and super-power.
79.	The world has grown. It offers our ambitions immense, still little-explored and under-exploited fields, such as space, the sea, and the sea-bed, which science technology are continually opening up.
80.	May these new prospects help us liquidate the sequels of past conflicts and overcome the crises which some day will seem quite petty.
81.	May this "shock of the future" urge us to move on towards tomorrow together-all together.

79.	Mr. President, I should like in the beginning to join with those of my colleagues who have spoken in saying how happy I am that we meet under your guidance and to express my full confidence that you will steer us with complete success through the many difficult problems which face us. I am happy, too, that the honor which is done to you is reflected on your country, Indonesia, with which we have and still maintain the closest and most friendly relations.
80.	I have found myself on this platform on a number of occasions compelled to call attention to a feature of international life which has plagued for far too long the lives of ordinary men and women. It is in short the abuse of the function of politics and diplomacy by what I may call the cult of confrontation and the denial of dialog. To promote dialog is the essential function of this Organization, and, indeed, it is implicit in the very name "United Nations". So it is here, above all, that we should show concern at a development that threatens to drag civilization backwards, down the-road to violence.
81.	Confrontation may develop as an internal problem, as the distinguished Foreign Minister of Canada has just reminded us. I speak today from experience.
82.	In Northern Ireland a terrifying manifestation of the old danger of religious confrontation has reappeared, complicated in this case by other political and social problems.
83.	All through history, in every corner of the world, religion has been the reason or excuse for wars which caught up peoples in their toils and left a trail of misery for ordinary people behind. In the last century or two dogmatic political ideology has supplanted it. But the danger is the same and in fact as we survey the world's scene it is greater than ever. With the rapid communication of ideas, the sophisticated propaganda, these divisions can be exploited^ and exploited on a vast scale. Millions-and we see this every day when we look at the modern means of communication are duped into adopting the prejudices of the few even though they have little or no idea what the confrontation is about. The way is thus open for the anarchist who believes in revolution and sees nothing beyond his nose and no formation of society beyond that; he believes in revolution by destruction. The way is open, too, for the terrorist who wishes to enforce one point of view and rejects compromise and reason.
84.	In the unhappy situation which exists today in one part of the United Kingdom, such people care nothing for the beliefs and legitimate views of Roman Catholics or Protestants. Their snipers and bombs and land-mines are intended to bring about the total disintegration of society. They are able to exploit the fears and prejudices of others, to intimidate witnesses and even to stir up children to destroy, to throw fire-bombs and to harass forces whose only task is to keep the peace.
85.	I illustrate my theme with this example because our experience of it is first-hand. And though it is our own internal problem in Britain, and it is not always possible so easily to compare internal and international confrontations, the lesson to be drawn is surely universal, It has application to every one of the intractable international problems which face us in this Organization. Each of us has the means to redress legitimate grievances within our own community; that is what gives u& the right to insist that violence within the borders of our State shall not be used. But international confrontations cannot be so easily resolved.
86.	We have not yet succeeded in providing effective remedies for international wrongs. Peace-making is at a discount because we have no means to impose solutions, and a tiny minority interest, therefore, which is interested in confusion can thwart the majority will. I think we are all familiar with the perennial agenda of problems before the international community, situations that have threatened peace in the past and situations that could do so in future. I do not underrate for one moment the difficulty when the parties believe that their vital interests in security, or even their survival, are at stake. But I think the evidence must be-and it has accumulated in these last few dangerous years that time does not resolve many of these confrontations. On the contrary, time works for the anarchist. Sooner or later, uncompromising confrontation leads to violence; neighbors who will not live together will one day fight together. When intransigence escalates into violence the anarchist will find his opportunity and the innocent will be drawn in and will suffer and will die.
87.	I remember last year on this platform, speaking in the context of hijacking of aircraft, I drew attention then to this danger of anarchy-anarchy superseding the law of nations and with it the inherent challenge to all governmental authority. For us to face the fundamental dangers of condoning those who take the law into their own hands I said:
"We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down ... even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice" [1848th meeting, paras. 128429],
88.	Last year's General Assembly resolution on aerial hijacking [resolution 2645 (XXV)] and the subsequent Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft,  which my Government has signed and will shortly ratify, have brought encouraging progress in this particular field. Last week my Government also signed the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.  I hope that as many nations as possible will sign and ratify both those Conventions so that this particular form of anarchy can be stopped. It may be modest progress, when we survey the whole field, but it is some progress.
89.	This year my plea goes wider. It is that in every case where there is international confrontation, existing or threatening, a conscious and urgent effort should be made by all the parties engaged, talking each situation one by one, to achieve a modus vivendi before the stage of open violence is reached, before the anarchist, armed with all the modern techniques of terror, infiltrates and takes charge and levies his fatal toll on society and on the law. This obligation lies plainly on each and all of us. But I think the effort • must first and foremost be made within the framework of the United Nations. Our Charter has equipped us with a whole range of remedies for these situations. There are the traditional diplomatic tools of mediation, conciliation and inquiry. If these fail us we are bound by the Charter to seek other peaceful means, and it provides new powers to investigate and to recommend.
90.	I think if we are honest with ourselves in this Organization we must admit that we have failed to make full use of this potential. Our Secretary-General-whose coming retirement deprives us of a devoted and wise counselor has lately given us a timely reminder of the true character of his role as a peace-maker as envisaged by the Charter. We have not allowed him or his predecessors to realize that capacity to the full. He has also made recently an important comment on the influence of this Assembly in peace-making. He said:
.. the majority must make it plain that they will listen to both sides of a case and not only to the larger faction. The majority must prove that they will seek a realistic way out of difficulties rather than resort to condemnations or threats" [A/8401jAdd. 1, para. 95].
I feel that he is right; but we have not taken those words of his seriously enough as yet. Too often in this Assembly and in the Security Council undisguised propaganda and the search for tactical advantages by this or that group block efforts to reach a just and a comprehensive solution of a problem.
91.	But until we can perfect the remedies which the United Nations offers I must also address this plea concerning confrontation to those who find themselves at this moment in direct and dangerous dispute. At this time of day challenge and confrontation are-to put it in plain language-just too dangerous. Compromise may be dull, but it is the sole recipe for peace and, with patience, it can usually-1 am tempted to say always-be had in honor.
92.	The confrontation which today carries the greatest risk of war is that between Israel and the Arab States. It is one which could draw into the lines of antagonism the most powerful countries in the world.
93.	A whole generation has matured in the Middle East in the shadow of war. A generation on the one side has grown up as homeless refugees; a generation on the other ride has been brought up in the fear of being swept by force into the sea. Violence and counter-violence have been the order of the day; and war has been and remains very near. And that war-so great has been the escalation of armament in the area in recent years-would be fought with modern weapons amply reinforced by the greatest Power.
94.	This dispute is concerned with the most emotional of all issues: the security, and therefore the life, of those who confront each other. The Arabs are totally convinced that the Israelis want to expand their territory at the Arabs' expense, and Israel is convinced that the Arabs want to encircle and destroy it.
95.	In such circumstances, what can others, or the United Nations, do? For unless action is taken, that war will come, I take it that we are resolved, in so far as we can influence events in this United Nations, that on this issue there should be no war. It would be catastrophic. We have, in fact, taken one positive step to help to avert it. Few can doubt that Security Council resolution 242 (1967), although not perfect, contains the essential ingredients of a peaceful settlement. I know it will be tempting to try to change that resolution for another. I consider, myself-I think that perhaps the great majority here would be with me-that it is the only resolution upon which we can count to command substantial support in this Assembly and in this Organization.
96.	We have, too, in the context of trying to find a solution to this problem, within the grouping of the four Powers, indicated a readiness to guarantee the terms of a settlement between the parties. That is not a task which any of us particularly relishes, but where distrust has run so deep for so long, we must take risks, and it may well be the only way to build the confidence which will lead to a permanent peace, taken together with, of course, measures for demilitarization and for the placing of United Nations personnel in evacuated areas.
97.	But if war is to be avoided, those who are in confrontation must actively help to promote a dialog. The main ingredients of peace are known, and I will not rehearse them. On the one hand practical proposals have been put forward which would satisfy the Arab desire for Israeli withdrawal, and these are contained in Security Council resolution 242 (1967); on the other hand, there are ways and means of meeting the legitimate Israel need for permanent physical security. I will not debate the particular possibilities here in a program of peace-making in this dispute, but I will say this, and positively: that, unless a mechanism of dialog can be established, sooner or later-and maybe sooner than later-the fighting will start again.
98.	Confidence can only be established in this case through dialog: here an interim arrangement providing for phased withdrawal and the opening of the Suez Canal, with a link to the next and final stage of withdrawal, could serve to build confidence and to prove to the parties on the ground that there is more to be gained by dialog and coexistence than by war. I still believe that Mr. Jarring has a crucial role to yiin this process of establishing contact. But whoever stages this dialog, the tempo of it must be quicker than it has been until now, and it must be at closer range. When there is distrust between the parties of this depth and scope, it cannot be removed by long-distance correspondence, and the onus of adopting dialog must rest with those who now confront each other in arms. It is for us to help them to find the way to do it and I emphasize again that the time is short. This is a case where dialog must supplant confrontation.
99.	In spite of the experience of wars in Europe and the Middle East, new confrontations loom. In Asia the world watches the frontiers of India and Pakistan with increasing anxiety. India, by reason of civil disturbance in Pakistan, has been faced with a problem of refugees which distorts its economy and stretches its resources to the limit, and beyond. It has been valiant and resilient in meeting this burden. It has rightly asked for international help. Much has been given through this Organization, but we shall need to mobilize a lot more help in cash and kind than we have yet done.
100.	There is now an added danger of famine in the months to come in East Pakistan, arising mainly from a break-down in communications following civil strife. Relief will be needed here too on a massive scale. I hope that we are all conscious of an obligation to help, and to help urgently, because there could be no greater tragedy for the world-even including that in the Middle East-than that India and Pakistan should find themselves unwillingly at war. The United Kingdom has given £8 million to relief in India and £1 million io East Pakistan, and we are ready now to add substantially to that. Relief is beyond the capacity of Pakistan. Therefore, the machinery of the United Nations on the ground must be strengthened, and if it is to. be adequate to the task of recreating the necessary network of communications, then action must be taken to meet local conditions of famine and to meet them in time.
101.	Again, there is not much time, for recently this problem between India and Pakistan has assumed a new and appalling dimension. Guerrilla warfare and sabotage are adding to the fear and are hampering rescue. I am not sure if we yet understand the scale of the guerrilla warfare in that area; but the operations of the guerrillas, taking advantage of this situation, could create another panic in East Pakistan and start another avalanche mass movement of population from Pakistan into India. So this situation could run both countries unwillingly into war,
102.	Reconstruction of the Constitution of Pakistan must be an internal matter for the people of Pakistan. But the risks to peace, if they fail in that reconstruction, are appealing, and the truth of the matter is that the danger will be finally averted only when there is a return to civil government in East Pakistan which gives confidence to all Pakistanis to stay at home, to return home, and to develop their country in peace. Meanwhile, let the United Nations do the humanitarian work. It must never be said of the politicians that we met here and argued about who was to distribute food while millions of innocent people starved.
103.	In Africa we see the evil of apartheid and the frustration of many at its continued existence. Frustration and impatience can lead to violence. And as we have seen so often that violence, from which the innocent suffer, provokes counter-measures, and the lines of war thus become more sharply drawn.
104.	I am glad to see that, in spite of the deep feelings aroused by apartheid, which we share, the urge to dialog grows and it is being to some extent put into practice. There in Africa, as elsewhere, neighbors have no choice but to live side by side; and ultimately dialog must be resumed and must take charge.
105.	In the Far East, we have seen that China has for too long isolated itself from the world community. That had its dangers. When it plays its full part here in New York, a mighty voice will be added to our counsels and a major step will have been taken towards the true representation here of the balance of world power and world opinion, from which consensus can be hammered out, however painful at. times that process may be. With all the difficulties, I think the majority here recognizes that the future lies, not in isolation, not in confrontation or in ostracism, but in dialog.
106.	I hope that in Western Europe after centuries of conflict we have learn our lesson. The confrontation of Germany and France which nearly destroyed civilized life on our continent was ended because two great nations and two great statesmen were willing to take a risk, to pull down the historic barriers between them and peaceful coexistence. Those two great statesmen in particular took a risk with public opinion.
107.	On that essential political foundation is being built !ready the integrating Community of th? Six, the
European Economic Community. The United Kingdom and other European countries will, we hope, soon expand the Community to one of ten. That should usher in a new era of economic expansion and greatly enhance the prospects for peace. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Schumann, yesterday, in one of his most felicitous phrases, described that enlarged community as a "community of hope" [1942nd meeting, para. 50}. I would underline that forecast. That Community is already committed, by reason of the many special provisions for territories once connected with France and the United Kingdom, to be outward-looking. It exists to encourage trade, and that is the healthiest form of assistance,
108.	Nevertheless, aid from the developed to the under-developed countries is a vital need, and my country and the Community recognize their duty in this. I am glad to be able to announce today that my Government has decided to increase its contribution to the United Nations Development Program. In 1972 to $19,2 Million, an Increase of one third, We had also made an advance pledge of $50 million to the International Development Association, to remedy the failure of the third replenishment this summer. Yesterday in Washington we announced that wo were raising this to $103,680,000, which completes our first year's contribution to that replenishment. Wo hope In this way not only to enable the International Development Association to continue its work but to encourage others to take action also.
109.	There is nothing we in Western Europe should till like better than closer economic and political relations with the countries of Eastern Europe. It was the policy of the Federal Republic of Germany again with a German statesman taking a risk to seek accord there, and thus open the way to East'West agreements, In particular agreement to ease the conditions of life for the people of West Berlin. Once that has been achieved, it should be possible to prepare a conference on the security of Europe, If that is to have any chance of success, each country must demonstrate that it respects the security of others; that is a .sine qua non of cooperation* and that alone can give confidence. With confidence we can do much; without It we can do very little. If this essential respect for one's neighbor Is shown, then in Europe we shall be embarking on a (UHvntv which is embracing and on which better and more enduring relations can be built. The trend, then, in Europe is to turn away from confrontation to detente,
110.	I have been concerned today to stress the responsibility we all bear to find the peaceful way out of our difficulties and differences. 1 believe that the first essential is to make a conscious effort to get back to a climate of good-neighborliness, with those with whom we disagree as well as with our friends.
111.	We have been exhorted to do more about last year's Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)J. I have no quarrel with that; but general declarations are of no avail unless our basic approach is the right one. Surely the right approach is laid down quite specifically in the Preamble to our Charter, where we declare that we are determined "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". "Tolerance" is a word that is all too seldom heard today in these halls. I suggest that it is as Important now as it was in 1945, when the Charter was drafted. When differences and disputes nevertheless arise, neither side can escape the duty of looking to negotiation to secure the peace. Nor can we collectively escape the duty of overcoming the obstacles which stand in the way of the United Nations making an effective intervention before dispute hardens into confrontation and confrontation into conflict.
112.	Peace-keeping is the center of the problem, because so often peace cannot be made until all concerned are confident that it will be kept. The Charter foresaw the Deed. Hie machinery exists and it is available for our use. What has been lacking and I hope is not now lacking is the w21 to use it or to support it.
113, There is even, I regret to say, at the present time one operation of peace-keeping, established by the Security
Council, that Is Involved in a serious financial shortfall. I refer to the endeavor that has successfully maintained the peace For more than seven years In Cyprus and consequently in that part of the Mediterranean. There is now a deficit of up to $70 million, half of which relates to former peacekeeping accounts, and this deficit Is growing every year, Therefore I share the Secretary-General's view that unless a remedy Is found In the very near future It will no longer be possible for us to fulfill the basic purpose and objective of the Charter,
114.	We must not slide backwards in peace-keeping, Every symptom of division In the international field urges us to do better, So let us each and all bend our minds to positive peace-making and positive peace-keeping, Let us prove it in each case where the danger of confrontation raises its stubborn head,
115.	To break the present stalemate In a number of the confrontations will not solve the problems of the world; but we can In this Assembly give the world a sharper instrument for peace, That will narrow the area for the anarchist and his operations and broaden the rule of law.




38.	Mr. President, on behalf of the people of India, we offer you our warmest congratulations on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly. This is a fitting tribute to your achievements as the Foreign Minister of Indonesia and to your interest in the political and economic problems of the world. As a fellow Asian. I take particular pride in your elevation to this high office. Indonesia and India have worked together in so many fields since we both achieved
our independence, and we have so much in common through history and geography, that I need hardly assure you of our fullest co-operation in the discharge of your responsibilities.
39.	We should also like to compliment our outgoing President, Mr. Edvard Hambro of Norway, for the skill, independence and patience with which he guided our deliberations and for his stewardship of the commemorative session last year. The world may not care for nor long remember the millions of words we utter here, but the important documents which we adopted last year will certainly guide and inspire us in our work for years to come. For this achievement much of the credit must go to Mr. Hambro.
40.	During the year that has just passed, our Secretary- General, U Thant, has once again manifested his devotion to the cause of world peace by his scrupulous regard for the purposes and principles of the Charter and by his indefatigable efforts to improve our Organization in all possible ways. We can still hope that his decision to relinquish this rewarding, though onerous, office is not final. The Secretary-General of this Organization has always to be a person of the highest caliber, sensitive to the changing needs of the world situation and fully prepared to meet the administrative requirements of an ever-growing institution. He should also be able to contribute to the creation of conditions in which all nations, big or small, can live in peace and friendship and work in their own ways for their national progress and prosperity.
41.	We extend our special welcome to the three new Members that joined us a few days ago: Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar. We look forward to working in the closest co-operation with these new Members, with which we have had long and friendly association in several spheres. Their entry into the United Nations should increase the value of our debates and the strength of our decisions.
42.	One of the most important issues that we hope will be settled during this session is the question of the rightful representation of China in this Organization. There is only one China; there is only one Chinese seat, and only the Government of the People's Republic of China is entitled to occupy it in the United Nations. We have always been convinced that the presence of the People's Republic of China will make this Organization more effective. Too long have we postponed a realistic decision on this issue; let us not procrastinate any further.
43.	We have also repeatedly pleaded for universality of representation in the United Nations and we believe that the entry of the divided nations into our Organization would help in the reduction and removal of tensions. They could also contribute effectively to our work in many other fields.
44.	For India, the year 1971 opened with many promises. The economy was poised for a high rate of growth. In March we had our general elections. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was returned to power with an overwhelming majority. Her success reflected the solid support of our people for a concerted program for socio-economic progress. Externally we had tried to establish warmer
relations with all countries, particularly with our neighbors. The fact that Pakistan had a little earlier, in December 1970, held the first general elections it had ever held was welcomed in India. The introduction of a democratic process in Pakistan would, we had hoped, bring about improved relations with this important neighbor of ours. Yet the entire picture was changed overnight when the events in the eastern wing of Pakistan took a catastrophic course. An international problem of utmost gravity and concern was created. Several Governments and international authorities have recognized the true character of this problem. The Secretary-General, U Thant, not only has brought the situation to the attention of the members of the Security Council but has included his views in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [Al8401/Add.l]. The Assembly has already heard the concern which the outgoing President, Mr. Hambro, expressed in his speech on 21 September [1934th meeting].
45.	By the middle of April it had become clear that Pakistan had no intention of abandoning its military methods and that we would be faced with an unprecedented flow of Pakistani refugees into our country. Refugee camps had to be speedily organized, and the systematic and detailed registration of the large number of foreigners had to be undertaken. Ration cards and temporary permits for stay in India had to be issued, transport and food supplies had to be organized and medical attention had to be provided. These relief measures could, however, meet only a fraction of the needs of the refugees. We asked the international community for help, and although the response to the Secretary-General's appeal has been warm, it is but a very small part of what is actually needed. By far the largest contribution towards the upkeep of the refugees has had to be made by India from its badly needed resources. We are sheltering and looking after the refugees on behalf of the international community. We simply do not have the capacity and the resources to bear this burden. While we gave them-on purely humanitarian grounds- shelter and refuge when they were fleeing for their lives, we have made it repeatedly clear that they are with us only temporarily and must return home. This has been accepted and endorsed by the world community. It has been impossible to make any firm estimates of what it would cost us in the coming months, but on the basis of the present figure the total cost may well be more than $800 million by the end of next March.
46.	The consequences of this massive influx-some have called it a civilian invasion-of refugees into India cannot be determined in terms of money alone. We are facing grave social, economic and political consequences. In the areas where the refugees are now living in difficult conditions in comps, all of our schools have had to be closed to find shelter for them. All of our hospitals in these areas have had to tend to the urgent need of the refugees rather than to the normal needs of the local inhabitants. Prices are rising as a result of a higher demand for essential commodities. Wages are falling. Crimes of various kinds are on the increase. Local friction and tensions are not unknown. Our local administration has had to be diverted to the work of looking after the refugees, and that in turn has further affected adversely all of our development projects. The fear of epidemics is ever present, even though the outbreak of cholera has been controlled. 
47.	The refugees must go back. The question simply is; How? Can anyone reasonably expect them to go back when thousands and thousands are daily fleeing from the same area? Pointless declarations and exhortations will not make them go back. On 21 May the President of Pakistan, Mr. Yahya Khan, called upon the refugees to go back; yet, since then, more than 5 million more have come into India. They will go back only when they are sure themselves that they can live in their own homeland in safety and freedom, when they are allowed to work as they wish, and when they are assured that their properties will be returned, their jobs restored and their daily lives not interfered with.
48.	To appreciate and understand the background to this unprecedented influx, it is necessary to recall the conditions prevailing in East Pakistan throughout Pakistan's existence. Pakistan is a unique country, in the sense that two parts of it are separated by a distance of 1,000 miles of Indian territory. The majority of the people-75 million- live in the East, and the West has a total population of less than 60 million. None the less, political, military and economic power was concentrated in the West, while the East continued to produce basic raw materials, such as jute and tea, and provided the largest source of foreign exchange for Pakistan. Even the Government of Pakistan has acknowledged that persistent discrimination and exploitation of East Pakistan by West Pakistan has taken place ever since the country became independent.
49.	Just to give one example, in the entire civil service and in the armed forces of Pakistan the Bengalis did not have a share exceeding 10 per cent. The East Pakistanis continued to protest and agitate against that discrimination and exploitation, and, for want of any effective remedy, their grievances accumulated.
50.	However, after the fall of President Ayub Khan in the middle of 1969 a new situation arose. Another General- President Yahya Khan-took over, and declared that he would hold general elections for the first time, on adult franchise with representation to both wings, proportionate to their population. For the first time the people of Pakistan saw in that democratic process a possible rectification of the injustices from which East Pakistan had suffered all those years.
51.	The elections were held in December 1970, after being postponed twice. The results of the elections were greeted in Pakistan as a success of democracy, as indeed they were. The broad results of the elections are worth noting. Out of a total of 313 seats, 169 had been allotted to East Pakistan. Of those 169 seats, the Awami League, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, won as many as 167. Winning 98 per cent of the seats in East Pakistan, Mujibur Rahman gained an absolute majority in the National Assembly and would, in normal circumstances, have been in a position to form the Government and become the Prime Minister of Pakistan. For the elections, the Awami League had adopted a six-point program to obtain specifically a greater degree of autonomy for East Pakistan with a view to putting an end to discrimination and exploitation.
I do not think the comment made by the representative of Pakistan calls for serious notice. What he says is that the Indian Foreign Minister is describing what is known to others. Then, certainly, there can be no grounds for a point of order if one is describing something which is known to others.
56.	What I am trying to give this august Assembly is an account of the circumstances that led to that unprecedented influx of 9 million refugees into Indian territory. Members must have noticed that the Secretary-General, in the introduction to his annual report on the activities of the United Nations, has devoted as many as 15 paragraphs, covering several pages, to highlighting, in a very lucid manner the various aspects-humanitarian and political-of the problem of the influx of the refugees f A/8401IAdd.l, paras. 177-179/.
57.	It is noteworthy also that the representative of Pakistan did not care to point out, as is customary in such cases, the particular provision, either in the Charter or in the rules of procedure, under which he was raising his point of order. I am not asking this august United Nations General Assembly to intervene-if he had Article 2, paragraph 7, in mind. I am saying that this is a problem, unprecedented in history, in which 9 million refugees have crossed over into Indian territory, and I am asking: Is the international community interested in knowing what the root-cause of that is, and what should be the direction in which the efforts of the international community should be directed to find a satisfactory solution of this tragic problem? If I may say so, to treat this matter by a point of order in a light-hearted manner is inconsistent with the international community's responsibilities: responsibilities first to find out and analyze what are the root-causes of these most tragic happenings in that part of the world and then to direct its attention to finding a satisfactory solution. I thought that, while dealing with a problem of such magnitude, this Assembly would be interested in knowing the relevant facts of the situation, so that it might be properly appreciated, and attention might be directed to finding a satisfactory solution.
58.	I am the last person, I would assure the Assembly, to interfere in the internal affairs of another country, but to give a description of the circumstances which led to the uprooting of 9 million people is certainly neither an interference in any other country's internal affairs nor any comment on what is happening in the country itself. One has to understand properly the circumstances of the
situation in order to come to the right conclusion. Therefore, while appreciating the anxiety of the representative of Pakistan, I have carefully avoided referring in any manner to matters which might be barred either by any provisions of the Charter or by any rules of procedure. If anything, we should concentrate on the basic problems, rather than become involved in a procedural debate which is pointless.
59.	Coming to the facts of the situation, I was referring to the elections that took place in Pakistan, giving Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the Awami League a majority of 167 out of 169 seats and thus giving him an absolute majority in the National Assembly of Pakistan. For the elections, the Awami League adopted a six-point program to obtain specifically a greater degree of autonomy for East Pakistan with a view to putting an end to discrimination and exploitation. Apparently, the results of the election so startled the rulers of Pakistan that they saw in them a risk to their economic, military and political domination over ' the eastern wing; this explains their swift action and their desire to continue military rule. So, on the fateful night of 25/26 March, the armed forces set out to crush the verdict of the 75 million Bengalis.
I am sorry that the representative of Pakistan in his wisdom has chosen this path of raising objections after every sentence or after every paragraph of my speech before this Assembly. I am not discussing the internal affairs of Pakistan and I am not interested in the internal affairs of Pakistan; but it would be a truism to say that the conduct of internal affairs by any country, if it results in the uprooting of 9 million people who cross over to the adjoining territory, should be a matter of concern to the international community, which
should be concerned about the circumstances that created a situation in which the conduct of internal affairs in that country compelled 9 million people over a period of a little more than six months to cross into the territory of India. Now, if a strict interpretation were accepted under which conditions in Pakistan could not be mentioned, then we would virtually come to the ridiculous position that a refugee who left his village in East Pakistan should not be described and the conditions prevailing in that part should not be taken note of and only when he crossed into Indian territory should we start mentioning him. I am sure that that would be neither the correct spirit nor the correct manner in which we should deal with such serious matters, I am fully conscious of and have regard for the principle of coexistence. We are not interested in whether there is a presidential system or a military system or a military rule in Pakistan. That is entirely its concern. We have learned to live in a spirit of coexistence with whatever may be the social or economic system prevailing in any part of the world, and this applies particularly to our neighbors. But when, while dealing with their own affairs, within what they describe as domestic matters, they create a situation where 9 million people are shoved on to us, then surely the international community would like to know the circumstances in which these people have left their country. They have not left their country of Pakistan as tourists to do sightseeing in India. This is a very serious matter. Therefore we should view this problem in the proper perspective. The international community will never be able to understand unless it knows the circumstances that prevail in that unfortunate country, where 9 million people, its own citizens, had to cross and come over to Indian territory. I am not interested in its internal set-up, but I am interested in putting across to the international community the circumstances which led to the creation of conditions that compelled these unfortunate men, women and children to leave their homes and hearths.
64.	On the fateful night of 25/26 March, the armed forces set out to crush the verdict of the 75 million Bengalis. However, before the army was given the signal to let loose a reign of terror, protracted negotiations started; in the meantime the strength of the armed forces in East Bengal was considerably increased. 
The suggestion made by the representative of Saudi Arabia -- who perhaps has a longer association with the United Nations than almost any one of us-has been listened to by me with great care. I was thinking that perhaps he had some point of order which came in the way of my proceeding with my speech, but instead of that, I find that he has appealed to me and placed me in the embarrassing position of being called upon to make my comment upon his appeal. I would appeal to him, and also to other representatives, to judge for themselves who is responsible for creating an atmosphere of tension. We have the accepted procedure that any points which might be mentioned by any leader of a delegation can be replied to substantively and also that another viewpoint can be presented before this august Assembly. But instead of adopting that usual procedure, efforts have been made to obstruct me when I am actually delivering my speech before the Assembly.
71.	The situation is such that I would be failing in my < duty if I were to respond much as I would like to-to the appeal made by the representative of Saudi Arabia. I owe it not only to my country, I owe it not only to the 9 million refugees, but, I believe, I owe it to the international community to tell them these things in the frankest possible manner, while trying always to remain within the procedure and the provisions of the Charter in making my presentation.
72.	I believe I have used my words carefully; I have not indulged in rhetoric, But I am sorry that I shall have to crave the indulgence of this august Assembly, and of you, Mr, President, to permit me to place before you in a dispassionate manner the facts which have led to this unprecedented tragedy. It is not pleasant for me to mention these facts, but the situation is so grave and the consequences that might flow from it so serious that I would be failing in my duty, as I said, not only to my country and to the refugees, but to the international community, if, simply for the sake of preventing objections from being raised, I Were not to proceed with giving the facts to the international community. If the facts are wrong, the representative of Pakistan has the right to make his statement and to say that the particular facts I mention are incorrect. Therefore, I would request him, and also the representative of Saudi Arabia, to permit me to present these facts, which are of the utmost importance in an issue that, I think, has resulted in the most tragic events in recent memory.
73.	What the army did, and is continuing to do, in its massive assault on the civilian population is now well known and I do not wish to take up the time of the assembly in describing the innumerable instances of killings and atrocities. A reign of terror prevailed and still prevails. The leader of the Awami League, Mujibur Rahman, was arrested and is still in prison. He is now being secretly tried in a military court on a charge which carries the death penalty. The freedom of the press and civil liberties were totally suppressed, and the foreign journalists were expelled. The International Red Cross was not allowed to visit the area and all attempts were made, not always successfully, to conceal what was happening in. that part of the world. Killing, raping, burning and looting became widespread. The inevitable consequences followed: the people fled from tenor and violence to India, leaving behind all that they had. Their number rose from less than a million, at the end of April, to nearly 4 million at the end of May, crossed the 6-million mark before June was over, and has been rising steadily ever since. Their number now exceeds 9 million, and the exodus still continues. This is an exodus of refugees unprecedented in history, across any international frontier.
74.	Pakistan’s military action and the snuffing-out of all human rights, and the reign of terror, which still continues, have shocked the conscience of mankind. There is a popular revolt against these actions. Some have fled from the tenor, while others are resisting it as best they can. The hard core of this resistance was provided by thousands of men who had defected from the army and the police and various paramilitary organizations at the time of the -military crackdown. They have been joined in ever-increasing numbers by people of all ages.
75.	The Pakistani authorities have tom up solemn declarations and conventions to which Pakistan had subscribed. Pakistan has desperately tried to divert attention from its outrageous actions. Its actions have made so many serious inroads into much that our Charter stands for that it would indeed be a travesty of international law and a mockery of international justice to suggest that what is involved is an internal issue. It is even less an internal issue when one keeps in mind that other nations are having to support the enormous cost of the massive exodus of Pakistani citizens into India.
76.	Apart from accusing others of their own most unwise and deadly activities, the rulers of Pakistan have taken a number of measures which are no more than eyewash. How unrealistic these measures are can be judged from the impact they have had on the flow of refugees. The 
Resident of Pakistan has from time to time called upon the refugees to go back; yet, the flow continues in ever- increasing numbers into India. A so-called civilian government has been formed in East Pakistan consisting of men who have no representative character whatever and who are mere figureheads, obliged to take orders from their military commanders. An amnesty is proclaimed, but Mujibur Rahman and other elected representatives are at the same time treated and tried as traitors. We witness the strange spectacle in which the party which would have been, by right, the Government of Pakistan, has been banned and disqualified from political activities. Half the elected representatives have been disqualified from sitting in the National Assembly. In our view, the flow of refugees will not stop, nor will the refugees already in India begin to go back, until a political solution acceptable to the elected representatives of the people has been found. Secretary- General U Thant and many other distinguished statesmen, politicians and leaders of public opinion have consistently maintained that the problem is essentially political. As a first step towards a political solution, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the leader of the Awami League, should be set at liberty without delay, and negotiations should be started with him. It has been proved beyond doubt that he alone can speak on behalf of the people of East Bengal. He, and he alone, symbolizes and represents the aspirations and will of the people of East Pakistan. Apart from these actions, which the Pakistanis themselves can take, what can the international community do in these circumstances? The first and foremost action which this Assembly, and all other international organs within or without the United Nations system, can take is to impress on the military regime of Islamabad the fact that force will not succeed and that, therefore, a political settlement between the military regime and the already-elected leaders is essential. We consider it wholly short-sighted to wait until worse crises have arisen. Bilaterally, all Governments can do their utmost to ensure, by whatever means are available to them, that the military regime stops its repression, enters into negotiations with the elected leaders to achieve a political settlement with their consent, and sends the army back to the barracks. Only by these measures will the flow of refugees be stopped and the refugees already in India be able to return home. Our only fault has been that we gave temporary shelter to millions of refugees homeless, food-less, without clothing; sick and aged, men and women, helpless children and dying infants-who were fleeing from terror, many of whom bore marks of recent army brutality. Only by the measures I have suggested can the threat of famine be alleviated and normal conditions restored. If these measures are not taken, and if attempts are made to divert attention by false analysis or wrong accusations, then the prospect is indeed gloomy. We here in this Assembly may argue in a sophisticated manner as long as we like, but those who have been the victims of aggression and who are fleeing from terror and massacre will not have such a tolerant outlook. They will not forgive us or those who did not stand by them in their hour of trial.
77.	It is only natural that I should have devoted some time to an important matter which is uppermost in the minds of most Indians, but we are not insensitive to other important issues that the world has faced during the last year. We believe that the world scene is changing and rearranging itself in a manner which is often difficult to comprehend
and even more difficult to analyze. Whether it is in Europe or Asia, in Africa or in the Americas, several trends are noticeable which can affect our traditional values and even some of the concepts on which the Charter is based.
78.	During the last 12 months there have been many welcome signs of reduction of tensions among the great Powers. The progress in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT], though slow, is an important step forward. The treaty between Poland and the Federal Republic of Germany and the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin    are important landmarks and should lead to a better understanding of the German problem. The greater degree of accommodation now evident will contribute to European peace, progress and prosperity. We congratulate all those whose untiring efforts have resulted in an accord over some of the most difficult issues facing the international community.
79.	At the same time, I must utter a note of caution. The concerns of the nations assembled in this hall are far wider than the preoccupations of the great Powers. One of the basic concepts underlying the setting-up of the United Nations was that in the solution of world problems and in the achievement of the political, social and economic objectives of the human race all sovereign States should have a voice. While talks among the great Powers can on suitable occasions be helpful, the viewpoints of other States, and particularly of the developing countries, must not be ignored. The concept of non-alignment, of which Jawaharlal Nehru was one of the principal exponents, was meant to modify the bipolar view of the world. The relevance and validity of non-alignment are not diminished by the lessening of East-West tensions in some fields.
80.	Indeed, with the lessening of cold-war tensions the importance of non-alignment has become even greater. The issues are no longer so clear-cut and, therefore, the non-aligned countries will .have to examine the ever- changing situations in a much more detailed and comprehensive manner. Decisions can then be based on principles, taking into account ail the factors. It is for those reasons that the Lusaka Declaration  was widely welcomed by many speakers in this Assembly last year. It is also for those reasons that we have found it necessary to continue discussions among the non-aligned countries on all important problems. Such a regular and systematic exchange of views will enable us to come to some agreed conclusions, even at short notice. As this Assembly is aware, in two days the non-aligned group of countries will meet at the Foreign Minister level.
81.	In Asia a new political equation is discernible, with rapid industrialization and economic development in several countries. Not only is a new relationship emerging among the Asian countries themselves, but several outside Powers are working for the establishment of new contacts and relations with Asian countries, including China. India is 
conscious of those developments and is adjusting its own attitude in the context of those important changes.
82.	The agony of the people of Viet-Nam has not yet ceased. Their freedom is still to be achieved, although large-scale warfare and massive slaughter are not so much in evidence. Raids, local fighting and a daily toll in lives continue throughout Viet-Nam. We regret particularly that there has been a recent resumption of bombing in parts of North Viet-Nam. Policies, especially in South Viet-Nam, have not shown any signs of moving towards the goal for which many lives have been sacrificed and for which the people of Viet-Nam have suffered so much. We welcome the United States and other foreign troop withdrawals that have already taken place. We hope that, through negotiations in Paris and elsewhere, the agony of Viet-Nam will be brought to an end without further delay; that United States and other foreign troops will be withdrawn completely by a definite date; and that the people of Viet-Nam will be allowed to decide their own future in accordance with their own wishes, without any outside interference. In that context the seven-point proposals made in Paris appear to us to provide a reasonable basis for a negotiated settlement.
83.	In the Middle East, the lack of progress in the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is creating new tensions. The cease-fire, accepted as a, temporary measure to help the parties negotiate a settlement through Ambassador Jarring, has unfortunately tended to freeze the situation in favor of the aggressor, despite the willingness shown by the Arab countries to go to the farthest limit m meeting their obligations under the above-mentioned resolution. Our own conviction that no country should be allowed to retain foreign territories taken by force of arms remains unshaken, and we would reiterate that this problem will not be solved unless Israel withdraws from the Arab territories which it has occupied since 5 June 1967 and restores the legitimate rights of the Palestinian refugees.
84.	In Latin America, too, new economic and political forces are emerging. Various developments in various States in that continent have proved beyond doubt that the conflict between traditional politics and a growing awareness of national interest is adding new dynamism to the situation. That will no doubt have an impact on international issues.
8$. The result of all those trends and tendencies has been to bestir people to new lines of -flunking and to a new realization that problems of great concern to the world cannot be solved by force. It is in this context that our discussions this year on the question of international peace and security will assume added significance. Such a discussion, by enabling all Member States to express their considered views, will substantially increase the effectiveness of the United Nations,
86.	India pointed out at the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly [1932nd meeting! that post-war developments had amply shown that disputes in the traditional sense are not the only situations which become a threat to international peace and security, the structure of which today is more often than not imperiled by actions which
amount to systematic violations of many other important objectives and principles of the Charter. This Organization must acquire and develop the skill and the strength necessary for dealing effectively with complex problems which have far-reaching consequences.
87.	The Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, adopted last year by the General Assembly [resolution 2734 (XXV)], recognizes the integral link between peace, on the one hand, and disarmament, decolonization and development, on the other. General and complete disarmament under effective international control remains the imperative and most urgent need of our time. We are concerned with the threat to mankind posed by the ever-increasing arms race, by the existing large stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction and by the impending new qualitative advance towards even more devastating nuclear armaments.
88.	We are pleased at the emergence of an agreement on bacteriological weapons as a result of the discussions in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, and we look forward to early steps towards an effective agreement on chemical weapons. We are pleased of course that the United States of America and the Soviet Union continue their discussions in the field of disarmament and that those contacts are helping to lessen suspicion and are creating and improving the atmosphere for negotiations in many other fields. However, the proceedings of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament have not been marked by any significant progress this year and we should consider how to strengthen further the mechanism of the Committee on Disarmament. We could perhaps do so by adopting the suggestion made in that regard by the Secretary-General in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [AI8401/Add.l, para. 52]. It is imperative that China and France participate in the deliberations. India also believes that it would be useful to convene a world disarmament conference, after due preparation, with the participation of all the countries of the world.
89.	The Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy has demonstrated the need to make nuclear energy and technology available to a greater extent to the developing countries of the world. We are convinced of the important contribution that the technology for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can make to the economy and the progress of the developing world.
90.	If the lack of progress towards total disarmament continues to be a threat to peace and security, there are other factors which also contribute to that threat. Colonialism and racialism have taken many forms in recent years, and all the efforts of the United Nations have been unavailing in bringing about the independence of such large and important colonial Territories as Angola, Mozambique, Guinea, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia.
91.	We are gratified at the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on Namibia  and our efforts should be concentrated on concrete steps to be taken in asserting the United Nations authority in Namibia. The liberation movements in other colonial Territories need to be encouraged. We are disappointed that the progress in. these fields has not been significant and we shall, at an appropriate stage, propose steps which can be taken to bring all colonial Territories to independence,
92.	Security and political stability cannot be achieved if the international community does not organize economic co-operation for speedy development in a rational and dynamic way. The International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] was a major step forward, but the developments which have taken place since the Strategy was adopted are causing us some uneasiness. The commitments made in the Strategy are still to be fulfilled, and yet attempts are being made to take advantage of the differences of interests, which undoubtedly exist in the developing countries, to modify this commitment. We hope that these attempts will not succeed, and that, on the one hand, the developing countries will present a united front on their basic needs and, on the other hand, that the developed countries will fulfill to the utmost the obligations they have accepted.
93.	The world today is facing a major economic crisis comparable to the one that arose when sterling went off the gold standard and new trade barriers began to disrupt world trade. Something similar is threatening the system of international trade and payments which had been built up after the Second World War. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development have not between them been able to provide the kind of orderly and balanced growth in world economy which was hoped for. The developing countries, which had very little say at the time of their establishment, have long cherished the feeling that a new look at the articles of these three bodies is called for, if the widening gap between the rich nations and the poor nations is not to grow wider each year, as it has unfortunately done in the last two decades. In the crisis that now confronts them,-some of the most developed nations have also begun to feel that the charters of these institutions do not provide adequate answers to the emerging problems. What we are unhappy about is the attempt to ignore and bypass these institutions and to try to seek solutions to the world's economic problems in a small group of the 10 richest countries. We believe that, while we must reform these institutions, we must not wreck them. Concerted thinking on the ways in which a new dynamism can be imparted to them has to be given in a forum which is truly representative of developed and developing countries alike,
94.	Already some of the measures that have been taken to solve the problems of prosperous nations have created serious problems for the less developed countries. Then- trade is confronted with new obstacles. The inflow of capital so essential to their growth and development, which is well below the target of 1 per cent of the gross national product adopted by the United Nations is in danger of being reduced. Poor countries of the world are victims of measures taken in the name of alleviating the payments crisis of the richest nations in the world, even though they themselves had not contributed to the crisis in any
conceivable manner. Without a concerted and cooperative approach, such progress as was made in the first United Nations Development Decade can easily be wiped out in the Second.
95.	Last year the Assembly gave much time and attention to formulating a just regime on the utilization of the resources of the sea and on the preservation of the human environment. During this year some progress has been made for the solution of these problems, but much more remains to be done. Similarly, on the problem of outer space we have achieved some success, particularly in formulating a draft Convention on Liability for Damage Caused by Objects Launched into Outer Space. We would like to record our appreciation to the United States of America and to the Soviet Union for reaching agreement regarding expanded co-operation towards developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems for the spacecraft of both the nations. We look forward, as a developing country, to increasing benefits from progress in the field of earth resources, surface remote sensing and other connected matters.
96.	I have mentioned all these specific problems in order to take into account the various major factors which are changing the conditions of the world we live in. The United Nations, reflecting all these concerns, has to adjust itself to these changing conditions. Our Charier was drawn up 26 years ago. Our methods of work and the procedure of our debates, as indeed our budget all subjects of separate studies-have to be adjusted and adapted to new demands and conditions. We must maintain a flexible attitude towards these matters and we hope that the present session of the Assembly would, in coming to decisions on substantive problems, keep in mind the need for this adjustment. No organization in this rapidly changing world of ours can hope to face successfully new trends and new developments unless its basic concepts can be modified speedily and effectively. Last year we had a World Youth Assembly. Although the people who attended this Assembly did not achieve any concrete results, they did demonstrate a need for the world Organization to be more responsive to the changing situation.
97.	The Prime Minister of India, while speaking at the last session of the General Assembly [1881st meeting], had referred to the unfinished revolution the completion of which is our common purpose. We have endeavored to fulfill purpose though we may not have succeeded fully in our efforts the world still continues to be in turmoil and to. be subject to natural and man-made disasters and tensions. In such an atmosphere of strife and ferment, the United Nations remains the only hope for States and peoples all over the world. The ideals of the Charter are not static norms to which we rededicate ourselves for form's sake every year. Each year representatives from Member countries assemble here to reaffirm their faith in the objectives and activities of this august Organization. It is strange, therefore, that in spite of these declared commitments, the conscience of mankind finds itself reticent and cautious in face of crises born of violations of the very principles of the Charter, violations which are at times deliberate and calculated. If this Organization is to survive and contribute constructively toward a new world in which the rights of the individual are safe, and his welfare ensured
in a just and honorable environment, it is essential that the United Nations assume a credible image on the basis of tangible activities, The foundations for this purpose were laid during the last commemorative session. It is for all of us now to see if we have the strength to build on these foundations. It is my earnest hope that representatives assembled in this session would give thought to this imperative necessity and act in concert to make this Organization an instrument of their common endeavor to achieve peace, stability and justice all over the world.




60.	 Mr. President, you come to the leadership of the General Assembly at a time when eastern Asia stands in the center of international concern. It is in that region alone that war still rages day by day. It is there that a burden of suffering, unparalleled elsewhere, weighs heavily on the conscience of mankind. And it is to Asia that our eyes will turn when we come to take decisions on the future of this Organization and the principles underlying its structure.
61.	It is right at such a time that an Asian statesman of high capacity and repute should preside over our deliberations. Israel wishes you success and pledges itself to your support. You will be fortified by the high example of your eminent predecessor, Edvard Hambro of Norway, and by the experience and patient skill of the Secretary-General, who is completing a full decade of service to the international cause.
62.	Last year the United Nations marked its twenty-fifth anniversary by an act of celebration. I suggested then that the occasion could have been more wisely used for scrutiny and self-criticism (1851st meeting]. There is a manifest decline in the influence of the General Assembly on the main issues affecting human welfare and destiny. Its resonance has diminished. The central currents of international life and policy flow outside its walls. The frustration arises, not so much from defects in the Organization's work, as from discord and contention amongst the Powers. Yet there are some causes which lie within our capacity of correction. I shall mention one.
63.	In the work of the United Nations there is a strong accent on public controversy and a relative neglect of private conciliation. A report by the Secretary-General 11 years ago contained a plea to give greater emphasis to the United Nations as an instrument for negotiation of settlements as distinct from this world debate of issues. The advice was not heeded. Debate, not negotiation, still dominates the United Nations practice. Resolutions are adopted in great numbers, but their texts bear witness to the parliamentary advantages of fragmentation rather than to a balanced view of rights or realities.
64.	For example: in a dispute in the Middle East between two parties one of which has a single vote and the other 16 or, in practice 40, the preordained triumph of automatic majorities has no moral value, little practical effect and a very short life in the world's memory. The same is true of the Security Council, a third of whose members have their diplomatic relations and their ethnic or sentimental predilections exclusively on one side.
65.	This difficulty would not exist if the organs of the United Nations would regard it as their main function to seek consensus which would include the interested parties. They would be better employed in encouraging agreement between the parties at issue, than in sharpening controversy between them by attempts at adjudication. In short, the United Nations should aspire to a diplomatic rather than to a parliamentary role. The test of achievement should be not how many resolutions we have voted but how many solutions we have advanced.
66.	And, indeed, wherever free, direct negotiation has taken place across the world in the past year there has been fruitful issue. There have been the treaties concluded by the Soviet Union and Poland with the Federal Republic of Germany, based, as Mr. Gromyko significantly told us, "on recognition of European realities, especially on the inviolability of frontiers" [1942nd meeting, para. 101]. He was referring to the frontiers established after the war by negotiation and agreement. There has been the four-Power agreement on Berlin where, as Mr. Gromyko again correctly said, it is now up to the two parties directly concerned "to complete the negotiations between them" [ibid., para. 98]. There has been the normalization of relations between Czechoslovakia and the Federal Republic of Germany. There has been direct contact between the United States and the People's Republic of China, to be followed at an early date by a meeting at the highest level of responsibility. The Paris talks on Viet-Nam, with the direct participation of all the parties at issue, have been accompanied by a constant de-escalation of the fighting. There is grave tension between India and Pakistan, as is evident from the general debate here earlier this week; but the two Governments have direct relations which they ca« apply to the solution of their differences. Many hearts are heavy at the reports coming from the boundary between Ireland and
Northern Ireland; but there is also news that the heads of Government concerned have met each other and agreed on a process of political reconciliation. In Washington, agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union are being signed today for modernizing the "hot line" and strengthening safeguards against accidental war.
67.	Is there no lesson to be drawn from the settlements reached and attempted this year? Surely they show that the air is alive with a spirit of innovation. Attitudes of hostility which once seemed to be an organic part of our generation's life are now yielding to a strong impulse for peaceful settlement. Above all we are learning lessons about the immense importance of communication. Time and again the decision of Governments to abandon their cold separation and make contact with each other develops from a procedural advance into a change of substantive positions and thence into binding agreements. The central themes of international life in 1971 are direct contact, the abandonment of traditional conflicts, and flexible, pragmatic negotiation.
68.	There is also a move away from dogmatic attachment to documents. If old formulas and texts have reached deadlock, new ones are sought. There is a particular recognition that after wars the need is to build new systems of relations and not to reproduce the conditions and situations out of which war erupted. This new empiricism affects the juridical domain as well. Governments which seriously seek peace do not hesitate to confer directly with Governments which they do not yet recognize and with which they have no legal relations,
69.	If there is frustration in the Middle East it is because our region is still the exception to all the positive rules which have been applied elsewhere. Whatever is tried successfully in other regions is avoided in the Middle East. Here alone there is still no contact between the parties at issue. Here alone the Governments which will have to live side by side with each other have still not come face to face at a table of negotiation. Here alone we are often told that the only way to get peace is to restore the situations which erupted in war. Here alone it is said in many places that the resumption of an important peace mission is wholly dependent on a single memorandum on which there is deadlock, and that there is no room for any innovation or any versatility of formulas and techniques.
70.	It is true, despite these failures, that the situation in the Middle East today is less explosive than a year ago. The flow of events has not been backward. The cease-fire along the Suez Canal has been effective, with rare and isolated exceptions, for 14 months. Israel does not propose to bring it to an end and Egypt would achieve nothing by violating it. Indeed, the only certainty in the Middle East is that resumed hostilities would serve no interest and advance no settlement. The absence of fighting along the Suez Canal line has released the Middle East and the world from the daily prospect of escalation involving the Soviet forces which were irresponsibly introduced into the' region with the effect of aggravating and enlarging a local tension. There has been a sharp decline in the strength and prestige of the terrorist groups and the pirate organizations that loomed so large a year ago. There has been peaceful movement across open bridges into Israel and the administered territories of scores of thousands of Arabs from neighboring Arab countries which are officially "at war" with Israel. Thus new patterns of coexistence have grown up between Israelis and Palestinian Arabs in daily life and work. Side by side with a violent and incendiary Arab rhetoric there seem to be here and there some beginnings of a greater realism in Arab thinking on the problem of Israel's sovereignty and Israel's deep roots in the life and history of the Middle East. Finally, there are three separate availabilities of good offices which, although not all in active course today, are mutually accepted by the parties: the Jarring mission; the good offices of the United States in pursuit of an agreement concerning the Suez Canal; and the intention of ten African Presidents to authorize four eminent heads of State to go to Jerusalem and Cairo on a mission of information and goodwill.
71.	Yet, with all these consolations the peace efforts are not sufficiently intense. The talks under Ambassador Jarring's auspices, which began in high promise in January, have been at a standstill since the end of February. An exchange of views and positions on a special Suez Canal agreement was inaugurated through the good offices of the United States in April. This effort is still underway, but its pace is slow. In discussing the obstacles to peace it would be easy, but sterile, to fall into recrimination. Nothing would be easier. One of the few things that all Members of the United Nations have in common is the ability to discuss each other's imperfections. Yet what mankind longs to hear is not how deadlocks arose, but how it is proposed to overcome them. The general debate will be well used if Middle Eastern States will give precise definition to what they are prepared to do in order to bring a peaceful settlement into view. All who seek an understanding of Israel's policies must come face to face with two elements in the national mood. There is a sharp preoccupation with security; and there is a vivid memory of the horror and dark peril from which we emerged four years ago.
72.	In reflecting on the theme of security, Israel cannot easily forget the immense loss and burden it has borne through the hostility directed against it for over two decades. Our danger, in 1967 was the climax, but not the whole story, of our predicament. No other people has had to live all its days with a mark of interrogation hanging over its collective and individual survival. Israel's insistence on genuine and stable security takes particular depth from the hideous legacy of Jewish massacre in the European slaughter-house. No people in history has undergone an experience of such tragic depth and scope. And no other State has grown for 23 years amidst such a comprehensive effort to deny it every breath of life.
73.	In particular, Israel's mind preserves a permanent and,, unfading image of the danger and solitude from which it emerged in the summer of 1967. To forget or ignore these memories is to renounce all true understanding of the Middle Eastern reality today. It was only by exceptional vigilance and cruel sacrifice that we repelled a monstrous design that would have ended our people's historic journey and cast all Israel's life and achievement into the flames. Maritime blockade, terrorist incursions, military encirclement, declarations of overt war, a frenzied torrent of threats and a formal announcement from Cairo that the battle was joined for Israel's destruction all these came
together in cumulative assault,"We recall the outrageous silence and apathy with which the Security Council, between one adjournment and the next, calmly observed the only attempt in modern history to wipe a sovereign State off the map of the world. Mr. Gromyko indulges his sense of humour when he tells us that guarantees by the Security Council are among "the firmest guarantees that can be imagined in the modern world" [ibid.., para. 135], The truth has Iden and is that, largely as a result of Soviet policy, the Security Council for 20 years has refused to defend any Israeli right including the right not to have its citizens killed, its ports blockaded, its existence threatened. The policy of the Security Council has been to refuse to adopt any decision of which a single word is unpalatable to the Arab Governments. It has thus surrounded every assault on Israeli lives, Israeli rights and Israeli security with indulgence. At the highest point of tension and of Israel's danger in May 1967, with Israel blockaded and encircled on every side, with all mankind gripped by the apprehension of approaching war, the suggestion of the Soviet Union was that the Security Council should go home and refuse to discuss such an "artificial" matter as the declaration of active war and the formal imposition of a blockade against a Member State. It is largely because of Soviet policy that the Security Council cannot be a guarantor of any Israeli rights. And the future development in the composition of the Security Council, however essential for other reasons, is bound to emphasize its inability to guarantee or even to express an Israeli interest, whatever the majority of its members may think or say.
74.	There are few effective guarantees of peace beyond those inherent in the nature of the peace itself. The greatest danger is lest through lassitude of spirit or impatience or imprecision of diplomatic craftsmanship we again revert to fragile, false and ambiguous solutions, which carry in them the seed of future wars.
75.	But the work of peace, however complex, must be attempted. Israel's deepest aspiration is to take part in a new deployment of energies in the service of a peaceful order of relations in the Middle East. Accordingly I ask the crucial questions: Is the slow rhythm of the peace efforts inevitable? Can nothing be done or at least attempted to set some dialog in swifter motion? Do Israel's policies offer openings through which roads to peace can be discerned and actively explored? My answer is that if the Arab States, and especially Egypt, sincerely desire an honorable and lasting peace, there are many roads leading to that goal.
76.	The first road lies in a Suez Canal agreement. There are many reasons for giving priority to this at attempt. A sudden transition from a conflict of more than two decades to a total settlement has proved difficult. It may be more rational to expect progress by stages. Each stage would bring about a solution of a specific problem while opening the way to further agreements and thus to final peace.
77.	The Suez Canal sector calls urgently for disengagement. It is there that the regional tension is compounded by the military presence of a great Power. Disengagement of forces here is an urgent international interest.
78.	The President of Egypt proposed on 4 February an attempt to open the Suez Canal ahead of a total settlement.
Israel's Prime Minister responded on 9 February. Both Governments subsequently agreed that the United States should use its good offices to explore the prospect. We therefore have an agreed objective and an agreed modality. , We believe that the effort to bridge the gulf between the positions of the parties should be pursued in the general interest of peace. If agreement cannot be reached on such a clearly defined issue in which Egyptian advantage is so strong it would appear to be even more difficult to advance in one step towards an over-all settlement in which all the complex issues would Ml into place. But the contrary is also true. A concrete result in this matter will accelerate and inspire negotiation and agreements on other issues. The peace effort will acquire momentum. It will be surrounded for the first time by an air of confidence and promise.
79.	Having been invited to give its views on this matter, Israel developed a proposal that an arrangement be agreed upon with a view to the opening of the Suez Canal to be cleared and operated by Egypt. Israel would make a withdrawal of its forces from the water-line to an agreed distance. The fighting would not be resumed. Egypt would clear and open the Canal. It would be agreed that there be free passage for all ships and cargoes, including those of Israel. Effective and agreed supervision procedures would be established. Means of deterrence against the danger of violation of the agreement would be assured. The agreement would stand on its own feet, but it would not affect or annul the undertakings which the parties gave in August 1970 to hold discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices in conformity with his mandate under Security Council resolution 242(1967). The line to be held by Israeli forces in accordance with that Canal agreement would not be considered final. When agreement on a final boundary is reached in the framework of the peace settlement Israeli forces will withdraw to it.
80.	We hope that Egypt will give this proposal the detailed and careful consideration which seemed to be its intention in April. It represents far-reaching concessions on Israel's part. It involves a movement from the cease-fire line ahead of peace. It mitigates the accepted legitimate principle that no withdrawal need take place ahead of a contractual and mutually agreed peace. The prestige, benefits and revenues from the Canal, the possible return of three quarters of a million people who live near the Canal in peaceful times, as well as the crossing of the Canal by Egyptian civilian personnel, would all be Egyptian, not Israeli, gains. A new impetus would be given to the Jarring mission, which is now in abeyance. The undertakings which I have given refute the idoa that the Canal agreement would be the last word. On the contrary, its conclusion and observance would create a favorable channel for further agreements.
81.	It is true that neither Egypt nor Israel would attain its final objective in this interim framework, but Egypt's right to present its claims in the over-all peace negotiations would remain intact, as would Israel's freedom to present its own proposals and reservations.
82.	A second road to peace lies through the resumption of negotiations under Ambassado. Jarring's auspices. Israel agreed to resume these talks in January 1971 despite Egypt's refusal to rectify its violation of the missile- standstill agreement. At a meeting with the Prime Minister and myself in January, Ambassador Jarring was requested to communicate to the Governments of Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon a list of principles which, in our view, should be embodied in the peace agreements to be concluded and signed between Israel and each of the Arab Governments concerned. These principles were, at first, vehemently "ejected by the Egyptian Government. Subsequently, on i 5 February, the Government of Egypt commented f A/8541, annex II] on an aide-memoir submitted a week before by Ambassador Jarring [A/8541, annex I], It did not accept Mr. Jarring's precise formulations on navigation in the Suez Canal, on the Straits of Tiran, nor indeed on the definition of the scope of withdrawal. But the Egyptian reply did contain an expression of readiness to enter into a peace agreement with Israel provided that all the Egyptian terms for the agreement were met. One of these terms was the total withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Sinai peninsula, the Gaza strip and all territories beyond the armistice line existing on 4 June 1967.
83.	In its reply on 26 February 1971 [A/8541, annex III] the Israel Government viewed favorably the expression by Egypt of its readiness to enter into a peace agreement with Israel, and reiterated that it was prepared for meaningful negotiation on all subjects relevant to a peace agreement between the two countries.
84.	Why then are the Jarring talks in abeyance? The reason is plain. The Security Council resolution, 242(1967), requires that the withdrawal and boundary clauses of the peace agreement, like all its other provisions, must be determined through agreement, which of course implies negotiation. Egypt declines to hold any dialog or negotiation whatever on this point. It lays down its own position as an ultimate condition to which Israel must submit before negotiation begins. Indeed it is not clear why negotiation would be needed at all if the Egyptian view has to be accepted in advance. In a recent declaration of which President Sadat was a signatory, three Arab Governments, including that of Egypt, reiterated that there can be no negotiation with Israel, no conciliation and no bargaining over the Palestinian issue. This is a more recent and presumably more authoritative statement of Egypt's policy than the one that Mr. Riad, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, communicated to Mr. Jarring six months ago. Together with other declarations in the same mood and spirit, it raises the question whether the February memorandum has the significance that we chose to attach to it at that time.
85.	But on one point alone the February communication from Cairo and the Damascus tripartite statement are one: they both rule out the free, precise and detailed negotiation of the "boundary and withdrawal questions. Our policy is that, instead of cease-fire lines or armistice lines, we should establish secure, recognized and agreed boundaries as part of the peace-making process, and withdraw our armed forces to those boundaries once they are determined. It is important to break away from the temporary and unresolved territorial concepts which have prevailed since 1948 in order to develop for the first time a permanent structure of boundaries and security agreements.
86.	There is no need to be apologetic about the doctrine that peace boundaries may be different from armistice lines. The Arab Governments wrote into the 1949 Armistice Agreements a provision stating that the armistice lines are not the final boundaries and these must be worked out by agreement in the transition to peace. We are now embarked on that transition. Israel's size and strength are smaller than those of the European Powers which insisted on secure and agreed boundaries after the Second World War; but the right to negotiate boundaries that would release Israel from a chronic and desperate vulnerability belongs to it as to every other sovereign State. In this matter we are not in a position of juridical defense.
87.	I shall summarize under three headings the reasons and justifications which give Israel the right to have negotiation on boundaries and security arrangements. The first, as I have already pointed out, is the provisional character of the lines now held as well as those which existed before. Several years before the 1967 war the Deputy Foreign Minister of Egypt correctly said: "There is no legal boundary between Israel and Egypt but only a line that was fixed in the pursuance of the Armistice Agreement."
88.	On 31 May 1967 the representative of Jordan said in the Security Council:
"There is an Armistice Agreement. The Agreement did not fix boundaries; it fixed a demarcation line. The Agreement did not pass judgment on rights political, military or otherwise. Thus I know of no territory; I know of no boundary." 
89.	A second and more contemporary reason in support of Israel's claim to a negotiation on withdrawal and boundaries lies in the Security Council's resolution 242 (1967), which has been accepted by some Arab States and by Israel and which is the constitutive document of the Jarring mission. That resolution was adopted after all attempts to require a withdrawal to the 4 June armistice lines had been defeated by vote or discarded for lack of support. The term "secure and recognized boundaries" was an innovation in the United Nations vocabulary. It first appeared in a United States draft resolution submitted on 7 November 1967 and later embodied in a United Kingdom draft  which was presented for unanimous vote. I must state with full solemnity and knowledge that Israel's adherence to the Security Council resolution and acceptance of the Jarring mission were secured on the most explicit understanding that the resolution offered an opportunity to negotiate agreements on boundaries and withdrawal. Secretary of State Rogers stated for the United States in October 1969:
"Those boundaries were armistice lines not final political borders. The rights, claims and positions of the parties in an ultimate peaceful settlement were reserved by the Armistice Agreements. The Security Council resolution neither endorses nor precludes those armistice lines as the definitive political boundaries."
90.	In a public statement on 12 July 1970, Mr. Sisco, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, declared that he had taken an active part in the formulation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). He added:
"That resolution did not say withdrawal to the pre- June 5 lines. The resolution said the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final secure and recognized borders. In other words the question of the final borders is a matter of negotiation between the parties."
91.	The United Kingdom Government, which sponsored Security Council resolution 242 (1967), put itself on record on 17 November 1969, when its Foreign Secretary, Mr. Michael Stewart, was asked:
"What is the British interpretation of the wording of the 1967 resolution? Does... it... mean that the Israelis should withdraw from all territories taken in the late war? "
He replied:
"No, Sir. That is not the phrase used in the resolution. The resolution speaks of secure and recognized boundaries. Those words must be read concurrently with the statement on withdrawal." 
A month later, on 9 December 1969, in the House of Commons he said:
"... There is reference, in the vital United Nations Security Council resolution, both to withdrawal from territories and to secure and recognized boundaries. As I have told the House previously, we believe that these two things should be read concurrently and that the omission of the word all' before the word 'territories' is deliberate."?
I repeat: "... the omission of the word 'all' before the word 'territories' is deliberate."
92.	It was in the light of these clear undertakings that the Israel Government informed Mr. Jarring in August 1970 that it accepted the Security Council resolution 242 (1967) for implementation in all its parts and that on the establishment of a just and final peace in accordance with the resolution it would withdraw its forces from the cease-fire lines to secure and recognized boundaries to be determined in the negotiations.
93.	The political and juridical aspects of the questions to which I have referred are the expression^ a deeper, more concrete reality. Israel does not have a policy of expansion or annexation. In the negotiations on boundaries and withdrawals it will seek those modifications which are essential to ensure security and to prevent another war.
94.	ihe war of 1967 did not arise exclusively from the vulnerability of the armistice lines. But there is no doubt that some topographical and strategic situations were a permanent temptation to assault. If they are not corrected and adjusted Israel, on withdrawing from the cease-fire lines, would find itself again in a position of intolerable vulnerability. There could be no more horrifying error than to revert, through lack of precise and detailed negotiation, to a territorial structure and security balance capable of reproducing the peril which exploded four years ago.
95.	In the framework of a peace settlement with Egypt, Israel would withdraw from the cease-fire lines. We have never asserted that in a condition of peace it would be necessary for our troops to remain in all of the Sinai peninsula or even in most of it. But there are vital interests affecting security, peace and navigation which impel us to reserve the right to attempt in the peace negotiations to secure a contractual basis for such continued presence as is necessary to protect security and navigation. There are several juridical expressions and precedents for such an arrangement. Our emphasis is on practical security conditions, not on any particular juridical formula. The post-war map of the world is replete with instructive parallels. The peace treaties in Europe and Asia did not bring about a return to the exact military and territorial dispositions that existed before.
96.	Now Israel does not ask Egypt to accept any of its positions as a condition of negotiation. The proposal for the withdrawal of all Israeli troops to the previous positions is legitimate as an Egyptian proposal. It is equally legitimate for Israel to insist on an opportunity of free negotiation in which its own reservations and counter-proposals could be made. And our request from the world community is modest. We do not present specific Israeli proposals for endorsement by other Governments; we ask only that our right to negotiate the issues vital to our future, to our peace and to our security, should not be cut off in advance.
97.	Our position, then, is this: We have taken note of the Egyptian proposal on withdrawal. Israel would withdraw its armed forces from the Israel-United Arab Republic ceasefire line to the secure, recognized and agreed boundaries to be established in the peace agreement. Now that both parties have presented their basic positions, they should pursue their negotiations in a detailed and concrete manner without prior condition to cover all the points I listed in their respective documents with a view to concluding a peace agreement. I continue to adhere to the view which I expressed at the twenty-third session of the General Assembly in October 1968 that
"It is possible to work out a boundary settlement compatible with the security of Israel and the honor of
Arab States	The majority of the United Nations have
recognized that the only durable and reasonable solutions are agreed solutions serving the common interests of our peoples. The new peace structure in the Middle East, including the secure and recognized boundaries, must be built by Arab and Israeli hands" [1686th meeting, para. 111].
Thus if Egypt will present its position for negotiation without the unprecedented request for Israel's acceptance of it in advance, we shall be ready for detailed and concrete negotiation on all the matters mentioned in the Egyptian memorandum of 15 February and the Israeli document of 26 February,
98.	Effective and versatile conciliation must include a capacity to move from one direction to another in a tireless pursuit of peace. In March 1968, Ambassador Jarring suggested a formula for the convening of meetings between the parties in Nicosia on the basis of an agreed term of reference. Egypt rejected that proposal. Those concerned with the conciliation effort did not say that the mission had to be held in suspense until Egypt gave a positive reply to something which its policy did not then allow it to endorse. It would be wrong now to affirm that such a vital objective as the establishment of a negotiated peace between Israel and Egypt will never be possible except on the basis of a working paper which did not happen to secure the agreement of the parties. Egyptian-Israeli peace is too great a cause to be tied and tethered for all time to a single optional memorandum. If Egypt will agree to pursue negotiations in a detailed and concrete manner without prior conditions on all the points listed in the Israeli and Egyptian memoranda of February 1971, this road to meaningful negotiation will lie open,
99.	There are other roads to peace. The Suez Canal agreement and the discussion of an over-all settlement are not the only options available for negotiation. The problem of refugees requires a broad acceptance of regional and international responsibility. We have therefore proposed the convening of a conference of Middle Eastern States, together with Governments which have contributed to refugee relief and the specialized agencies of the United Nations, in order to chart a five-year plan for the solution of the refugee problem and the integration of refugees into productive life.
100.	This problem would now be considered against the background of some alleviating developments in recent months. There is a growing disillusion with the irredentist pretensions of the terrorist groups and the air pirates. The dividing wall which once prevented all human contact between Israelis and Palestine Arabs is falling. It is true that this is due so far to Israeli initiative. Last year not a single Israeli set foot in any Arab land, but 110,000 Arabs from countries "at war" with Israel came into contact with Israel across the open Jordan bridges. An open frontier between Israel and its eastern neighbor similar to the community frontiers in Europe would do much to give human reality to a peace settlement, and indeed might help the settlement to be achieved.
101.	There is a fourth possibility. The problems of boundaries and security are usually considered to be the crux of the negotiation. But there are other unresolved matters in the memoranda presented by Egypt and Israel in February. At first sight there seems to be some proximity between the peace, non-aggression, recognition and navigation clauses suggested by the two Governments. On closer inspection the disparities are substantial, and could become crucial. We suggested in January and later in March that, it might be profitable to attempt to draft some of the clauses of the Egyptian-Israel treaty relating to the principles of peace. It is an accepted negotiating technique to begin with problems in which divergences are less broad and thus to create a favorable atmosphere in which to confront the more acute problems.
102.	There is a fifth road towards negotiating procedure and activity; it concerns the negotiating procedure, but its weight is intensively substantive and not at all procedural I have said that in the early months of 1968 Ambassador Jarring suggested meetings between the parties, under his auspices, in Nicosia, in accordance with a text setting out the terms of reference for the conferences. On 10 March 1968, Ambassador Jarring informed me that Egypt had rejected that proposal. As the Secretary-General's report of 4 January 1971 reveals, Dr. Jarring "was informed of Israel's official acceptance, without conditions, of the text". 
103.	Now that was the negative turning-point in the history of the Jarring mission. Since then it has been limited, through Egyptian insistence, to a bizarre procedure under which Israeli documents are presented to Ambassador Jarring, and by him to the Egyptian representative. If the Israel document contains the words "for communication to the Government of Egypt", the Egyptian representative refuses to take it into his h?nds; or if he has inadvertently accepted its delivery, he comes back to relinquish it with panic-stricken haste as if it were a hot coal. The Israel document is then divulged by the Egyptian representative to the press, accompanied by a burst of invective. Egyptian replies are published without any hint of an intention to communicate them to Israel. The Egyptian position is that Israel may not talk to Egypt directly, may not talk to Egypt indirectly and may not communicate anything to Egypt in writing.
104.	If no other method is available my Government will communicate its views to Egypt by whatever channel or technique is possible. But we cannot conceal our conviction that there is an element of farce in the idea that the word "negotiation" can honestly be applied to the extraordinary procedure followed so far. How can a Government which alleges that it wants a peace agreement with Israel refuse to negotiate the terms of that agreement by a rational method of contact? To say that one is prepared to enter into a peace agreement but not to meet or negotiate even under international chairmanship is to make a mockery of the international community. One thing is clear: No international agreement has been reached on any subject between any States at any time by the methods to which the Jarring mission has so far been confined through Egypt's insistence.
105.	I am convinced that the strongest chance of breaking out of the deadlock lies in a transition to a rational negotiating procedure. The hour is ripe. The gap between the parties is wide, but may not be impossible to bridge. Negotiation is the agent which would transform the potentiality into action.
106.	One of the most important things said about the Middle East in recent days is Sir Alec Douglas-Home's statement yesterday that "distrust... of this depth ... cannot [easily] be removed by long-distance correspondence" [1944th meeting, para. 98] and that "those who are in confrontation must actively help to promote a dialog'' [ibid., para, 97], If all those who hold that view would express it with equal candor, an international movement in favor of abandoning the illusion of long- range correspondence would come to effective expression.
107.	There is no weight or value in. the argument that the Arab Governments would be negotiating from weakness if they accepted direct contact under international chairmanship. Their point of reference would be, not the military situation, but the political forum in which the Arab side would speak from a position of numerical and geographical predominance,
108.	I therefore propose to the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Riad, that we take our guidance from the spirit which inspires the international life of our ags. Let us meet here this month under the auspices of the United States to discuss the details and! principles of a Suez Canal settlement; or under the chairmanship of Ambassador Jarring to discuss the establishment of peace in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) on the basis of our respective memoranda of February 1971. Let us break out of devious procedures and sterile polemics into a new vision and a new hope.
109.	In a recent statement the President of Egypt, Mr. El-Sadat, declared that he would sacrifice a million men to achieve a military victory. What he and we should be considering is how to ensure that the 33 million Egyptians, tin 3 million Israelis and the other millions in the Middle East are saved i.om sacrifice and preserved for the construction of a peaceful regional order. The task will not be served by war or by threats of renewed hostilities which command our vigilance but which are, in effect, an echo of ill-fated bombast in the recent past. Nor will our task be fulfilled by living out the rest of 1971 in ineffective debate or inflammatory resolutions. The Arab States may have enough voting strength to secure the adoption of virulent, unbalanced texts or to give a biased interpretation to the Security Council resolution, which would then cease to be an agreed documentary consensus available as a basis for the ultimate and inevitable negotiation. But what will it profit to gain an Assembly majority, but to lose Israel's adherence to a set of principles common to it and to neighboring States? The roads to peace do not have their starting point in war or in polemical debate. They branch out from one of the many avenues and by-ways of negotiation on which we shall meet Egypt when its choice is made and declared.
110.	This session could mark a recuperation in the career of "the United Nations if the Organization made this the year of negotiation, the year of negotiation in all outstanding disputes. It has other tasks. The Second United Nations Development Decade can be saved from the frustrations of the First if the advanced countries turn aside from the perils of monetary war towards an expanding vocation in the development of emergent societies.
111.	And in the last resort this Organization will be judged according to the role it has played in defense of human welfare and dignity, The call of kinship and of dark memory will bring us to refer at appropriate stages in Committees and in the plenary meetings to two dramas of great intensity and pathos: the Jews of the Soviet Union, of whom some have reached us but of whom the great majority are still restrained from the expression of their cultural identity and their national hope; and the captive remnants of helpless Jews in Arab lands, especially in Syria, whose anguished voice cries out for liberation from terror and despair. This Organization, for all its imperfections, is still the only organized expression of the planetary spirit. It may be bearing within itself the seed of a universal order in which men will come together to save their environment from pollution, their society from disruption, their economy from decline, their life from the stress and grip of violence. There is no room for fatalistic despair. There is still time for men and nations to be, inspired by a new and spacious vision and to invest their thought and labour in defence of the "common heritage of mankind".




164.	 Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure to congratulate the new President of this Assembly. You come to us, Sir, as one of the most distinguished statesmen of South-East Asia, from a great country of that region, and with qualities that will serve us admirably during one of the most important assemblies in the history of this Organization. It is also a pleasure for me to pay a tribute to the previous President of the Assembly, Mr. Hambro of Norway, who presided so well over a session marking another significant juncture in the lifetime of the United Nations.
165.	This session of the General Assembly, meeting under the guidance of an Asian President, is one which will be marked by a degree of preoccupation with matters relating to that most populous of regions which has not always been characteristic of this Organization. For New Zealand, a country of the South Pacific on the fringes of Asia but a full partner, for all that, in many aspects of the increasingly intensive co-operation among the great majority of countries in this region, this will be welcome.
166.	It means that in the first instance the Assembly will, as we hope, at last come to grips in a realistic manner with the position which the People's Republic of China should occupy in the Organization. My Government, along with most of those Governments represented here today, has welcomed the hopeful developments which have taken place in relationships with Peking since the Assembly last met, and particularly during the last few months. The announcement of President Nixon's intention to visit China at some time before May of next year and the preliminary talks which preceded that announcement, no less than the actual visit when it eventuates, have the quality of events which leave their mark on the history of human affairs. They portend the end of an era. Whether it is the beginning of a new order depends on the efforts which will be made by all concerned. For the present we are in a period of transition and of adjustment of relationships which calls for
difficult decisions on the part of Governments, but particularly on the part of those whose future is intimately bound up with the destinies of Asia.
167.	For many years my Government, which in 1961 proposed the inclusion in the Assembly's agenda of an item on the question of the representation of China in the United Nations, has been concerned with the achievement of a solution to the problem of Chinese representation that would be both just and reasonable. We have spoken in favor of the seating in the United Nations of the People's Republic of China. We have also wished to see fair recognition of the reality of the situation, which is the existence of two Governments in full control of their respective territories. Here there is a separation of authority as distinct as there is in the case of what are known as the "divided States", but with the essential difference that the entity, China, is already a Member of the United Nations. The Secretary-General has argued strongly in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization that the admission of the divided countries should not be linked to the problems resulting from their division [Aj8401IAdd.l, para. 104]. My delegation may not be entirely convinced that that is so, but since the argument has been advanced, a fortiori it must apply in the case of two Governments, in control for two full decades of different parts of the territory of what was a founding Member of the United Nations. The legitimacy of either Government is not a matter for the Assembly to determine in the circumstances of the case, where both Governments enjoy wide recognition among United Nations Members. It is for the Assembly rather to make clear that a resolution of the basic conflict lies with the parties concerned, while providing for the seating of both in the Organization.
168.	This is fair; this is reasonable; this is, above all, common sense. That is why my Government, which shares with many others the desire to see the representatives of Peking seated in the Assembly and exercising the powers which should fall to them in the Security Council, has joined in sponsoring a proposal to this effect[A/L.633].
169.	Great Powers have great capacity to achieve good, or equally to inflict damage. Rapprochements involving great Powers must always be welcomed for the relaxation of tension which should accompany them. Yet it is important, and it is the responsibility of this Organization to ensure, that the rights of the less powerful should not be ignored or swept away in the interests of an accommodation among super-States, or between a super-State and the rest of the world community. My delegation believes that this consideration is one to which due weight should be given when the Assembly embarks upon the substantive discussion of this problem.
170.	It is, indeed, the peculiar quality of the General Assembly that, as the Secretary-General stated in paragraph 95 of his introduction, it "offers the smaller and the medium Powers not only a voice, but also a way of influencing the course of events far in excess of what was previously available to them". This is a significant statement, like a number of others made in this year's
introduction, particularly in part one, to which I wish to pay a warm tribute.
171.	My Government believes that the smaller Powers, into whose ranks we have the pleasure of welcoming Bahrains Bhutan, Qatar and soon Oman, have a special role to play both within the United Nations and outside. They bring a different perspective to world affairs which can serve as a useful balance to the interests of larger Powers,, while in many cases they enjoy relationships with such Powers which enable them both to understand the objectives of the latter and to exercise some influence upon them.
172.	The necessity for this three-way relationship between the great Powers, small countries and international institutions has been dramatically evident in recent weeks in the international monetary situation. It is a fact of life we recognize, that the economic weight of the great industrial Powers has a major impact on molding the character of the international monetary system. In the present unstable situation it is the major Powers that must undergo the restructuring needed to restore equilibrium. Naturally it is those Powers that will have a major role in the negotiations that are necessary to lead to long-term international monetary stability.
173.	At the same time, it is essential that the great Powers recognize that -their economic decisions can profoundly affect the economic stability of the smaller nations, many of which do not have sophisticated monetary systems and the resilience to ride out major upheavals. I repeat what I said at the meetings in Washington last week that it is an unfortunate fact that recent measures taken by major countries which to them seemed reasonable arid legitimate-may have damaging repercussions on the economies of small nations whose problems were neither perceived nor discussed.
174.	New Zealand welcomes the improvement in the climate for constructive discussion. While we understand the reasons for the actions of the United States Administration, we firmly believe that all nations, large and small, that are intimately concerned with these events should consider each other's difficulties. We are confident that they will recognize the duty each has to the international community to reach a reasonable compromise before further serious damage is done not only to international trade but also to the institutions that have served us well since Bretton Woods. We are encouraged, therefore, that the International Monetary Fund unanimously recognized that, whereas the present international monetary situation contains the dangers of instability and disorder in currency and trade relationships, it also offers the opportunity for constructive changes in the international monetary system, and in particular it called upon its members to collaborate with the Fund and with each other in order, as promptly as possible, to establish a satisfactory structure of exchange rates, together with the reduction of restrictive trade and exchange practices.
175.	Among other problems confronting small countries is their position in world trade and in relation to large economic groupings, which may so easily develop marked protectionist characteristics. In this debate last year, the leader of the New Zealand delegation spoke of the threat which hung over New Zealand's economic future as negotiations were engaged on the entry of the United Kingdom, its largest export market, into the European Economic Community [1853rd meeting, para. 197]. He said that in a very real sense the role of regional groupings ia world trade was on trial in this test case. He also said that ft would be tragic if, as a result of enlarging the European Economic Community, one of the world's most efficient agricultural producers were to be driven to the wall.
176.	I owe it to this Assembly , and to the countries of the Community, as well as to the Government of the United Kingdom, to record on this occasion the satisfactory outcome of these negotiations from New Zealand's point of view. Having disposed of this area of uncertainty in its immediate trading future, New Zealand is now in a better position to plan ahead, to move forward on the basis of sound economic growth and to play its full part in world trade and development and, with it, in the Second Development Decade.
177.	Regional economic groupings are a fact of international life. They have much to offer to smaller countries by providing the advantages of a market-place of new dimensions. The development of wider opportunities for trade and development throughout many of the countries and territories of the South Pacific is one of the important goals sought by the Heads of State or Government of Western Samoa, Nauru, Fiji, Tonga and the Cook Islands, who joined with the representatives of Australia and New Zealand in the South Pacific Forum held in Wellington in August this year. A second such meeting will be held in Canberra in the first half of 1972, and preparatory work is under way among officials. Co-operation is envisaged over a wide range of fields of practical interest. Combined with the continuing work of the South Pacific Commission and the welcome and increasing commitment of United Nations agencies to the area, we believe these activities should have a significant impact at the development level.
178.	There was another aspect of the growing sense of South Pacific awareness at the recent meeting. This was the unanimous feeling of concern expressed by this group of small countries that, despite the opposition voiced over the years, they should still be faced with the intrusion, as they saw it, of a great Power into the area for the purpose of conducting atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons. Why, they asked, if the hazards are as slight as France claims, should it not test nearer home?
179.	In this and in other ways in recent months a growing impatience has been revealed among countries in and bordering the Pacific. An even wider range of concern has been shown in recent discussions in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the limits of National Jurisdiction. While we welcome the fact that this year's test series has been cut short after five explosions, this is apparently only a temporary relief. What we wait to hear is that this will have been the last series to be conducted in our Pacific area. In saying this, my
delegation is not unmindful of the arguments that France is not a party to the partial test-ban treaty; that it is, after all, only following the path of other nuclear Powers which continue to develop their potential through underground testing; that there is no agreement on measures of nuclear disarmament; and that the People's Republic of China also continues to test in the atmosphere. My delegation will advocate at this session, as it has done in the past, the ending of all nuclear testing, including underground testing. But meanwhile no atmospheric test can escape the condemnation of those who have signed the partial test-ban treaty and who constitute a great majority of this Assembly.
180.	The meeting of the South Pacific Forum to which I have referred brought together all the independent or self-governing countries of the South Pacific. Apart from Australia and New Zealand, none has a population of much more than half a million or a land area greater than 7,000 square miles, and the majority are decidedly smaller. Yet in every case, whether the country concerned had been a Non-Self-Governing or Trust Territory, the right to self-determination had been recognized and freely exercised, and the transition had been a peaceful one in what we like to think is the Pacific way. Nor, so far as New Zealand's remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories of Niue and the Tokelau Islands are concerned, will that right of free choice be denied when the peoples concerned wish to exercise it. The problems which remain, unlike those in some other parts of the world and notably southern Africa, do not relate to this principle: they are simply, in these tiny islands, the problems of size, resources and general viability. It has been a matter of disappointment to my delegation that the bodies concerned with questions of decolonization have not as yet fully studied the special problems inherent in such small Territories. Rather, they have been understandably anxious to assert the basic principles to which my delegation, having voted in favor of resolution 1514 (XV), also subscribes. My delegation has nevertheless been encouraged by the trend of the constructive discussion which took place this year in Sub-Committee II of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
181.	The Assembly will be interested to know that the New Zealand Government, which has long expressed its willingness in principle to receive a visiting mission, has during this year's consideration of Niue and the Tokelaus, invited the Special Committee to send a small mission to both Territories in 1972. It thus continues a pattern of co-operation with the United Nations in the field of decolonization which at different times has involved United Nations presence both in the former Trust Territory of Western Samoa and in the Cook Islands. It is confident that, when a mission of the Special Committee visits Niue and the Tokelau Islands next year, this will be an important element not only in ascertaining the attitudes of the local populations but also in deepening understanding in the United Nations of the conditions in these small Pacific islands. The Secretary-General has provided an excellent summary of the question in paragraph 304 of his introduction where, speaking of small Territories, he says:
".,. the problems involved in their decolonization are nevertheless complex and call for individual solutions which must stem from the full and freely expressed wishes of their peoples and, at the same time, take account of realities."
182.	Once the right to self-determination has been recognized, the search for a realistic solution to the problems of Non-Self-Governing Territories can begin and the United Nations can assist in the process. But there remain those Territories, in particular Angola, Mozambique and Portuguese Guinea, in respect of which that right continues to be denied; and in Southern Rhodesia the problem is overlaid with racial discrimination and apartheid-type policies which deprive large segments of the population of their most elementary human rights. Here, as on the even more arduous question of South. Africa itself, the approach in the United Nations must of necessity be a consistent one: no doubt must be left as to where the international community stands on the principles involved, and its condemnation must be firmly stated where these principles are denied.
183.	In determining its position on the various draft resolutions on questions relating to southern Africa which will be before the present session, the New Zealand delegation will wish to give full weight to this moral imperative. It was for this reason that New Zealand recorded an affirmative vote earlier this year in the Economic and Social Council on its resolution 1591 (L) on apartheid, on which it had previously found it necessary to abstain in the voting on draft resolution V in the Commission on Human Rights. It is at the same time impressed by the view expressed by the Secretary-General in the section of his introduction entitled "Concluding Remarks" where, in the light of his long experience, he states in paragraph 143:
"It is however a weakness when resolutions are adopted which have no prospect of implementation, and the authority and prestige of the world's greatest deliberative body is thereby eroded."
It will be our endeavor in our discussions with the sponsors of resolutions on this topic and during the formal deliberations on them, to ensure that these wise words are given full weight.
184.	New Zealand's view on the questions of apartheid and raciL? discrimination will be set out more fully under the appropriate items on the agenda. I should wish to place on record during this debate, however, my Government's stated intention to proceed to the ratification of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX)J as its major contribution to the International Year. For this purpose, the Government has introduced into the legislature a Race Relations Bill which is currently at the committee stage. We hope it will be enacted in time to allow ratification to take place before the end of this year. Our examination of the situation in New Zealand showed that, in practice as in law, substantial conformity with the provisions of the Convention already exists. A Race Relations Act, which establishes complete legislative compliance with this key international instrument, will nevertheless constitute an important landmark in the evolution of New Zealand's multiracial society, as well as an unequivocal rejection of all doctrines or political systems based on concepts of racial superiority.
185.	Racial discrimination is but one aspect, although a highly important one, of the broader problem of the defense and promotion of human rights. As New Zealand completes two successive terms of membership in the Commission on Human Rights, we can reflect on the gradual but definite progress which has been made. Looking back over the range of human rights instruments which the United Nations has developed over a longer period, we see legitimate grounds for satisfaction with the development of a substantial legal framework in this field. My delegation has considered for some years that what is now required is an institution which can assist in the promotion of human rights in order to enable the Organization and its Members to give effect to the commitments entered into under Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter. The proposed office of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is, in the view of my Government, well conceived to meet this need. This office would provide, moreover, the means of exerting a positive influence on human rights questions, free from political considerations. Let us at this session finally come to grips with this issue. Let us discuss amendments to the terms of reference set out in resolution 1237 (XLII) of the Economic and Social Council so as to enable broad agreement to be reached. Let us strive to remove the doubts which a number of delegations have felt about this proposal. Agreement on this issue would represent an important achievement for this session and for the furtherance of respect for human rights everywhere.
186.	A major item involving human rights in the highest degree has not been separately included on the agenda of the present session, although the Secretary-General has dealt with it in cogent and eloquent terms in paragraphs 177 to 191 of the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization. I refer to the situation in East Pakistan.
187.	The upheaval that has taken place there, causing perhaps the largest refugee problem in modern times, cannot simply be ignored by the Assembly. The consequences that continue to flow from that tragedy have been beyond the resources of both India and Pakistan to cope with and still demand urgent international attention. The United Nations has therefore been called upon to assume an important role in focusing attention on the human desperation involved and in co-ordinating and channeling aid to alleviate the distress.
188.	New Zealanders have been concerned most at the human aspects of the problem the bloodshed and suffering and the far-reaching dislocation which the crisis has caused to the livelihood of both India and Pakistan. But we are also increasingly worried about its implications for the peace of the sub-continent. We have some understanding of the intensity of feelings that have led to this situation and that threaten to increase the human misery if a solution is not found soon, and we have some appreciation of the difficulties that have so far prevented a political solution from being achieved.
the problem. The humanitarian aspects were considered on two occasions this year in the Economic and Social Council. New Zealand took a part in having the question raised, because of the responsibility which we felt that body owed to the refugees themselves and to a shocked public opinion throughout the world. Those discussions served to emphasize, however, that in the absence of a durable political settlement very little can be achieved beyond meeting the immediate day-to-day needs of the refugees,
190.	Shortly after the discussion in the Economic and Social Council the Secretary-General drew the attention of members of the Security Council to the situation in East Pakistan and its implications for international peace and security. That action, in our view, was both timely and a proper exercise of the powers of initiative of the Secretary-General. My delegation wishes to pay a tribute to him for having taken this step and for having set forth at length in paragraphs 124 to 137 of his introduction a concept of the role and powers of the Secretary-General which my delegation takes this opportunity to endorse.
191.	In welcoming the Secretary-General's initiative in a public statement, the New Zealand Prime Minister, Sir Keith Holyoake, observed:
"The essential problem of reaching a political settlement in East Pakistan is one that only Pakistan's own leaders can solve.... But if one is to be reached a climate of confidence must be established., and this requires the co-operation of the Government of India. The Governments of India and Pakistan have so far acted with caution and restraint towards each other. Statements are, however, being made by political figures on both sides that cannot but undermine the positions of the two Governments and add to the tensions between them,"
192.	This deteriorating situation was described graphically by the Secretary-General in his message to the President of the Security Council when he said:
"... I have reluctantly come to the conclusion that the time is past when the international community can continue to stand by, watching the situation deteriorate and hoping that relief programs, humanitarian efforts and good intentions will be enough to turn the side of human misery and potential disaster".
193.	A durable solution can be arrived at only by negotiation and compromise between all the parties directly concerned, and not by further assertions of force. Substantial progress towards a settlement has so far not been achieved largely because of the tension that has developed in the area. That tension, in turn, has arisen in part from desperation at the apparent absence of any hopeful sign of a political settlement being reached in consultation with the elected representatives of East Pakistan. This is the crucial problem the Secretary-General was referring to when he spoke of "a series of vicious circles which largely frustrate the efforts of the authorities concerned and of the international community to deal with the vast humanitarian problems involved"[A/8401/Add.l, para. 184].
189. We have therefore been anxious to see that the United Nations should bring its influence to bear fully on
194. The United Nations has a heavy responsibility for maintaining international peace and security in the area
will not have fulfilled that responsibility simply by attending to the daily physical needs of the refugees, immense though these problems alone have become. As the New Zealand delegation said in the Economic and Social Council on 16 July, "the dictates of humanitarianism do not cease with the provision of food and shelter. They extend to the long-term future of the unfortunate refugees and particularly their right to return of their own free will to their homes in conditions which promise them a normal life as citizens participating fully in their society."9 It is in this area of the problem that the United Nations can exercise a beneficial restraining influence, encouraging the leaders on either side to seek an acceptable accommodation and to act out of a sense of broad humanitarian concern for the interests of the refugees themselves, on whom the greatest burden of all has fallen.
195.	I do not wish to labor, in connexion with the question of East Pakistan any more than in relation to the war in Viet-Nam and the widened Indo-China conflict, the failure of the United Nations to play any real part at the political level. The shortcomings of the Organization in the area of peace and security were widely discussed during the twenty-fifth anniversary session. There are a variety of reasons for this state of affairs, residing mainly in the will of Member States to use the Organization and their concept of their interests outside it.
196.	One element, however, which it should lie within cur power in this Assembly to rectify, is the state of the Organization's finances. This problem, arising from its involvement in peace-keeping activities, is intimately related to its future capacity in that area.
197.	We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his frankness in stating that "there exists no real basis for optimism or for the expectation that an over-all and comprehensive solution is imminent or likely to be found in the foreseeable future" [ibid., para. 119]. I submit, however, that we should nevertheless, during this session, face up to this complex of problems with all the seriousness that we can muster. My delegation, for one, is willing to see negotiations engaged on the basis put forward by the President of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly [A/8497], More specifically, New Zealand, as a bond-holder, is prepared to see its bonds included in a negotiated package on the basis of a reduced face value, as well as to see waived such credits as might stand to it in the peace-keeping accounts of the Organization. It is New Zealand's expectation and hope that all other Members will join, in their various ways, in a united effort to save the Organization from the bankruptcy which is so clear and present a danger to it. This is surely a year when the United Nations is at the cross roads of history. Let us equip it for a vigorous future.
198.	I would like to join previous speakers in expressing our very high regard for the Secretary-General, U Thant, as he completes his final term of office. It was indeed a difficult inheritance to which he succeeded many years ago and he has performed with unexampled steadfastness,
9 This statement was made at the 1783rd meeting of the Economic and Social Council, the official records of which are published in summary form.
honor and devotion the essential task of holding this Organization together over the ensuing period. We have all expected much of, as well as imposed much on, our Secretary-GeneraL May I say for New Zealand that our debt of gratitude to him is very high indeed.




82.	 First of all, Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly of the United Nations and to wish you success in carrying out the responsible tasks which lie before you.
83.	The international situation in which the twenty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly has been convened is complex and variegated. There is undeniably much in it; which is new and which meets the aspirations of the peoples; but the opposite trends are strong and the world is not free from danger. The situation is shaped by the policies of States and is by no means simple.
84.	In analyzing the foreign policy of any State, what we have to determine above all else is whether that State regards the task of strengthening world peace as the focal point of its policy, or whether it gives preference to other objectives which may not correspond to the interests of peace and may even run counter to those interests,
85.	The position of principle of our socialist State on questions of foreign policy was already determined at the time of its inception. Since then, for over half a century, it has never deviated from that policy. It has always done everything in its power to consolidate the security of the peoples and to ensure respect for their rights. It has condemned wars of aggression and annexation and holds the banner of peace firmly in its hands. The Soviet Union will continue to use all its authority, all its resources, its policy and its ideology to influence the course of international events in the direction of peace among the nations.
86.	A policy aimed at worsening the situation and leading to tension, conflicts and international crises is organically alien to us and is rejected by the very nature of the socialist order. At the same time, we shall continue to resist all attempts to pursue such a policy against our country and against our allies and friends.
87.	The general line of the foreign policy of the USSR, which was evolved and bequeathed to us by Lenin, was confirmed and adapted to the circumstances of today by the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Congress carefully weighed and appraised the most important directions and trends of world developments and advanced a broad program of peace and peaceful co-operation.
88.	This program covers all the main aspects of the task of maintaining peace, from the elimination of existing hotbeds of war and the prevention of new conflicts between States to the implementation of the principle of collective security, from measures to ensure a military detente in the areas of the most dangerous confrontations to the prohibition of ail types of weapons of mass destruction, and from the final elimination of colonialism and racism to the development of mutually advantageous co-operation between States in solving major economic, scientific and technological problems.
89.	We make no secret of our feelings of satisfaction at the world-wide acclaim given to the program of peace and co-operation advanced by the Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. All those who show concern for peace, irrespective of their class and ideological outlook, consider this program to be constructive and realistic and to meet the interests of all, peoples. The Soviet Union's efforts in the sphere of foreign affairs are being concentrated on the preparation and execution of measures to give effect to the proposals contained in the program.
90.	Our country is acting in concert with the other socialist States in solving the problem of building a more stable world. Our alliance with them is firm, and the policy of its members is directed towards securing the most advantageous conditions for building up socialism and communism in their countries, a task for which the main prerequisite is peace.
91.	The foreign policy objectives of the socialist alliance coincide with the interests of all peoples and with the purposes solemnly proclaimed in the United Nations Charter. No one is more concerned than we are to ensure that the lofty principles of the United Nations are brought into effect through peaceful relations between States and peoples, .irrespective of their social systems and political structures.
92.	But the socialist countries neither claim nor want to monopolize the policy of peace. On the contrary, the wider the circle of States defending the cause of peace and actively helping to find solutions for acute international problems, the mora opportunities there will be to forge ahead and the greater will be the confidence in success, however difficult the road to stable security may be and whatever obstacles may have to be overcome.
93.	This circle of States has now widened, because the facts of our times are forcing all States into the realization that in spite of the social, political, economic or cultural differences between them, it is in their common interest to ensure that people can live in peace.
94.	The ways in which States express this realization may vary, but its meaning is always the same. It underlies the foreign policies of the socialist States. It is the main guideline of the policy of countries which call themselves non-aligned. It is manifested in the trends towards realism which have recently become more evident in the policy of a considerable number of other States which only a short time ago automatically adjusted their attitudes to the positions of the military blocs into which they had been drawn in the past. That is why in recent years the alienation and even antagonism between States belonging to different social systems has in a number of cases given way to relations based on mutual understanding.
95.	None of this can in any way eliminate the historic confrontation between socialism and imperialism or make less acute the struggle between the two opposing directions in world politics to which we have often referred from this important world platform. But the strengthening of the principle of peaceful coexistence as a real force of international development and the further redeployment of political forces on the international scene in favor of peace can shape to a large extent the relations between States.
96.	If the development of the situation in different parts of the world is compared from this point of view, then it is Europe that attracts most attention. On that continent, where both world wars began, where in the post-war years a dangerous and prolonged confrontation took place between two opposing political systems and two armed camps emerged, 'there are now signs of developments and trends towards a relaxation of tension.
97.	The recently signed Quadripartite Agreement on problems concerning West Berlin will serve to eliminate one of the most dangerous sources of tension and friction and to improve the atmosphere in an unhealthy area of European politics. The Soviet Union has long and consistently pursued this objective.
98.	As we know, neither of the German States participated directly in the negotiations between the four Powers,
but they were constantly consulted and much depended on them. It is now for the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany to complete the negotiations between them which are provided for in the four- Power agreement. We should like to express the hope that this stage of the settlement of the question of West Berlin will also be successful.
99.	Mutual understanding and agreement between two continental European Powers, the Soviet Union and France, has become one of the main pillars of peace in Europe. These relations were given considerable impetus by the Soviet-French Protocol on Consultations, which was signed a year ago  and which during this short time has proved to be an effective instrument of political co-operation. We are in favor of raising the relations between the two Powers to an even higher level, in the interests of European peace and international security.
100.	In the Federal Republic of Germany, the forces which evaluate the situation more soberly and have declared themselves in favor of a policy of peace and a peaceful future are showing more confidence than in the past and gaining the, upper hand. The objectives consistently pursued by the socialist States of Europe in their relations with the Federal Republic of Germany have thus become attainable.
101.	The treaties concluded with the Federal Republic of Germany by the USSR 3 and the Polish People's Republic,  which are based on recognition of European realities, especially on the inviolability of frontiers, meet the interests of all European States. We expect them to be ratified and to enter into force in the near future.
102.	Next on the list is the settlement of relations between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, based on the recognition of the invalidity ab initio of the Munich agreement, and on the normalization of relations between the two countries on the basis of respect for the principles of sovereignty and equal rights in their relations among themselves and with other States.
103.	If the Federal Republic of Germany makes a final break with the disastrous legacy of its past in favor of a peaceful future, no one can cast doubt on the place it should occupy in Europe and in European policy. Another reason why this should be mentioned is the unceasing activity in the Federal Republic of Germany of those forces which look to the past instead of to the future and desire above all to turn West German foreign policy back to its former course of hostility against other countries and peoples, a course which endangers peace and holds oiit'fRT" prospects for the Federal Republic of Germany itself.
104.	We must dwell on yet another aspect of the question, one that has a direct bearing on the United Nations. The, fact that the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany are still not Members of the United Nations is a political anomaly. The reason for this does not
lie in any objective difficulty in solving this problem, but in the unrealistic, discriminatory attitude of certain Powers towards the German Democratic Republic. But the time is definitely past when some people pretended that this State did not exist and that they did not know what its correct name was.
105.	The German Democratic Republic has firmly established itself as a real and active component of the European system of States. To be more precise, it is no longer possible to imagine modern Europe without it. But since that is the case, it is time to remove the artificial obstacles which lie in the way of the admission of the German Democratic Republic to the United Nations. We are also in favor of the simultaneous admission of the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations.
106.	As we know, in the communique on the recent meeting between Leonid Dyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Mr. W. Brandt, Federal Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic declared their intention to promote that very solution of the problem.
107.	What has been and is being done in Europe is significant, but by no means exhausts all the outstanding problems. There are questions which all the European States must settle together, and that is the underlying idea of the well-known proposal of the socialist countries on the convening of an all-European conference on problems of security and co-operation, in which the United States of America and Canada could also take part.
108.	On meeting together, the participants in such a conference could achieve a great deal in the interests of consolidating peace in Europe. Renunciation of the use of force in relations between European States and the expansion of economic, trade, scientific and technical and cultural ties between all these States are requirements dictated by our times, and the solution of these problems should be within the capacity of the conference. This is now recognized by everyone, or nearly everyone, in Europe.
109.	The problem of convening an all-European conference is ripe for solution; this is now obvious, no one questions it, and the problem now is to move from the preparatory to the practical stage of the work.
110.	The problem of relaxing military tension in Europe also insistently demands solution. This is one of the most important problems. The military potential of the opposing sides in Europe has been growing for many years, and though neither the Soviet Union nor the socialist countries were responsible for this, 'they have been obliged to participate in the race. The existing political tension has been adduced as the reason, but we have always regarded this argument as dubious. Now that a certain relaxation may be observed in Europe, there is no longer any room for such assertions, if we wish to face the truth rather than try to base our policy on deception of the peoples.
111.	Reactions to the Soviet Union's proposal to begin negotiations on the reduction of armaments and armed forces in Europe show that many are in favor of this proposal. Accordingly, what we must do is set to work.
112.	The convening of an all-European conference and the progress made towards a military detente in Europe should bring us closer to the solution of the problem of eliminating military blocs in Europe. This would lead to a thorough and comprehensive improvement of the situation. Let the fervent advocates of the policy of military blocs not faint at the thought of such a proposal. While such blocs continue to exist, the danger of a military confrontation between States will also continue to exist.
113.	It may be difficult to achieve this goal at once, although the socialist countries have stated on more than one occasion that they would be prepared to agree forthwith to the elimination of military blocs, or, to begin with, of their military organizations. But even if we have to proceed step by step in this direction, the elimination of military blocs in Europe now seems to be attainable in principle, and this too is something new on the horizon of European politics.
114.	Of course, the task of improving the international situation is not limited to Europe. For all the importance of the relations between States in Europe and for all the influence of European events on the general world situation, the prevention of a new world war depends not only on them, but also on relations in general between States in all regions. When the United Nations Charter speaks of the obligation "to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples", it does not distinguish between European and Asian nations or between American and African nations. Universal peace can be based only on peaceful relations between all nations.
115.	The settlement and development of friendly relations between any countries calls for good will, mutual interest and common peaceful intentions on their part. When these conditions are present and when countries entering into closer relations with each other do so in the context of a common concern for the strengthening of international peace, it is possible to achieve results which benefit not only the countries in question, but the world as a whole.
116.	The treaties of friendship and co-operation which the Soviet Union recently concluded with the Arab Republic of Egypt  and with the Republic of India  may serve as examples. Both instruments are widely regarded as important stages in the development of friendly Soviet-Egyptian and Soviet-Indian relations, as well as significant factors in the general construction of a more stable peace. We are convinced that this is a correct appraisal.
117.	We attach great importance to the development of our relations with Italy, Canada, with which we have concluded a Protocol on Consultations, Algeria, Iran, Afghanistan and Finland, with such an important Asian Power as Japan and with other countries of Europe, Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania. We make no exceptions for anyone and our attitude towards the development of contacts and ties between other countries is the same: the closer these are, the more purposefully they are integrated in the general system of efforts to strengthen peace, the more the forces of aggression will be held in check and the greater will be the benefit to the peoples.
118.	Much has been said recently about the intended normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China. In principle we regard this as a natural development. Normal relations should exist between all States. So far as the position of the Soviet Union is concerned, we have always consistently opposed any unlawful action in respect of the Chinese island of Taiwan, any deprivation of the People's Republic of China of its legitimate rights in the United Nations, the concept of "two Chinas" and any notion of a "dual representation of China". This is our position of principle, and we shall uphold it at this session of the General Assembly.
119.	But the Soviet Union opposes now as before any policy which is directed against the legitimate interests and security ,of other States, including the Soviet Union, however such a policy may be camouflaged. In the past, States combined into many antagonistic groups, which led to international complications and sometimes even to wars. Yet in the end such actions always backfired against those States which had initiated and participated in them, whether they were large States or small. The generation of people who saw such combinations has not yet died out.
120.	The Soviet Union's approach to its relations with the United States of America is also based on the strengthening of peace. We attach due importance to these relations, being aware that they affect international affairs as a whole. The Soviet Union is willing to develop its political contacts and economic, trade, scientific and technical and cultural ties with the United States of America, just as it is with any other State. We are prepared to seek mutually acceptable solutions. But in doing so we are not prepared to adapt our principles in international matters, our firm policy of peace, to any considerations of the moment. The steps we take in our relations with the United States of America are always in keeping with our general line of action in the interests of peace. Speaking at the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev laid special emphasis on the following:
"We proceed from the premise that it is possible to improve relations between the USSR and the United States. Our position of principle with regard to the capitalist countries, including the United States of America, lies in the consistent and comprehensive practical implementation of the principles of peaceful coexistence, the development of mutually advantageous relations and, in the case of States which are prepared for this, co-operation towards the strengthening of peace, by making our relations with them as stable as possible. But we have to consider whether we are confronted by a sincere wish to solve problems at the negotiating table or by attempts to pursue a policy from a 'position of strength'."
121.	However great the power of the Soviet Union may be, we have never used it and never will use it to place our country above others. Nor do we generally accept the division of States into categories according to their sign or military might. The Charter of the United Nations is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of its Members and we fully subscribe to this principle.
122.	Violation of the principles of equal rights, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs and attempts by more powerful States to impose their will on those which they consider to be weaker inevitably lead to critical situations and conflicts. This is the course which is always followed by aggressors.
123.	Is this not essentially what is going on in Indo-China and the Middle East, which have been hotbeds of war for many years?
124.	Statements have been made recently in Washington concerning the intention to withdraw American troops from Indo-China. Information is published practically every week about the number of thousands by which the American forces have been reduced. But the war in Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia is continuing, and the scope of military operations even expands from time to time. The United States of America and its hirelings are continuing the war.
125.	The point is not the percentage of American soldiers in the area, but the number of local troops, and whether they are being trained, armed and sent into battle under orders from Washington. The point is that the United States of America should cease its military and political interference in the affairs of Indo-China and its efforts to impose an order of its own choosing in that area Ly force of arms.
126.	The world now understands full well that from the very outset, right was on the side of the patriots of Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia. Now that information which was formerly carefully concealed has become known, there is simply no more room for discussion about who unleashed the war in Indo-China and with what ends in view. It is also obvious whose fault it is that the Paris negotiations were brought to a deadlock.
127.	In these circumstances, the new proposals for the establishment of peace which have been advanced by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and have been supported by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam acquire even greater importance. These proposals are imbued with a constructive spirit and are directed towards finding a rational solution for the practical problems which arise.
128.	Not only the friends of the Viet-Namese people, but all those who can assess the situation objectively see these proposals as a realistic way out of the prevailing situation. But what is it about them that the United States of America does not like? Why does the United States of America continue the war when all the conditions for peace are there? Why is the bombing of the territory of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam continuing and being intensified of late, although as we know the cessation of this bombing in 1968 was a prerequisite for the beginning
of the Paris negotiations for. a political settlement? These are questions which arise from the logic of events, and they require an answer.
129.	Where the Soviet Union is concerned, our country, resolutely supporting the proposals for a peaceful settlement and pursuing its international duty, will continue to provide all the necessary support to the fraternal VietNamese people and to the peoples of and Cambodia in their legitimate struggle for their rights.
130.	Events in the Middle East centre round the same problem: will the legitimate rights of the Arab States which have suffered aggression be respected, will the territories annexed by force be returned, or will the policy of aggression be allowed to triumph?
131.	Israel and its protectors are obviously counting on the latter alternative. That is why they have paralyzed the mission of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General of the United Nations, who was entrusted with the task of promoting a political settlement in accordance with the well-known decision of the Security Council. That is why the consultations between the four Powers which are permanent members of the Security Council are just marking time, since to be effective they require the co-operation of all the participants.
132.	But Israel has miscalculated. The policy-makers of that country have made their expansionist schemes too evident to receive any support on the international scene. Now no one can believe the claim that Israel is defending its "existence". One by one, the false arguments with which Israel's rulers have tried to cover up the real objective of their policy have fallen to the ground.
133.	Israel has refused to relinquish the occupied territories until the Arab countries agree to put an end to the state of war, yet the Arabs are prepared to agree to this.
134.	Israel has insisted that a treaty of peace should be concluded and the Arab States do not object to this either, provided, of course, that all the occupied territories are returned to them.
135.	Israel has expressed anxiety about its security. It is now clear that, as part of a political settlement in the Middle East, the appropriate guarantees, including those of the Security Council, can be given. These are the firmest guarantees that can be imagined in the modern world.
136.	No one can now have any doubts: Israel does not want peace, or if it does, then it must be an annexationist peace. But this is contrary to the United Nations Charter and to the most elementary principles of international law, and must therefore be rejected.
137.	Israel's rulers apparently believe that since they have been able to hold on to the occupied territories for four years, that situation can be maintained indefinitely. But they must be aware of the alternative to a political settlement in the Middle East!
138.	Is the United Nations capable of contributing to the solution of the problem of a Middle Eastern settlement?
Yes, it will be capable of this if it does not limit itself to adopting yet another resolution expressing pious hopes unsupported by practical measures and if it makes use of all the possibilities afforded it by the United Nations Charter.
139.	The Soviet Union wants to see peace in the Middle East. It will continue to support the Arab States which have suffered aggression and their efforts to liberate their territories. The just cause of the Arab peoples, including the people of Palestine, must prevail.
140.	Indo-China and the Middle East are not the only sources of military danger. In some other parts of Asia tension is not only not declining, but is even increasing. The situation in the area of the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent is becoming increasingly complex. It must be admitted that India has cause for concern at the turn which events have taken in East Pakistan. The flow of refugees into India has given rise to serious difficulties and problems which are not only economic. We are convinced that a political settlement of the problems which have arisen in East Pakistan is the only means of achieving a general relaxation of tension in that region. Moreover, all the States of the region must be associated with such a settlement. The refugees must be returned to East Pakistan, and this will become possible only when their safety there is ensured. The present situation in the area is acute, and this is not merely a domestic problem. The Soviet Government would like to express the hope that this situation will not lead to a military conflict between the States of the region an.: that restraint and reason will prevail.
141.	The peoples of Asia need lasting peace and a situation in which their resources and efforts are not dissipated in conflict, but are directed towards the solution of social and economic problems on which the raising of their standard of living, of their economy and culture, primarily depends.
142.	It will be recalled that the Soviet Union put forward the idea of establishing a system of collective security in Asia which would ensure a state of stability on that continent. Time and effort may be needed to put that idea into practice, but the situation which has arisen in Asia requires that such efforts should be made and should be pursued consistently.
143.	Another essential condition for normalizing the situation in Asia is to put an end to interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people. The United Nations, for its part, should stop serving as a screen concealing the foreign occupation of South Korea. That is the purpose of the proposals submitted to the General Assembly by a number of socialist and non-aligned States concerning the withdrawal of United States and all other foreign troops from South Korea and the dissolution of the so-called United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea. We can only regret that the consideration of these questions, which require immediate solution, has been deferred until the next session of the General Assembly. Such an approach in no way helps to reduce tension in the Korean area. On the other hand, we note with satisfaction that during the discussion of the question whether the items concerning Korea should be included in the agenda of the current session of the General
Assembly, some 30 countries spoke against the clumsy maneuvers of those who are afraid of a broad consideration at this session of the topical questions of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and of the dissolution of the so-called United Nations Commission.
144.	If we are to choose an area of international relations in which the interests of all States coincide and in which an impulse by the United Nations is particularly necessary to speed up progress, such an area is that of questions relating to the cessation of the arms race and to disarmament.
145.	The arms race is fraught with new and unknown dangers and its adverse effects on the life of our society are now more profound and more dangerous than ever before. During the post-war years, the money spent on armaments has been several times greater than the total annual national income of all the developing countries in the world. This waste of material and intellectual resources is taking place at a time when many millions of people have no bread to satisfy their hunger and no roofs over their heads to shelter them from rain and cold and when over one third of the population of our planet are illiterate.
146.	It would be wrong to say that nothing has been done to check the arms race. Nuclear weapons tests in the air, in outer space and under water have been prohibited, the proliferation of these weapons among States has been stopped, and the siting of weapons of mass destruction in outer space, on celestial bodies and on the sea-bed and the ocean floor has been prevented. The conviction is growing that the solution of the problem of banning underground nuclear tests can no longer be postponed. The ideas of the creation of nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world and of the elimination of foreign military bases in the territories of others are gaining increasing support.
147.	Efforts for the prohibition and destruction of bacteriological weapons are proceeding in the right direction. Negotiations for an appropriate convention are nearing conclusion. This should be an important practical step not only in limiting the arms race, but also in actual disarmament. We are dealing here with the elimination of one specific type of weapon and, moreover, a weapon of mass" destruction. The task of also prohibiting and eliminating chemical weapons lies ahead.
148.	There has been growing awareness recently of the need to take measures to prevent the accidental occurrence or deliberate provocation of incidents involving the use of nuclear weapons. This purpose is served by the agreement reached recently between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America.
149.	The talks between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the limitation of strategic arms are continuing and are now concentrated on the preparation of an agreement on anti-missile systems. Unless the expansion of anti-missile defense is halted now, a chain reaction Of competition between offensive and defensive weapons will inevitably take place, as it did in the past between naval armor and the artillery shell, the difference being that this competition would be immeasurably more dangerous and more costly.
150.	The successful outcome of these talks would serve the interests of the peoples of both the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America, as well as the cause of strengthening universal peace. In view of the increasing importance of the talks, the Soviet side is intensifying its efforts to reach agreement, which must of course be based on the principle of equal security. But the success of the talks also depends to the same extent on the other side.
151.	Achievements in limiting the arms race are only the first steps towards disarmament. However important they may be, to stop there would be to shirk the solution of the basic problem. And we are convinced that, from the point of view of what is possible, it can be solved. The whole question is whether there Is a desire for such a solution.
152.	The Soviet Union recently advanced a proposal to convene a conference of the five Powers possessing nuclear weapons-the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America, the People's Republic of China, France and the United Kingdom-with a view to examining questions of nuclear disarmament. One of the nuclear Powers we approached, France, supported this Soviet initiative. But then another announced its opposition, whereupon the remaining two hastened to declare that in the existing circumstances the convening of a conference of the five nuclear Powers had become an "academic'' question.
153.	The Soviet Union does not consider that the other nuclear Powers have said the last word. All those who view matters realistically understand that nuclear disarmament can be achkved only with the participation and agreement of all five iiuclear Powers and that they cannot absolve themselves of this responsibility.
154.	A radical solution of disarmament problems will, of course, call for the united efforts of all States, irrespective of the size of their territories and populations, the level of their military might and their economic potential. The Soviet Government believes that further intensification of efforts to achieve disarmament would be promoted by the convening of a world disarmament conference in which all the States in the world would participate, and that this question should be examined at the current session of the General Assembly. The relevant item has been included in the Assembly's agenda at our proposal fA18491J.
155.	In the not-too-distant past, States have already approached the question of convening a world disarmament conference, but for various reasons it has so far proved impossible to hold such a conference. The general political situation is now more conducive to this.
156.	It is essential to make the most of these developments, bearing in mind the fact that, although during the post-war years disarmament talks have been conducted in the widest variety of places, all States have never yet gathered together to discuss disarmament questions. Yet +his problem affects them all without exception.
157.	The universality of the world conference and the participation of all States might contribute to its success.
158.	The tasks before the world disarmament conference would of course be enormous. That Is why it should perhaps become a permanent forum, or rather one operating over a long period. Its sessions might be convened periodically, say, once every two or three years. In view of the fact that the nuclear arms race arouses the greatest concern among the peoples, first priority should be given, if the majority of the participants in the conference express this wiJh, to questions of the prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons, the use of which cannot be tolerated by the conscience of mankind.
159.	The world conference should be convened outside the United Nations, so that it can be attended by all States, irrespective of whether or not they are Members of the United Nations. It is self-evident that Its convening should in no way detract from the significance of those forms of, and channels for, disarmament talks which are now being used, Including the Committee on Disarmament. On the contrary, the Committee on Disarmament should intensify its work.
160.	Both the existing channels for negotiations and any which may be created in the future would contribute to preparations for the convening of the world disarmament conference, and later to the actual drafting of specific agreements on disarmament in pursuance of the decisions of the world confoiencc.
161.	States must obviously be given some time to conduct the necessary consultations on questions relating to the convening of the world disarmament conference. In this connexion, we consider that the General Assembly might address an appeal to States to agree not later than 1972 on the date of the conference and on its agenda.
162.	In view of the above considerations, the Soviet delegation hereby submits the following draft resolution for the consideration of the General Assembly:
(The speaker then rear? out the text of a draft resolution which was subsequently circulated as document A/L.631. For the text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth session, Annexes, agenda item 97.]
163.	We believe that this draft speaks for itself. We call upon all delegations to give it due attention.
164.	In considering all these questions, within the United Nations or outside it, no one should forget that disarmament negotiations are being conducted in circumstances where the arms race is not only continuing, but is being accelerated. This may appear to be a vicious circle, but it can and must be broken. This is demanded by the most vital interests of mankind.
165.	Disarmament is the most reliable means of strengthening international security and ensuring peace, this is clearly expressed in the United Nations Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security which was adopted at the twenty-fifth, anniversary session of the General Assembly [resolution 2734 (XXV)], at the initiative of the Soviet Union.
166.	The Declaration has been correctly assessed as a program of specific measures which, taken together, can
radically change the international situation for the better. Some of its particularly significant features are that it reaffirms the principle of the inadmissibility of acquiring territories through the use of force and strongly emphasizes the obligation of all States Members of the United Nations to carry out the decisions of the Security Council and to do everything in their power to enhance the authority and effectiveness of this organ, on which the Charter confers the main responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
167.	In this connexion, we should like to state frankly that the Security Council is by no means carrying out its functions as it should under the Charter of our Organization. The founders of the United Nations envisaged the situation rather differently. They envisaged it in such a way that no one should paralyse the Council's activities and that all the States which have been trusted to become members of that organ, especially its permanent members, should carry out their obligations with a sense of responsibility, so that no violator of peace should go unpunished and so that the activities of the Security Council should be based on the agreement reached during the Second World War, when the foundations of the United Nations were laid and its structure was elaborated. We believe, however, that this situation can be remedied, if the policies of States particularly of the great Powers, are directed to the pursuit of genuinely peaceful goals.
168.	The twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly will have to consider the question of how the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security is being implemented [item 34]. It is not enough to adopt even the best possible declaration: every effort should be made to ensure that it does not become a dead letter.
169.	Yet such a danger exists, because not all States Members of the United Nations are in practice acting in accordance with the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security for which they voted. Many of the considerations I expressed earlier can serve as examples of this.
170.	There are yet other facts of the same kind. For example, let us take the clause of the Declaration which calls upon all States to desist from any forcible or other actions against peoples still under colonial rule and to render them assistance in their just struggle. This requirement is not being fulfilled by those very States to which it is primarily addressed.
171.	There are different forms of colonialism and racism, but none of them is better than any other, be it the Portuguese kind, supported and sustained by the NATO military bloc, the South African kind, with its policy of hatred-apartheid, or any other kind.
172.	And now, when the great torrent of national liberation movements has destroyed nearly all the strongholds of colonial empires, there are still people and even governments which vaunt the pseudo-civilizing action of the colonialists and are trying-in one form or another and on some pretext or other-to maintain their rule over the last colonial territories. If they think that the peoples have forgotten how much blood and sweat the policy of certain
States has cost the peoples of Africa, Asia and other parts of the world and if they think that they will be allowed further to oppress and exploit those who still remain under their domination, they are mistaken, and history does not forgive such mistakes. The United Nations has done a good deal to help peoples in their struggle for freedom and independence. It must do even more. Colonialism must be finally eradicated.
173.	The Soviet Union is in favor of the full and unconditional implementation of United Nations decisions on the elimination of remaining colonial and racist regimes. We shall continue to provide material and political assistance and support to all the peoples striving towards that goal.
174.	The United Nations must of course take vigorous action in all the areas provided for in its Charter. We can only welcome the fact that a number of questions arising from developments in the scientific and technical revolution will be considered during this session of the General Assembly. The Soviet Union introduced one such item into the agenda of the session, the question of the preparation of a treaty concerning the moon [A/832* J.
175.	The time has come to reach agreement on universally mandatory rules which would be binding on all States and which would ensure the study and utilization of the moon in the interests of the present and future generations for peaceful purposes only. We hope that our proposal on the conclusion of a treaty concerning the moon will receive the support of all States Members of the United Nations.
176.	Preparations are being made for two important international conferences, one on problems of the human environment and the other on the law of the sea. The United Nations must make its contribution to these conferences, since they will be discussing questions which in modem times are closely linked with conditions of human life and the further progress of civilization.
177.	These are new problems, arising from life itself. The United Nations is also faced with not a few old problems, which have not, however, lost their urgency for its Members, especially for the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America. The problems of international economic co-operation have been discussed in the United Nations for many years, but this has not led to any improvement in the economic situation of most developing countries. That situation remains serious.
178.	The struggle of the developing countries against one-sided, agreements and other forms of neo-colonialist oppression and lawlessness is constantly expanding. It is being conducted both by the young States which have recently gained political independence and by developing countries which ceased to be colonies long ago. The United Nations cannot stand aside from this struggle. It is in duty bound to support those who are defending their legitimate rights to liberation from economic oppression, to free national development and to labor for the well-being of their peoples, not for the profit of foreign monopolies.
179.	More than a quarter of a century has passed since the United Nations was founded. This is a considerable period.
During this time the Organization has experienced some failures. It has not always acted with sufficient resolution in cases where it should have shown firmness and energy. But on the whole it has proved that it can serve as a useful instrument of peace and development of international co-operation if it follows the right course and strictly observes the United Nations Charter.
180.	Nevertheless, even now the question sometimes arises of the priority that should be given to certain United Nations activities. The answer was given in the days when the foundations of this Organization were established, when the Charter of the United Nations was signed. The principal task of the United Nations', the basis of all its activities, is the maintenance and strengthening of peace and the prevention of a new war. The United Nations was established for that purpose and that is its very first priority in its work. The peoples of the world evaluate the results of every session of the General Assembly and of every meeting of the Security Council by considering whether effective steps were taken towards the attainment of that essential goal. The Soviet Union, for its part, will do everything in its power to ensure the success of this session of the United Nations General Assembly.


 Mr. President, I should like first of all to associate myself with the previous speakers who have congratulated you on your election to the high office of President of the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly. The United States is confident that you will pursue the ideals of the Charter with the same dedication as your distinguished predecessors.

2.	The United Nations is an important instrument of peace. It is also the repository of many of the world's hopes. We must ensure that it is true to those hopes; that we here assembled-the representatives of 130 nations- meet our high responsibilities not only to our own world but to the world of the future.
3.	Building a structure of peace-a structure that will stand-requires patience, dedication and realism. Working at peace working at it seriously means more than long hours of careful deliberation. It means putting aside preconceptions; it means weighing carefully what our real interests are, not only as citizens of our own countries, but also as citizens of the world. It means proceeding with urgency, but without impatience; steadfastly, but not stubbornly. And it means recognizing that differences exist, and will continue to exist-differences of view, differences of interests, different systems and different values-and that one of the functions of a structure of peace is to protect and accommodate those differences, not to destroy them.
4.	It is appropriate, I think, to take note of the fact that, by any objective standard, the world is a more peaceful place than it was just a few years ago.
5.	In Africa;, the conflict in Nigeria is now long over. Because of recent developments, prospects in the Far East seem more hopeful. Fighting in Indo-China, though it continues, has been substantially reduced. The cease-fire still holds in the Middle East. The division of Europe is less


threatening because the first stage of agreement has been reached on Berlin. Concrete agreements have been achieved on the periphery of the arms race, and encouraging progress is being made at its center.
6.	Yet there are areas-above all, in South Asia where political instability has tipped the balance toward greater tension. There, man's ancient, enemies-poverty, hunger and disease-gain headway, nurturing within themselves seeds of further unrest. And even in areas where recent progress has been made, tensions remain, and the threat of renewed or increased hostilities continues.
7.	That is why we must accelerate our efforts for peace. The achievement of a peaceful world will depend, not just, on the efforts of a handful of powers, but on the efforts of all Governments.
8.	In recent years we have seen a new diversification of power and influence among the nations of the world. Most colonial States have won their independence and now exert a marked impact on world affairs. Japan has found remarkable new strength. The movement towards cohesion in Western Europe has quickened. This diversified and interdependent world is clearly preferable to the bipolar world which emerged from the Second World War. Nevertheless, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States-both large, continental States, both nuclear States and both dynamic States-are of fundamental importance.
9.	Nothing could better serve the cause of peace than a further relaxation of tension between our two countries and the elimination of its by-product-the arms race.
10.	The foreseeable future cannot, of course, be expected to bring an end to the differences between the Soviet and United States political systems or to the competition between us. But it can bring important and beneficial changes in our relations. Many agreements have been achieved in recent years between us. The success of those agreements has stimulated the effort to negotiate still others. Collectively they could promote not just "coexistence" but-if we proceed to build on durable foundations "co-operation" as well.
11.	Our desire to lay the foundations for such cooperation is in no way lessened by our policy of seeking to improve relations with the People's Republic of China. And we have taken due note of the Soviet Foreign Minister's statement that the Soviet Union regards the normalization or our relations with the People's Republic of China as a "natural development".
12.	Though efforts at improvement in Soviet-United States and in Soviet-European relations have assumed many 
forms, the two most important have been the negotiations on strategic arms and on Berlin.
13.	A Berlin agreement will be a milestone along the road to a more peaceful and co-operative Europe. Pivotal in the portion already agreed to is the firm commitment to unrestricted transit traffic of civilian persons and goods between the Federal Republic of Germany and West Berlin. Particularly significant is the obligation the Soviet Union has undertaken to ensure that this traffic will be unimpeded, that it will be facilitated and that it will receive preferential treatment.
14.	The value of this agreement will depend, not on how the obligations have been formulated on paper, but on how they will be carried out on the ground. Truly unhindered movement to and from Berlin would greatly reduce tensions and remove one of Europe's most dangerous flash-points. Half-hearted or grudging implementation of the agreement would only perpetuate fears and suspicions, The willingness of the German Democratic Republic, in its discussions with the Federal Republic of Germany, to translate general obligations into specific commitments and subsequently to put those commitments into actual practice will be the crucial test.
15.	The achievement of a final Berlin agreement and its effective implementation could lead to broader progress. It would, for example, make more realistic the prospects of a European conference with United States and Canadian participation. It would accelerate the movement desired by the people of Eastern as well as of Western Europe-- towards the reduction of tensions on the continent.
16.	It is to this end that the United States is pursuing the possibilities of negotiation on a mutual and balanced reduction of military forces in Europe.
17.	Two years ago President Nixon pledged to the General Assembly that the United States was determined to limit, and then reverse, the build-up of strategic arms. He said we intended to conduct our negotiations with the Soviet Union "soberly and seriously... seeking to reach agreements rather than to make propaganda" [1755th meeting, para. 69J.
18.	In May of this year the United States and the Soviet Union announced their intention to achieve agreement on both defensive and offensive strategic arms, initiating a new stage of intensive work. As a result, although no agreement has yet been reached, we have come closer together on the concepts and details of an agreement to limit anti-ballistic missile systems. On 20 May we made an announcement that contemplates that agreements to limit defensive and offensive weapons will be reached "together". When talks resume in Vienna next month it is therefore agreed that discussions in greater detail will be undertaken on the limitation of offensive weapons.
19.	Meanwhile, these negotiations have already produced two valuable agreements, one on preventing nuclear accidents from leading to war and the other on improving "hot line" communications between Washington and Moscow by use of satellites,
20.	There has also been encouraging movement in multi-lateral negotiations. Here, too, the United States intends to work constructively for further concrete results. In particular, we urge this session of the General Assembly to seek broad ratification of the draft convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and their destruction [A/8457-DC/234, annex A],
21.	The Soviet Union has suggested the creation of a periodic world disarmament conference to be established outside the United Nations [1942nd meeting, paras. 158' 159J. Frankly, we are skeptical that such a generalized approach would produce specific accomplishments. All post-war experience indicates that a concrete, step-by-step approach offers better prospects for success than more grandiose schemes, which tend to generate many words but few results.
22.	At a time when the prospects are promising for participation in the United Nations by the People's Republic of China, and perhaps others as well, there would seem to be no reason for establishing still more world disarmament machinery outside the United Nations framework.
23.	Accommodations among the stronger nations of the World are vital elements of a lasting peace. But the road to enduring peace is no short cut, passing only through the capitals of the strong. The road to peace must traverse every region where there are human beings who aspire to a better condition of life.
24.	In Africa, where the right to a freer existence is still denied to many, we are constant in our support of practical and peaceful means to achieve self-determination and end racial discrimination. That is the policy which President Nixon and I were pleased to confirm to the President of Mauritania and the distinguished delegation from the Organization of African Unity in Washington last week. Consistent with that objective ve have decided to accept the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences for States of South Africa's continuing occupation of Namibia. .
25.	In South-East Asia, as we proceed with an orderly military withdrawal from Viet-Nam, we will continue to make substantial efforts to aid the region's economic progress.
26.	In this hemisphere, we are moving towards a relation-ship of equal partnership in which rights and responsibilities are shared. We are conscious that such a relationship requires economic growth, greater opportunities for trade, and closer economic co-operation among us.
27.	I especially wish to emphasize our undiminished concern for the economic health of the nations of Latin America and other nations of the developing world at a time when the new economic policy of the United States may have raised certain questions,
28.	Our objectives have not changed. We are not adopting a policy of economic nationalism. We have not abandoned our efforts to assist developing countries-through trade, through aid and through investment. Our faith in a free and open system of economic relations among States has not diminished.
29.	We seek a stronger economy at home. We seek also a more equitable international economic system which meets present-day conditions and thus gives even greater encouragement to the flow of goods and capital across borders. Such a system would contribute to the prosperity of all the world's people, in developing and developed countries alike.
30.	This Organization, during this session, faces a decision on the China question-a decision with major consequences for the United Nations.
31.	In our interdependent world, no significant segment of the world's population and of the world's power should be isolated. It was this consideration which led President Nixon to alter the China policy of the United States. To pursue a policy which did not respond to present realities would risk the future for the sake of the past . On the other hand, to seek to improve relations with the People's Republic of China, and to contribute to its greater contact with the international community, could foster prospects for a stable peace in years to come.
32.	Thus, President Nixon began over two years ago, unilaterally and at first without response, to improve bilateral relations. Recently, he resolved to move decisively into a new era of relations by accepting an invitation to visit Peking before 1 May 1972. And he decided to support the seating of the People's Republic of China in the General Assembly and as a permanent member of the Security Council.
33.	The United States wants to see the People's Republic of China come to the Assembly, take its seat, and participate. We want to see it assume, as a permanent member of the Security Council, the rights and responsibilities which go with that status. On the seating of the People's Republic of China there is widespread agreement in this body.
34.	This Assembly does, however, face a related and momentous issue. It could become the first Assembly in United Nations history to take action to expel a Member -an action which would have the effect of expelling 14 million people from its councils. The path of expulsion is perilous. To open it for one would be to open it for many.
35.	So the United States and 16 other countries have introduced a draft resolution [A/L.633] which would seat the People's Republic of China as a permanent member of the Security Council, while providing representation both for it and for the Republic of China in the General Assembly. That resolution is based on political reality and on basic equity.
36.	It is only realistic to recognize a factual situation which has persisted for more than 20 years: that two Governments now exercise authority over territory and over people who were given representation in the United Nations when China ratified the Charter in 1945 as an original Member.
37.	It is only realistic that all the Chinese people who were once represented there should again be represented and represented by those who actually govern them.
38.	It is only realistic that the Security Council seat should be filled by the People's Republic of China, which exercises control over the largest number of people of all the world's Governments.
39.	It would be unrealistic to expel from this body the Republic of China, which governs a population of Taiwan larger than the populations of two 'thirds of the 130 United Nations Members.
40.	Further, it would be unjust to expel a Member which has participated for over 25 years in the world of this Organization with unfailing devotion to the principles set forth in the Charter.
41.	The proposal that both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China should be represented in the United Nations should commend itself to Member States of varying national policies.
42.	It would assure that the long-prevailing de facto situation in China is reflected in United Nations representation; but it does not ask Member States to alter their recognition policies or their bilateral relations.
43.	It would provide representation for the people concerned by those who actually govern them; but it does not divide China into two separate States; after all, we all know that Byelorussia and the Ukraine are not separate States.
44.	The dual representation draft resolution is founded on the reality of the current situation; but it does not seek to freeze that situation for the future, as it expressly provides that the present decision is without prejudice to a future settlement.
45.	In short, the dual representation draft resolution asks simply, and only, that the United Nations take account of the situation as it exists today, and give all the people of China representation in this Organization. As the Charter has accommodated practical solutions of other unusual situations in the past,, so it is flexible enough to accommodate the realities of this one.
46.	The other proposal before this Assembly the draft resolution advanced by A'bania and others [AjL.630 and Add. 1 ] -is punitive in substance and in intent. It does not seek to deal with facts, but to excoriate and condemn. Its essence is not to admit the People's Republic of China, but to expel the Republic of China and to expel it "forthwith". That draft resolution would exacerbate, not harmonize, relations in Asia. And it would weaken, not strengthen, the moral and political fiber of this Organization.
47.	The issue, then, before this body is the issue of expulsion. That is why we have proposed a draft resolution, which we refer to as the "important question draft resolution" but which more properly should be referred to as the "non-expulsion draft resolution" [AjL.632]. This draft resolution requires a two-thirds vote to expel a present Member of the United Nations. It is consistent with the letter and the spirit of the Charter,
48.	Some Members have argued that, whatever the equities and realism of our proposal to maintain the representation of the Republic of China, it should not be supported because they feel that the People's Republic of China would refuse to take its seat. Such predictions are hazardous. Certainly the People's Republic of China may be expected to oppose the proposal so long as there is any possibility for a draft resolution that meets its maximum demands. But just as certainly, after a General Assembly decision providing the People's Republic of China with the status of a permanent member of, and with a seat on, the Security Council but not expelling the Republic of China, a new situation would exist. In any event, I submit, in deciding how to vote we should look more to what the United Nations should do.
49.	It is ironic that, just as the sentiment for universality in the Assembly is growing, many of those who have long extolled it now seek to violate it. If the United Nations is to. embrace universality-as some have suggested then surely the admission of one Member should not be accompanied by the expulsion of another.
50.	Our task here, it seems to me, must be to make a decision that is reasonable, that accepts the realities of the existing situation, that does not prejudice the ultimate outcome and that provides for representation of all the people concerned. Thereafter, our efforts should be to convince those directly involved to take advantage of the decision we have made. The cause of peace has been greatly benefited in recent years by greater pragmatism in many capitals. It would be served by the same pragmatism on this issue.
51.	As the United Nations becomes a more universal body it will be better able to deal with the lengthening list of global issues confronting it: in conciliating political differences, in reducing the world's armaments, in curbing the epidemic spread of narcotics addiction, in protecting the environment, in assuring the exploitation of the oceans for the benefit of mankind.
52.	In meeting those responsibilities the United Nations must during this session deal with two important matters.
53.	It must choose an outstanding successor to our most able and distinguished Secretary-General, UThant, to whose dedication and idealism we all pay a tribute. And, as I pay respects to the Secretary-General, I am sure my colleagues will understand if I also single out for special attention two United States citizens who are now retiring -Paul Hoffman, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Program, who has devoted himself so effectively to the economic welfare of the developing countries, and Ralph Bunche, Under-Secretary-General for Special Political Affairs, and a Nobel Prize winner, who has contributed so markedly to the cause of peace.
54.	The Assembly must also arrest the continuing deterioration of the United Nations financial position, which, as the Secretary-General has pointed out [A/8401/Add.lJ, has eroded its fiscal credit and undermined confidence in its potential. Responsibility for halting that decline rests primarily on those who fail to pay their share. Given assurances of adequate contributions by others, the United States will be prepared to assist towards an over-all solution. Meanwhile we find it hard to understand why the membership should continue to recommend and approve budget increases beyond those necessary to meet inescapable cost increases.
55.	In two parts of the world in which the United Nations has been particularly active-South Asia and the Middle East urgent progress is needed.
56.	In South Asia, renewed and more widespread violence is an ever-present possibility. The events in East Pakistan are internal events with which the Government and people of Pakistan must deal. But their consequences the flight of refugees into India, the danger of famine, the threat to peace in South Asia-are of grave concern to all nations.
57.	To restore peaceful conditions and to save human lives it is clear that restraint must be exercised in the subcontinent; that the international assistance Program must be expanded to avert famine and to create conditions to encourage the return of refugees; and that efforts towards an effective political settlement in East Pakistan must be actively pursued. We are working to those ends.
58.	The United States strongly supports the efforts of the United Nations to organize an effective international relief Program. We have made available over $200 million for relief in bast Pakistan and for emergency assistance for the refugees in India-well over 50 per cent of the total contributions from all foreign contributors, public and private. Last week, President Nixon asked Congress to appropriate an additional $250 million to sustain a high level of relief assistance. A much wider response from other countries is clearly required. We urge the major powers and others with substantial financial resources to contribute generously.
59.	The other place where progress is urgently required is the Middle East. Over several years the United Nations has made determined and persistent efforts to achieve a lasting peace in that critical area. None the less the opportunities for success and the risks of failure remain in precarious balance.
60.	Security Council resolution 242 (1967), establishing the principles for a durable peace, was the first major step towards reason after 18 years of belligerency and a fragile, often violated, armistice.
61.	The cease-fire along the Suez Canal, now nearing its fifteenth month, was the second major step away from war.
62.	It is time for a third major step towards peace.
63.	For four years Ambassador Jarring has worked diligently to secure the agreement called for in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). We support his efforts. We believe his mission remains the best path to an over-all settlement and to lasting peace. Our views on such a final peace settlement remain those expressed in President Nixon's foreign policy report earlier this year and in my statement of 9 December 1969,
64.	Both sides to the conflict are committed to the fundamental and reciprocal principles to which the Jarring mission is dedicated: living in peace with each other and withdrawal from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict as set forth in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). Despite those commitments a deep gulf ot suspicion and distrust remains.
65.	Each side is convinced of the justice of its cause. Each is concerned about its future security. A political settlement based on mutual accommodation could assure both. An attempt to achieve these ends by force will destroy all possibilities for either.
66.	That is why we believe a third major step towards peace is essential -a step that can be taken now; a step that is practical; a step that could help create the confidence and trust which are now lacking; a step towards full and complete implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
67.	That step is an interim Suez Canal agreement. That is why the United States has welcomed the interest of both Egypt and Israel in such an agreement. That is why, at the request of the parties, the United States has undertaken to play a constructive role in the process of arriving at an agreement.
68.	In order to explore the positions of each side, we have discussed concrete and specific ideas designed to meet the legitimate needs and concerns of both sides. Those ideas, given willingness and good intentions on both sides, could become the basis for a breakthrough. They require further quiet discussions with the parties, an undertaking we now hope can be expedited along the following lines.
69.	A first point is the relationship between an interim agreement and an over-all settlement. A fair approach should be founded on two basic principles:
-That a Suez Canal agreement is merely a step towards complete and full implementation of resolution 242 (1967) within a reasonable period of time, and not an end in itself-that has to be clearly established in any agreement; also
-That neither side can realistically expect \to achieve, as part of an interim agreement, complete agreement on the terms and conditions of an over-all settlement -if it could, there would be no necessity for an interim agreement.
Those final terms and conditions will have to be worked out through negotiations under Ambassador Jarring's auspices. And we would hope that if an interim agreement was reached, active negotiations under Ambassador Jarring's auspices could be renewed.
70.	A second point is the matter of the cease-fire. Its maintenance is in the interest of all of us, of everyone concerned, of everyone in this room, in fact in the interest of the whole world. The ultimate objective, of course, is a permanent end to belligerency, as part of a final, binding peace agreement. But such a commitment is not realizable in the context of an interim agreement. Neither would a cease-fire of short duration be realistic. With goodwill on both sides, it should be possible to find common under-standing between the parties on this issue.
71.	Third is the zone of withdrawal. There are, of course, very important strategic considerations involved in this key point. However, based on our discussions, we believe it should be possible to meet the principal concerns of both sides. Without going into the details, I would merely say that I believe that in the long run the most significant aspect of an interim agreement might prove to be that it established the principle of withdrawal looking to an over-all settlement as a fact rather than as a theory.
72.	Fourth is the nature of the supervisory arrangements. Both sides must have confidence that the agreement will not be violated and that adequate machinery will be provided for prompt detection of any infractions. We are confident that ways reassuring to both Israel and Egypt can be found for altering and strengthening the supervisory mechanisms that have existed in the area for the past two decades.
73.	Fifth is the question of an Egyptian presence east of the Suez Canal. The reopening and operation of the Suez Canal would require Egyptian personnel east of the Canal. It is understandable, too, that normal activities should be pursued in as much of the zone evacuated as possible. The question of an Egyptian military presence east of the Canal is one on which the parties hold opposite views. But here too, based on our discussion, we believe that there are possibilities for compromise on this issue.
74.	Sixth is the use of the Suez Canal. The United States has long held that the Canal should be open to passage for all nations, without discrimination. This principle is clear in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). What is at present at issue in considering an interim agreement is principally the timing at which this right could be exercised. We believe an accommodation on this point is quite possible.
75.	With those six points in mind, let me say this: because the parties have asked us, we intend to continue our determined effort to assist them in arriving at an interim agreement. This effort, we believe, is imperative because  and I think it is important to keep this in mind there is no more realistic and hopeful alternative to pursue.
76.	There are risks to peace: but the greater risk is inaction, unwillingness to face up to the hard decisions. A practical step now-an interim agreement-would make the next step toward peace less difficult for all the parties to take. It would restore the use of the Suez Canal as a waterway for international shipping. It would re-establish Egypt's authority over a major national asset. It would separate the combatants. It would produce the first Israeli withdrawal. It would extend the cease-fire. It would diminish the risk of major-power involvement. It would be an important step toward the complete implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
77.	I submit that the logic for such an agreement is overwhelming. If the leaders of the area would grasp this opportunity, they would give new hope to their peoples for tranquility, for progress and for peace.
78.	In all of our efforts, both in the United Nations and elsewhere, we should recall that nothing we do matters so much as the legacy we leave to those who follow, the bridge that we build between the past and the future. There is a tendency, especially when tensions are high and tempers short, to regard the present as the focal point of all of man's history. But ours is only the latest generation, not the last generation; and nothing we leave to future generations will matter so much as a structure of enduring peace.
79.	Peace must be achieved and maintained, not by the decree of a few, but by accommodation among many. Each Government, in upholding its people's particular interests, must also advance the world interest in a peace which will endure.
80.	To that interest the United Nations, from its creation, has been dedicated.
81.	To that interest the United States pledges anew its best efforts.



1.	 Mr. President, I am glad to have the opportunity today of congratulating you on your election to the office of President of the General Assembly, one which my delegation is sure you will fill with great distinction.
2.	I should like at the same time to pay a tribute to your predecessor, who guided our deliberations so successfully during the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly and the special commemorative session,
3.	When I addressed the General Assembly last year [1857th meeting], I referred in some detail to the progress made by the South African Government in implementing and promoting the ideal of self-determination for all the different nations which comprise the population of South Africa. Since then I have been encouraged by the display of interest in these developments in many quarters, including countries in Africa. I have, therefore, decided to expand on my remarks of a year ago.
4.	Last year I outlined to this Assembly our program in the political field. I stressed that for a number of years my Government had been develop*- j, the political institutions of the various nations in South Africa. As early as in 1951 and again in 1959, legislation was passed to provide for various types of Bantu authorities on the regional and territorial level. A number of such authorities was established, and provided valuable experience in the art of government. In the Transkei, self-government was conferred as far back as 1963. Since then the Transkei has held two general elections. During 1969 and 1970 eight additional territorial governments were established. I said, therefore, that each of the nations living in South Africa had acquired some form of self-government.
5.	During the past year we continued on this road, seeking to accelerate the progress towards self-determination, moving forward step by step in consultation with the nations concerned. Ministers and officials were constantly engaged in discussion with the Bantu, the Colored and the Indian peoples.
6.	Arising from these consultations, legislation was passed enabling the Government to proceed with the constitutional development of the various homelands in the light of prevailing circumstances.
7.	Legislative assembly status was granted to the Tswana, Lebowa, Ciskei, Venda, Machangana and Basotho homelands. Some of these territories will shortly advance to the stage of full self-government. They will attain the same political status as the Transkei and will be that much closer to the eventual goal of full and sovereign independence.
8.	The South African Prime Minister himself very recently held discussions with the members of the Colored People's Representative Council, representing the Colored population group, and the governing bodies of the Ciskei, the Tswanas, the Basothos, the Zulus and the Tsongas. In company, inter alia, with the Minister of Finance, he also recently visited the Venda, Lebowa, Tswana and Machangana homelands, with a population of some 4.5 million, in order to confer with their representatives and to gauge at fust-hand the extent of their progress towards self- determination.
9.	These visits are an integral part of our policy of consultation with the different population groups and have been warmly welcomed as such by all concerned. Indeed, as the Sunday Times, a South African newspaper, which opposes my Government's policies, wrote on 1 August of this year;
"From all accounts* Mr. Vorster's tour has been a great success in the sense of fostering dialog with homeland leaders and making personal contact with the various populations which turned out in their thousands at each function...".
10.	The Rand Daily Mail, another South African paper, which is also opposed to our policies, commented in similar vein. It reported that the Prime Minister's visits had improved the relationship between black and white in. South Africa.
A/PV.1946
11.	The road to self-determination is not always an easy one. However, the South African Government is doing all it can to assist the peoples on this road. It is still too early to say exactly when the Bantu peoples will attain their full independence, when they will become sovereign and be able to play their part in the world at large and also in this Organization. It depends in large measure upon themselves 
and the progress that they make. But they have the right to negotiate at any time with us for the attainment of independence. We do not impose conditions on their right to approach us. We shall listen to them at any time that they feel the moment has arrived to ask for independence.
12.	In this way we shall achieve our ultimate aim of making it possible for the various nations to be associated with one another in mutual harmony and acceptance of each other in a South African constellation of independent nations where no nation would be governed by another.
13.	Consultation fosters co-operation, and without co-operation there can be no real progress on either the internal or the international level. Internally it is necessary for the smooth realization of self-determination and for the material as well as the moral well-being of the various nations. Internationally it is necessary for the greater prosperity and peace of nations, especially for those of us on the African continent.
14.	I have have already outlined how this co-operation is being achieved through consultations within South Africa itself. The political development of the various homelands to which I have referred is not something imposed arbitrarily upon those nations. Each one plays an active part in this development.
15- I have emphasized the importance of consultation in our efforts to co-operate smoothly within the borders of South Africa because there are those who condemn our policy of dialog and contact with other African States on the alleged ground that my Government should rather first conduct a dialog with its own peoples. As I have indicated, that is precisely what we are doing.
16.	It is our firm policy to co-operate to the fullest extent possible also with all other countries, including those of Africa. For South Africa is as much a part of Africa as any other African State and we have a vital interest in our continent's peace and prosperity.
17.	During recent years the emphasis in Africa has been placed more and more on the need for development. The developing States have had to contend with various problems in the economic, health, educational, technical and agricultural fields. And where South Africa has in some instances been able to co-operate in the solution of those problems, it has been happy to do so.
18.	We have, for example, assisted various other African States by way of famine relief, we co-operate with them in respect of the supply of electricity, health and welfare services, the marketing of agricultural produce, the provision of low-interest loans and the planning and construction of various long-term development projects.- The private sector in South Africa has also played its part by assisting African countries in the field of tourism, for instance, with the opening of hotels and, in the field of industrial development and transport, with the establishment of factories, plants and works and the construction of railways.
19.	There are no strings attached to our co-operation; we have tried to help others to help themselves. We believe that progress and economic, growth lead to greater stability at home and hence throughout the continent.
20.	We welcome discussions with any State in Africa which desires to talk to us. We have much to discuss and discussion could well be the first step towards co-operation in many fields of mutual interest. My Prime Minister has' said that he is prepared even to discuss our internal policies with those genuinely interested in conducting a dialog with us.
21.	Throughout our history we have firmly believed in living in friendship and harmony with our neighbors and with those further afield. We do not interfere in their internal affairs. We pose no threat to anyone. We are willing at any time to conclude solemn treaties for the preservation of peace with any African country. We believe in communication with our own peoples and with the peoples of Africa. Without communication we cannot hope to solve our problems. Proof of our sincerity in this respect is to be found in our action in the past year. Thus we have continued to make contact with other African States. My Prime Minister, for instance, last year visited Malawi at the invitation of its President, Dr. Banda.
22.	In November last I led a delegation to another neighboring State to discuss with the Government concerned matters of mutual economic and technical interest and to conclude agreements in connexion with development projects. During this year an official delegation from the same country in turn visited South Africa. In addition, discussions were held .with heads of government and ministers of other neighboring States.
23.	Less than two months ago we were proud to welcome to South Africa the Life President of the Republic of Malawi, H.E. H. Kamuzu Banda. The occasion was a historic and significant one, for it marked the first official visit of an African Head of State to my country.
24.	President Banda has made it clear that there are aspects of our domestic policies which he cannot support. Nevertheless, he came to talk to us. As he said:
"I came here because I sincerely believe in co-operation not only in material things but also in spiritual things ... co-operation of the spirit, co-operation of ideas.... The main reason why we should meet is because if we do not agree and we do not meet, how are we going to resolve our problems? "
25.	The visit of President Banda was an unqualified success. He received a most enthusiastic-indeed, tumultuous-reception from all the South African peoples. President Banda himself remarked on the warmth of the welcome accorded him by the entire population. That, he saiJ, contrasted sharply with what he had been told in certain circles, namely that the black peoples of southern Africa disliked the idea of an African statesman cooperating with the South African Government. In other words the policy of contact and communication between the South African Government and other African Governments is welcome also to the black peoples of South Africa, contrary to what has been alleged.
26.	President Banda saw his visit as a mission to build a bridge between the peoples of our respective countries. His mission captured the imagination of black, Indian, Colored and white alike. In welcoming him we were honored to receive a great and far-sighted son of Africa.
27.	Our domestic and foreign policies are founded on the principles of mutual respect and tolerance for the other man's point of view. We believe that South Africa has a considerable contribution to make to Africa's development and prosperity. By the same token, we realize that we have much to learn from other States of Africa. Although our social, political and economic systems may differ, experience has proved that there need be no barriers to co-operation between parties with a common interest in Africa's welfare. Lack of knowledge and policies of isolation inevitably magnify difference. And we are glad to hear more and more of the voices of Africa calling for a departure from the sterile pattern of the past and for a new approach to the issues which seemingly divide us.
28.	In the words of the South African Prime Minister:
"I know of nothing ... that stands in the way of better understanding between South Africa and other nations who seek peace and prosperity for the peoples of the world and especially for Africa."
29.	Surely, policies of communication, co-operation and accommodation such as I have outlined are appropriate to the spirit of detente and reconciliation which is meeting with increasing acceptance by the international community. Surely, those policies are essential for Africa, if Africa as a whole is to prosper and inherit the greatness which should be its destiny. Surely, those policies are the policies of peace which inspired the Charter, which are the essence of the Charter and which should continue to inspire us all.




1.	  Mr. President, it is my pleasant duty, on behalf of my Government and delegation, as well as on my own behalf, to extend to you our most sincere felicitations on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. This is a fitting tribute both to your distinguished diplomatic career and to the country which you represent. We of the Chinese delegation wish you every success in the discharge of the great responsibilities of your high office.
2.	Notwithstanding the atmosphere of euphoria which seems to have pervaded the current scene, the world is still confronted by war or threats of war. The war in Viet-Nam has now been escalated to embrace the whole of Indo-China. The situation in the Middle East continues to be explosive. Conflicts of one kind or another prevail in various parts of the world. Although some of these may be said to be disputes of a domestic nature, their continuance could endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.
3.	In Viet-Nam the Communists continue to seek a military solution. They count on the pressures of world
public opinion to force the withdrawal of United States forces. The Paris peace talks have served, as far as the Communists are concerned, more as an instrument for political warfare than for serious discussions. Always with an eye on the anti-war sentiments in the United States, the Communist negotiators have been skillful in stirring up popular opposition to United States involvement in Viet- Nam. Division within the United States has made the eventual American pull-out inevitable. But the withdrawal of the United States military establishment from Viet-Nam, however, should not mean the disappearance of United States interest and influence from South-East Asia. We are confident that the United States will continue to fulfill its commitments in that part of the world, even though a nation directly threatened by aggression must now, in the light of the Nixon Doctrine, assume the primary responsibility for providing the manpower for its own national defense.
4.	In terms of Viet-Nam this means that the brunt of the war must henceforth be borne by the people of the Republic of Viet-Nam themselves. Indeed, the South Viet-Namese people have been doing just that for over two years. All evidence points to the fact that they have given a pretty good account of themselves. There is every reason to believe that they will be able to safeguard their independence and freedom against subversion from within and aggression from without after the withdrawal of United States armed forces.
5.	It is gratifying that, in the midst of war and crisis, the Republic of Viet-Nam has continued to make progress in the social, economic and political fields. A general election has just taken place. Bitter fighting on the battlefields and terrorism in the rear failed to keep the voters from the polls. Given the divisive social and intellectual climate, and the disruptions of the war, no one should expect the Republic of Viet-Nam to master the mechanisms of the democratic process overnight. Of the fact that Saigon has done its best to make democracy the dominant element in its future there can be no question. One is doing no favor to the people and Government of South Viet-Nam if one allows oneself to expect too much to happen too soon. In any case, the Republic of Viet-Nam does not merit the kind of abuse and vilification which some critics have been in the habit of meting out. It is ironical that the same critics, while condemning South Viet-Nam for its undemocratic ways, do not hesitate to pay craven homage to the North Viet-Namese Communists, who have nothing but contempt for bourgeois democracy. Obviously, they are less interested in the development of democratic institutions in South Viet-Nam than in sowing the seeds of dissension among the Viet-Namese people. The last thing they want to see is the creation of conditions in which healthy political institutions can flourish and the Viet-Namese may be enabled to work out their own destiny in their own way. 
6.	In the Middle East, guns have for the most part been silent since the acceptance by Israel, Egypt and Jordan in August last year of the United States peace initiative. The cease-fire, while no longer formally in effect after its lapse in March 1971, has by and large been observed. It is to be regretted, however, that the maintenance of the precarious cease-fire has not been accompanied by any progress towards the resolution of the basic issues which have so long embittered the relations between Israel and the Arab States. It is all too obvious that, unless the parties concerned are prepared to accept reasonable and practical compromises or the major interested Powers are willing to bring their influence to bear on the parties, peace in the Middle East will remain unattainable.
7.	There are conflicts which are technically matters of a domestic nature but whose significance for international peace is beyond question. A case in point is the recent civil strife in East Pakistan. As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report on the work of the Organization, the problems generated by the conflict "are necessarily of concern to the international community" [A/8401[Add.l, para. 177].
8.	In purely human terms the magnitude of the tragedy is staggering. In the six months since March several million refugees have poured into India. The terrible plight in which millions of destitute and helpless people find themselves cannot but arouse the sympathy and compassion of us all. We of the Republic of China know how serious the problem can be in terms of human misery and suffering. Ever since the Communist take-over of the Chinese mainland, millions of our brethren have suffered the same fate as that whicn has now befallen the East Pakistanis. We therefore urge the international community to do everything possible to give relief to the innocent people who, through no fault of their own, have been deprived of their homes and possessions and have been thrown upon the mercies of an alien world.
9.	Lasting peace cannot be built on the foundation of a world community in which the greater part of mankind sinks ever deeper into the miseries of under-development and over-population. It is, of course, no easy matter to close the gap between rich and poor nations. There is no question, however, that there are available material resources for this task. The question is whether there is the will to use the available resources to meet the pressing needs of development. In the view of my delegation, the United Nations is in a special position to create that will. The International Development Strategy for the new Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] is an important step in the right direction.
10.	The third session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development [ UNCTAD], scheduled to convene in a few months, should provide an excellent opportunity for co-operation between developed and developing countries. It is hoped that the developed countries will find it in their own interest to remove the barriers which they have set up and which have operated to the great disadvantage of the developing countries.
11.	The Republic of China is a developing country. It faces many of the problems which plague other developing
 
countries. In so far as lies within the limits of its capabilities, it has always been ready to contribute to the solution of problems which confront countries in various stages of development and to share experiences with them.
12.	It must be admitted that the United Nations has in recent years lost much of its prestige and influence. In Viet-Nam it has contented itself with playing the role of a helpless bystander. In the Middle East its attempts to bring about a settlement have achieved no outstanding success. The advance towards disarmament is being decided not so much in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament meeting at Geneva as in the direct Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] between the Soviet Union and the United States. The recent agreement on the status of Berlin  was concluded outside the walls of the United Nations. The inescapable conclusion is that on the main currents of world events the United Nations has exerted only a marginal influence.
13.	As a free association of sovereign States the United Nations can be only as strong and effective as its Members make it. All too often short-range national interests are allowed to prevail over the common interests of the world community. All too often the United Nations has not hesitated to resort to expediency at the expense of vital Charter principles. Its readiness to yield to force, to disregard justice, or to neglect human rights, has been to a large extent responsible for what has often been called "a crisis of confidence".
14.	It is sad to reflect that, at a time when the effectiveness of the United Nations is being called into question, there are those in our midst who press for the replacement of the Republic of China, a Member of impeccable standing, by a regime whose declared policy has been the destruction of the Organization as an instrument for peace.
15.	I shall have occasion to speak on the so-called question of Chinese representation when the item comes up for debate in the Assembly. I wish to make here a few observations which may help to clarify certain issues in respect of the Chinese Communist regime.
16.	The first observation I wish to make is that it is erroneous to assume that the Communist regime and the Chinese people are an indissoluble whole. The fact of the matter is that the regime and the oppressed millions are two distinct and mutually hostile entities. The overwhelming majority of the people are anti-Mao and anti-Communist. Twenty-two years of unremitting regimentation and brainwashing, torture and terror have failed to make them accept tho Communist regime as anything more than a transient tyranny which, like other tyrannies in Chinese history, will in time pass away. The Chinese people have never ceased to thirst for freedom, and they will struggle on until freedom is won.
17.	In recent months Western journalists who have visited the Chinese mainland have painted a glowing picture of progress and achievement. It is difficult to believe, however that a brief conducted tour to a few cities and villages in a vast land could provide any genuine insight into the real conditions of the country. The Chinese people arc too well experienced in the ways of the world to reveal their true feelings to an outsider. Yet it is possible to get glimpses of the real situation from some of the dispatches. Not a few correspondents, for example, have written admiringly about the wonderful discipline of the common people. Some have reported the existence of a new species of human being on the Chinese mainland the “Maoist men”-austere, self- controlled, all dressed in the same drab clothing, all relating their every activity to the thought of Mao Tse-tung, all shouting the same slogans, all vowing undying fealty to Chairman Mao. What all this amounts to is that, by means of terror and ruthless regimentation, the masses of the people have been reduced to the level of robots, apparently with no will or mind of their own.
18.	Yet it would be a grave mistake to view them as nothing but robots. They conform because conformity is the only way to survive in a world in which life is regulated by harsh decrees, intimidating exhortations, punishment without crime. But below the surface of seeming docility, there is a boiling and ultimately irrepressible mass of resentments and suicidal despairs. No one should give them up as irretrievably lost to the Mao regime. Despite Communist news black-out, bloody anti-Communist and anti-Mao uprisings are still going on in many parts of the mainland.
19.	Nothing is more indicative of the people's profound opposition to the Communist regime than the floods of refugees who have fled, and continue to flee, the mainland. They number in the millions. Today, the border between mainland China and the outside world is closely guarded by army and militia patrols. Yet thousands have daily risked death to escape Communist tyranny. It is estimated that in the first eight months of this year, 12,500 to 15,000 made good their escape. Most of them have done so by swimming, spending up to 10 hours in the water, usually at night, and covering four to six miles. This was reported in The New York Times on 12 September 1971. Clearly, only hatred and revulsion of the first order can account for their decision to leave behind their loved ones, friends and possessions for the uncertainties of life in an inhospitable world.
20.	If the Communist regime and the Chinese people are mutually hostile entities, it follows that the Communist regime cannot possibly represent the Chinese people in the international community. It is thus ridiculous to assert that to bar the Communist regime from the United Nations is to deny 700 million people, a quarter of the world's population, of their representation.
21.	This brings me to the second point I wish to make, namely, that the Chinese Communist Party, whose total membership represents only about 2 per cent of the population, is torn by dissension and factional strife, and that it faces an uncertain future, As is well known, during the Cultural Revolution, the Party apparatus was completely demolished and hundreds of thousands of Party members were subjected to all kinds of indignity and inhuman treatment. Many of them have since been purged. Chou En-lai, in an interview with Arab newsmen in May of
 
this year, said that the number of Communists who had been purged in the Cultural Revolution amounted to about 1 per cent of a total of 17 million, that is, 170,000. In the same breath, however, he added:
“There are still Communists whose problems have not been solved. We are conducting direct investigations with them. They amount to about 50 per cent of the Party membership.""
In other words, the loyalty of no less than 8.5 million Party members is still in doubt. Obviously, something must be basically wrong with the Chinese Communist Party. It seems that the cancer cf fear is gnawing at its vitals. Leaders are suspicious of one another, suspicious of the rank and file. The rank and file live precariously under the whip-lash of their superiors and at the mercy of lick-spittles and informers among their own comrades. It is not surprising that in recent weeks so much speculation should have centered on the cancellation of the customary 1 October military parade and on other developments on the mainland. There is every reason to believe that a new and serious power struggle is braiding up within the Maoist ranks. The schism within the Communist Party militates against the regime's ability to stabilize itself and consolidate control.
22.	The third point I wish to make is that the world should never mistake Peiping's tactical zigzag for a basic change of policy. The cold fact is that both in words and in deeds the regime remains what it has always been oppressive at home and aggressive abroad.
23.	It is easy to understand why Peiping's change of style has been received with so much fanfare and enthusiasm. Weariness with recurrent crises and fear of nuclear holocaust have engendered in the minds of men a yearning for normality and a craving for world-wide detente. They are conditioned to accept Peiping's gestures of goodwill at face value.
24.	It seems to my delegation, however, that this is a dangerous delusion. There is nothing to suggest that the Chinese Communist regime is ready to give up its policy of world domination. It continues to promote the violence of war; it continues to make a fetish of force. It continues to foment armed insurrection in neighboring countries. It continues to supply arms and ammunition to rebel bands in Thailand, Burma, Malaysia and Indonesia. It continues to train, equip and finance guerillas on a global scale. Rhetoric and friendly gestures notwithstanding, there is no evidence that the regime now intends to pursue a course of action consistent with the United Nations Charter. Indeed, all signs point the other way.
25.	The quest for international peace and security is, and will continue to be, the dominating purpose of our age. It is to the Governments represented here that the peoples of the world look for the peace and security that they so desperately long for. So, let us whole-heartedly pledge ourselves to the noble and challenging task of translating the ideals and goals of the Charter into reality. Let us hope that this great international body will remain steadfast and true to the purposes and principles for which it was founded. Let us hope that the Assembly will refuse to subject itself to the humiliation of bowing before force. As 
the Organization enters the second quarter-century of its existence, let us remind ourselves that the road to peace is indeed tortuous and long, and that lasting peace will come only when it is built, not on the quicksand of expediency and appeasement, but on the rock of moral strength.




34.	It is toward Asia where all the problems of the world are in ferment, but whose ancient wisdom never shuts out the possibility of dialog, that our thoughts turn, Mr. President, in welcoming your election. The example given by your country strengthens our hopes. The age-old nature and quality of the relations which unite Indonesia and Europe and which the recent visit to your islands by the Queen of the Netherlands again illustrates, cause us to welcome- even more the choice the Assembly made in naming you to succeed a great European, Mr. Hambro, that great President of the twenty-fifth session.
35.	However, I do not wish to mention the eminent role played by the President of our Assembly during the . twenty-fifth anniversary session without also paying the same tribute to a man who has preserved and guided our Organization for 10 years with patient and serene energy. May U Thant accept our gratitude. It is yet too early to bid him farewell.
4	Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and under Water, signed at Moscow on 5 August 1963 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 488 (1963), No. 6964).
5	See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda items 27, 28, 29; 30, 31, 93 and 94, document A/8191.
36.	A former French diplomat recently wrote: "One cannot say that politics, the realm of means, is identical to ethics, the realm of ends. But a policy which did not have ethical ends and a certain conception of good and evil, would have no sense. It would be, literally, senseless." I did not mention these three short sentences to proclaim the superiority of one "certain conception" over another, or to give myself the right to trace the boundary between the realm of ends and the realm of means. More modestly, I shall have attained my goal if I succeed in showing members the meaning France wishes to give its policy.
37.	We belleve-as everyone here knows-that the affirmation of national independence of nations, far from being the expression of nationalism, that is, egotism, is on the contrary the manifestation of a profound solidarity: solidarity which brings people together-regardless of distances or differences-people whose sole ambition is not to part with the choice of their own destiny. We believe-as everyone here knows-that refusing to accept any kind of hegemony is the best contribution a country can make to the birth of a truly international community. We must, however, to justify this conviction, assume the consequences and the risks it entails.
38.	Let me take as the first example monetary relations between nations. We are, in fact, here to increase the chances for peace. Now, no one questions the fact that one of the best ways to achieve this is to bring about, for all world economies, the set of conditions needed for truly balanced growth. In the face of this immense task-and the poorest peoples feel this urgency most deeply the major countries have a special responsibility. How can they and how should they undertake it? Recent history gives us the beginnings of an answer.
39.	The Bretton Woods Agreement, the Marshall Plan, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade: one would be pushing forgetfulness or ingratitude very far indeed in failing to mention the benefits and farsightedness of the initiatives which substituted equality of rights, stability, freely endorsed rules of truly international codes for the evils of compartmentalization, that is, shortsighted egocentricity and unchecked competition, which is anarchy. Once and for all, history has given a large part of the credit to the United States. But two cracks have successively threatened the order of this magnificent structure.
40.	First, it has always been obvious that world equilibrium presupposed -even demanded- the participation of the countries of Eastern Europe, and foremost that of the Soviet Union, in the main currents of exchange. This is one of the goals and this is already, to a certain degree, one of the results of the detente whose political advantages it is superfluous to stress. A great Power or group of Powers could no more be kept .on the sidelines by an outside agency than they themselves could remain aloof from circuits of communication, whether technical or scientific, economic or cultural.
41.	However, the other crack is moire disturbing, because it is threatening the structure from within: respect for the international rules which were accepted by Common agreement by all countries, large and small, led the West to make. an unprecedented leap forward. These rules are called free trade and fixed exchange rates. They are irreplaceable. No one has the power, however strong he may be, to substitute other rules for them. To violate them is therefore to replace them by the absence of rules.
42.	So, if the industrialized States reached a point of preferring anarchy or-and this amounts to the same-the unstable law of the strongest to a set of agreed conditions for harmonious development, who, in the long run, would benefit? The betting-dangerous, like all betting-is open. But, while it is difficult to be a winner in this game, it is easy to pick out the first loser. It would undoubtedly be all the victims of under-development. Let us reread the text relating to the International Development Strategy which was solemnly adopted on 24 October 1970 by the General Assembly [resolution 2626 (XXV)] and which should in principle determine-let us not forget-the relations between industrialized and developing countries throughout the present decade. It rests entirely on the idea that the drive against under-development must be a concerted action, undertaken jointly and in close co-operation by the two groups of nations. What will remain of this fine plan if one of the two groups on which the major responsibilities fall begins by dividing against itself and in some way denying or destroying itself?
43.	In those conditions one can imagine the anxiety in the third world caused by the recent announcement of certain trade restrictions. Because they strike indiscriminately at all States, it is in fact the weakest among them which may be hurt the most.
44.	My country, guided by the experience it has been able to acquire in its relations with the African countries to which it is attached by ever-closer ties of friendship, has made itself and will continue to make itself the untiring advocate of a real organization of markets for basic commodities, where the essential goal is to seek stable, just and remunerative prices. As I have once said:
"The problem is not to throw a few provisions into the abyss of hunger, but to throw a lifeline to enable millions of human beings to climb out through their own effort."
We are here-why not say so? -on the level of principles. We put ourselves on this level as early as 1964, when we suggested that a system of preferences such as the one which had been set up between the associated African States and the European Economic Community should become generalized. We are striving to stay on that level when we insert into our own plan the goal proposed by the United Nations, in other words, when we set our rate of participation in development at 1 per cent of the gross national product.
45.	What are we trying to say? Simply that the responsibility of the industrialized States is committed and cannot be denied.
46.	On several occasions during this analysis we have mentioned the European Economic Community. We have observed that its very structure keeps it from becoming inward-looking. That will be even more true the day it brings together 250 million men and women to whom several million others will be joined through more or less close ties.
47.	Latin America can bear witness to this. I had the honor of presiding over the Council of Ministers of the Community when a colloquium-which should not be the last-both reminded us of our affinities, to which France attaches such importance, and encouraged us to continue increasing our exchanges on all levels.
48.	Nevertheless, how can one talk today of Europe before the nations which comprise it, and also before those which observe it, without being struck by the parallel progression of two phenomena which is its present day characteristic?
49.	On the one hand, the European Economic Community is being enlarged, which means that it has an ever-stronger attraction, that it will henceforth be considered irreversible and that its internal difficulties are the manifestation of growing pains. On the other hand, the progress and consolidation of detente justify this reference to "the whole of Europe" that the six countries meeting in The Hague nearly two years ago took care-on France's initiative to include in the final communique of their summit conference. This I repeat, is parallelism, not coincidence.
50.	'	Western Europe was for a long time a community of suffering and anxiety. Through economic integration and political co-operation it is becoming a community of hope. By setting the example, it has shown first that the decisions and rivalries which seemed so persistent could be overcome, then that the refusal to accept any kind of hegemony was, for peoples too long torn by divisions, the best justification and the most effective stimulus for a necessary rapprochement. In learning that Berlin had become the place and the symbol of agreement, everyone said to himself that the time had come for "the whole of Europe" to keep its appointment with destiny.
51.	What name will history give this conference for which preparation must now enter the decisive stage? "East-West Conference"? Certainly not that. Our plan is certainly not to endorse or even to organize a confrontation of the two camps, but on the contrary to reduce it enough to make it fall into disuse. "European Conference"? That title would be incorrect; everyone agrees-and has agreed for some time now thai the two great North American countries should have a place in it. I hope, then, that we would try to live up to the title which summarizes a great design: "Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe". "Security", "co-operation" it is important that those two words remain linked together, because the concepts they encompass are complementary and indivisible.
52.	To reinforce existing ties between all the countries of Europe on the level of economy, culture, science or technology; to open new paths for their co-operation; to lower the barriers which here and there still prevent or hinder the movement of people, the exchange of information, the movement of ideas; to bring about a genuine mutual interpretation, without impairing State Sovereignty, which would by drawing the peoples closer together, enable them to improve their intellectual and material living standards: is not all this contributing at the same time to increasing the security of the continents, and we think that mistrust, lack of understanding, and even glaring inequalities in development, are also factors of instability;
we note that these still exist in Europe, and not only between what is still called the East and the West. We consider that the multiple development of co-operation extended to everyone in order to reduce those factors is imperative if one intends to deal with the problem of European security in depth.
53.	But this problem is also, of course, political and military. France, in so far as disarmament is concerned, neither can nor will be content with words or appearances. Disarmament must be the elimination of existing arms under effective international control, and the prohibition of any new manufacture of them. And yet, the result of all the efforts made in New York, Geneva and elsewhere since the end of the Second World War is that no arms have in fact been destroyed. On the contrary, we are witnessing the most fantastic arms race the world has ever known. Several bans, whose effectiveness remains to be demonstrated, have been declared on the proliferation of nuclear arms or on their deployment in areas which were up to now inaccessible to man.
54.	Those bans, whatever their individual merits, are unfortunately misleading and can give rise to the belief that disarmament has begun, while the existing arsenals and their power to destroy never stop growing. A "disarmament" carried out in this way can only promote the development of hegemonies and would tend to divide the world by installing an order in which only the super-Powers would retain the ability to exercise their sovereignty.
55.	France has obviously not acquiesced in such a prospect. That is why it has insisted on keeping the possibility of providing itself with the necessary means to secure its defense and maintain its independence. But it remains nonetheless highly in favor of any undertaking for true disarmament, which in an age of nuclear armaments demands, first of all, settlement of the problem of those armaments. How can that be achieved, if not by consensus between the States which possess them? That is why France just recently again recalled that it favored a conference of the five nuclear Powers. It hopes that the requirements for such a conference will one day be met.
56.	Is this to say that for the moment nothing can be done to reduce the threats which weigh on humanity? The United States and the USSR have, for their part, begun talks to lessen the risk of nuclear confrontation between them. To that end, in Vienna and in Helsinki, they are planning to set mutual limits on the development of their strategic arms. But the balance they hope to reach that way is not the only thing which could be called upon to avert the risk of nuclear war. In the absence of a true disarmament agreement between the five, but in the hope of opening ways towards it, would it not be possible as of now also to plan nuclear-Power co-operation to prevent accidental, mistaken or surprise release of the terrible weapons at their disposal? Establishing such a security system will surely provide a practical means of moving toward a world where the risks accompanying the existence of nuclear arms, while not yet eliminated, could at least be reduced. France, for its part-and I confirm and announce this formally-is ready to contribute to that.
57.	For it is only to avoid submission to any system of blocs and I deliberately repeat myself of hegemony that we have had to provide ourselves with the means of deterrence, after having asked in vain for an internationally controlled ban on nuclear arms. In this field as in others, the desire for independence is a contribution to world equilibrium and, consequently, to peace. However, our experiments -I voluntarily refrain from mentioning experiments for which other countries are responsible- would, in our view, cease to be legitimate if they were to endanger life-first of all, of course, the life of man, but also the life of the flora or fauna on land and in the sea.
58.	Have we set ourselves up as the sole judges of the adequacy of the precautions taken, and first of all the remoteness of the test sites? Not at all. We have not been satisfied with the installation of a system, now five years old, to survey the development of radio-activity at various points of the globe on our own.
59.	We have invited scientists and researchers from the countries concerned to take part in our observation and surveillance work. This is a unique and unprecedented effort of international scientific cooperation. Each year we report the results of these observations to all the Members of the Organization, without concealment or hindrance.
60.	We have duly reported to the United Nations committee qualified, as its name indicates,  to evaluate the harmfulness or harmlessness of atomic radiation. Consequently, those who would charge us, not only without proof but against all proof, with risking pollution which our experiments, and ours alone, might entail would be taking to task not us, but the indisputable and indeed undisputed authority and the conscience of a scientific committee of the United Nations.
61.	Let me add that those explosions-by the very fact that they take place in the atmosphere-are not registered by even the most sensitive seismographs on the American continent, which respond to all variations, however weak, in the earth's crust; consequently, they cannot have any , relation to any seismic shock. You will then understand that we trust good faith and common sense to do justice to the simple truth.
62.	But the accumulation of forces in the European theater is the consequence, not the cause, of political tensions there. What chance is there of dealing with the effects without troubling to go to the roots?
63.	It is not too early to look beyond the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin,' which is sure to be supplemented soon by the necessary arrangements between the German authorities-a must for its entry into force. A larger settlement will then appear, since the Treaties of Moscow and Warsaw,  Which convey an equal desire to surmount the obstacles built up in the path of reconciliation between peoples by the horrors of war, are going to take effect in their turn. May we not hope that those three elements of a true political reconstruction in the very center of Europe -the Berlin accord, the necessary arrangements between the German authorities, and the entry into force of the Treaties of Moscow and Warsaw-will culminate in a lasting agreement between the two German States? Nothing would contribute more effectively to guaranteeing the stability of the continent as a whole.France, which bears a part of the responsibility regarding this problem, and which as I said right here last year [1842nd meeting], is anxious to see the Organization become universal, will not spare its encouragement and support for the efforts the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany intends to make in order to -come to such an agreement soon, with all the consequences that this would, I believe, entail for the United Nations.
64.	From then it will only be a matter of organizing the relations between European States in such a way that the alliances, as long as they are held necessary, do not take the form of blocs turned in upon themselves, that for each country the right to belong to one alliance or to belong to none will be respected, as well as the right to territorial integrity, the right to sovereignty with all the accompanying prerogatives, the right to be exempt from all forms of pressure, from wherever it comes, from all interference or external attempt at interference. One of the tasks of the conference on security and co-operation in Europe will be to define these rules with the greatest precision and to ensure that their binding force is clearly understood. At stake is the confirmation of a detente which-I purposely repeat myself-is based on respect for and development of national independence, through free co-operation, a detente which, in a continent so rich in possibilities-for the best and for the worst-means both progress and peace.
65.	In bringing up the universality of our Organization a moment ago, I was thinking of Asia, for I see there something which causes great hope, great fear and great impatience.
66.	The hope springs from the awareness that, as France has always hoped, the People's Republic of China and the Unites States of America have entered into a necessary and difficult undertaking whose effects, we strongly feel, will have repercussions on international relations in their entirety. Doubtless the process will be long. But if, as I am convinced, it is not directed against anyone, it will not fail to serve the cause of detente and peace in that area as well as beyond. Will we then finally see the completion, this year, of the debate on the question of China which our Assembly has continued for too long? Logic and realism would point this way, for although it is said that all roads lead to Rome, there is only one, as far as I have been informed, that leads from Peking to New York. No stratagem can change this, any more than it is possible to make our Charter say something it does not say.
67.	Great fear also. How can one not feel it in the face of the horrible drama 'which has already caused one of the most tragic exoduses in modern times and which anyone feels is perhaps only the prelude to more terrible sufferings still to come? Of course, the response the international community gave to the appeal launched by the Secretary-
General for those unfortunate people of East Pakistan shows that the voice of U Thant was not sounded in vain. But if the wrong is not righted at the root, will the flow of people stop? And will it be possible to reverse the flow? We must hope that the wisdom and generosity of some people will respond to the moderation of others and that a political and constitutional solution based on the consent of the Pakistani people will make it possible to come out of the crisis; for, if the tension is not relieved soon, we shall have to expect tragic consequences for peace in Pakistan and in the subcontinent as a whole.
68.	Lastly, great impatience. Impatience caused by the absence of any progress in settling the Indo-Chinese conflict. However, new proposals have recently been advanced. Could they not be discussed? This question, as the Assembly has surely understood, is actually a wish. I have three reasons for making it: my Government is the host for the Paris Conference; it has, for the people of Indo-China, a friendship which it is always ready to express: it believes, lastly, as we all do, that the only lasting solution to this long-drawn-out tragedy is one which will ensure the independence of each State in South-East Asia, a zone which, after so much suffering is yearning at last for peace and neutrality, sheltered from the competition of all the major Powers.
69.	The same moral -if not the same formula- is applicable to the Middle East, with one basic difference however. Here the responsibility of the United Nations is directly committed. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) will be four years old in a few weeks. Will we spend this anniversary in silence? Will it be for us a time to draw up a report of our lack of success? We are not about to be limited to this alternative! Once again, faithful to our maxim, we will not confuse the means with the end. There is, on the one hand, the cease-fire, for which we can never be thankful enough, if only out of horror for the bloodshed though we see how inevitably precarious it is. There is, on the other hand, .the object of the cease-fire, which can and must be only the mutually accepted implementation of the resolution, that is, evacuation of the occupied territories in exchange for guarantees of real peace. Also, we must be grateful to the United Kingdom and its Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, for having warned us against a certain thinking pattern from which we may soon be painfully awakened. We have two good reasons for fearing and refusing to let time run out: elementary prudence and, above all, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Observing our impasse, Africa responded. I wish here to pay tribute to its decision. To the four Heads of State who will make contact with the parties concerned  Presidents Senghor, Ahidjo, Mobutu and Gowan France offers its warmest wishes.
70.	However, the fears and the hopes of the international community as well as the latter's determination for a peaceful settlement must all be expressed, and this can only be done here. Our appeal last year was heeded. Mr. Jarring was able to resume his mission within the desired time- limit. Our hopes, alas, were quickly dashed. Without the required answer, dialog could not begin. Without unanimous determination, the permanent members of the Security Council has so far not been able to formulate their recommendations for a settlement or make known as agreement whose persuasive effect could be decisive. So here we are again faced with the same alternative: either the Assembly speaks out or the international community is doomed to silence. We should lose our raison d'etre if we did not opt for the first choice. The voice of the General Assembly is thus to be heard: with moderation, equity and firmness. May its appeal inspire in all those who carry more direct responsibilities in this sad affair, the desire to act together so that peace can be established-a peace whose durability is guaranteed by respect for justice.
71.	Is it futile to hope that 12 months after having celebrated the foundation of the United Nations we might, on the occasion of this session of the General Assembly, make a new start in some way? Actually, everything prompts us to do this, above all this striking but necessary observation: we have entered a new era. When we compare the world of 1971 with the post-war world or with what was called the "cold-war" era, we see clearly that the dissimilarities far outweigh the similarities: no continent is invulnerable any more; no ideology is sufficient any more to guarantee the monolithism of all the countries which adhere to it; no nation can be subjected to dependence any more.
72.	These changes point to simple and fruitful guidelines: on the one hand, the world community lives and prospers only through national entities-that is, organized, sovereign and ultimately equal nations. On the other hand, national independence is meaningful and final only through its contributions to the community task. The conference of the non-aligned countries in Lusaka  was correct in taking this principle as its motto: "Unity in diversity." General de Gaulle was no less far-sighted almost 30 years ago when he said to us in a voice we shall never hear again:
"Henceforth there cannot be even the slightest connexion between independence and isolation; no State can maintain itself or, still less, develop without support and help."
73.	Given those two rules, is it possible to construct a world where there would be more solidarity and more security? Europe torn asunder for so long has now the best chance of proving the reverse. As we have seen, the union of Western Europe and detente in international relations in Europe as a whole have gone hand in hand. The year 1972 should see both the summit conference, which was proposed by Georges Pompidou on behalf of France and which will strengthen the solidarity of 250 million Europeans, and also the first conference on the security and co-operation of all Europeans.
74.	Yet co-operation, the guarantee of security, -can. neither stop at the frontiers of Europe, nor do without justice. Recently, before the Conference of the InterParliamentary Union, the President of the French Republic termed racism-of which apartheid is only one manifestation-the "scourge of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the most distressing form of.man's scorn for man". But the threats and the violence which cause millions of human beings to flee their homes, extreme poverty and
hunger, are no less incompatible with the dignity, and indeed the very mission, of man.
75.	May I add that those men whose magnificent life's work is to keep the collective conscience alerted by the pen or by the word have never been more necessary; never, consequently, has the protection of journalists on dangerous missions been more pressing or more urgent. Of course, there are countries where industrial civilization has developed in such a way that the public wonders about the effects and about the very goals of this civilization, awed as it is by the scope of the resulting difficulties and disorders: destruction of the natural environment, pollution, moral and social crises chiefly affecting the young. In these countries the idea of economic growth is sometimes called into question.
76.	This obviously does not apply to the majority. The countries of the world, for the most part, strive to ensure that their populations have the basic requirements and that the opportunities for what is too often difficult and precarious progress are preserved.
77.	Before concluding it would be well to re-emphasize the obligations of the industrialized nations for in our hearts we know that the success of our efforts does not depend on any arrangement or mechanical adjustment of our institutions-even though improvements in means and procedures are welcome. We must above all imbue our undertakings with more soul and more action.
78.	Today, new and inspiring horizons are being spread before our weary, burdened nations and the impatient youth of the world, who are astonished at our quarrels and are already tempted to break rank. Away with hegemonies, therefore and the thirst for power and super-power.
79.	The world has grown. It offers our ambitions immense, still little-explored and under-exploited fields, such as space, the sea, and the sea-bed, which science technology are continually opening up.
80.	May these new prospects help us liquidate the sequels of past conflicts and overcome the crises which some day will seem quite petty.
81.	May this "shock of the future" urge us to move on towards tomorrow together-all together.

79.	Mr. President, I should like in the beginning to join with those of my colleagues who have spoken in saying how happy I am that we meet under your guidance and to express my full confidence that you will steer us with complete success through the many difficult problems which face us. I am happy, too, that the honor which is done to you is reflected on your country, Indonesia, with which we have and still maintain the closest and most friendly relations.
80.	I have found myself on this platform on a number of occasions compelled to call attention to a feature of international life which has plagued for far too long the lives of ordinary men and women. It is in short the abuse of the function of politics and diplomacy by what I may call the cult of confrontation and the denial of dialog. To promote dialog is the essential function of this Organization, and, indeed, it is implicit in the very name "United Nations". So it is here, above all, that we should show concern at a development that threatens to drag civilization backwards, down the-road to violence.
81.	Confrontation may develop as an internal problem, as the distinguished Foreign Minister of Canada has just reminded us. I speak today from experience.
82.	In Northern Ireland a terrifying manifestation of the old danger of religious confrontation has reappeared, complicated in this case by other political and social problems.
83.	All through history, in every corner of the world, religion has been the reason or excuse for wars which caught up peoples in their toils and left a trail of misery for ordinary people behind. In the last century or two dogmatic political ideology has supplanted it. But the danger is the same and in fact as we survey the world's scene it is greater than ever. With the rapid communication of ideas, the sophisticated propaganda, these divisions can be exploited^ and exploited on a vast scale. Millions-and we see this every day when we look at the modern means of communication are duped into adopting the prejudices of the few even though they have little or no idea what the confrontation is about. The way is thus open for the anarchist who believes in revolution and sees nothing beyond his nose and no formation of society beyond that; he believes in revolution by destruction. The way is open, too, for the terrorist who wishes to enforce one point of view and rejects compromise and reason.
84.	In the unhappy situation which exists today in one part of the United Kingdom, such people care nothing for the beliefs and legitimate views of Roman Catholics or Protestants. Their snipers and bombs and land-mines are intended to bring about the total disintegration of society. They are able to exploit the fears and prejudices of others, to intimidate witnesses and even to stir up children to destroy, to throw fire-bombs and to harass forces whose only task is to keep the peace.
85.	I illustrate my theme with this example because our experience of it is first-hand. And though it is our own internal problem in Britain, and it is not always possible so easily to compare internal and international confrontations, the lesson to be drawn is surely universal, It has application to every one of the intractable international problems which face us in this Organization. Each of us has the means to redress legitimate grievances within our own community; that is what gives u& the right to insist that violence within the borders of our State shall not be used. But international confrontations cannot be so easily resolved.
86.	We have not yet succeeded in providing effective remedies for international wrongs. Peace-making is at a discount because we have no means to impose solutions, and a tiny minority interest, therefore, which is interested in confusion can thwart the majority will. I think we are all familiar with the perennial agenda of problems before the international community, situations that have threatened peace in the past and situations that could do so in future. I do not underrate for one moment the difficulty when the parties believe that their vital interests in security, or even their survival, are at stake. But I think the evidence must be-and it has accumulated in these last few dangerous years that time does not resolve many of these confrontations. On the contrary, time works for the anarchist. Sooner or later, uncompromising confrontation leads to violence; neighbors who will not live together will one day fight together. When intransigence escalates into violence the anarchist will find his opportunity and the innocent will be drawn in and will suffer and will die.
87.	I remember last year on this platform, speaking in the context of hijacking of aircraft, I drew attention then to this danger of anarchy-anarchy superseding the law of nations and with it the inherent challenge to all governmental authority. For us to face the fundamental dangers of condoning those who take the law into their own hands I said:
"We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down ... even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice" [1848th meeting, paras. 128429],
88.	Last year's General Assembly resolution on aerial hijacking [resolution 2645 (XXV)] and the subsequent Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft,  which my Government has signed and will shortly ratify, have brought encouraging progress in this particular field. Last week my Government also signed the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.  I hope that as many nations as possible will sign and ratify both those Conventions so that this particular form of anarchy can be stopped. It may be modest progress, when we survey the whole field, but it is some progress.
89.	This year my plea goes wider. It is that in every case where there is international confrontation, existing or threatening, a conscious and urgent effort should be made by all the parties engaged, talking each situation one by one, to achieve a modus vivendi before the stage of open violence is reached, before the anarchist, armed with all the modern techniques of terror, infiltrates and takes charge and levies his fatal toll on society and on the law. This obligation lies plainly on each and all of us. But I think the effort • must first and foremost be made within the framework of the United Nations. Our Charter has equipped us with a whole range of remedies for these situations. There are the traditional diplomatic tools of mediation, conciliation and inquiry. If these fail us we are bound by the Charter to seek other peaceful means, and it provides new powers to investigate and to recommend.
90.	I think if we are honest with ourselves in this Organization we must admit that we have failed to make full use of this potential. Our Secretary-General-whose coming retirement deprives us of a devoted and wise counselor has lately given us a timely reminder of the true character of his role as a peace-maker as envisaged by the Charter. We have not allowed him or his predecessors to realize that capacity to the full. He has also made recently an important comment on the influence of this Assembly in peace-making. He said:
.. the majority must make it plain that they will listen to both sides of a case and not only to the larger faction. The majority must prove that they will seek a realistic way out of difficulties rather than resort to condemnations or threats" [A/8401jAdd. 1, para. 95].
I feel that he is right; but we have not taken those words of his seriously enough as yet. Too often in this Assembly and in the Security Council undisguised propaganda and the search for tactical advantages by this or that group block efforts to reach a just and a comprehensive solution of a problem.
91.	But until we can perfect the remedies which the United Nations offers I must also address this plea concerning confrontation to those who find themselves at this moment in direct and dangerous dispute. At this time of day challenge and confrontation are-to put it in plain language-just too dangerous. Compromise may be dull, but it is the sole recipe for peace and, with patience, it can usually-1 am tempted to say always-be had in honor.
92.	The confrontation which today carries the greatest risk of war is that between Israel and the Arab States. It is one which could draw into the lines of antagonism the most powerful countries in the world.
93.	A whole generation has matured in the Middle East in the shadow of war. A generation on the one side has grown up as homeless refugees; a generation on the other ride has been brought up in the fear of being swept by force into the sea. Violence and counter-violence have been the order of the day; and war has been and remains very near. And that war-so great has been the escalation of armament in the area in recent years-would be fought with modern weapons amply reinforced by the greatest Power.
94.	This dispute is concerned with the most emotional of all issues: the security, and therefore the life, of those who confront each other. The Arabs are totally convinced that the Israelis want to expand their territory at the Arabs' expense, and Israel is convinced that the Arabs want to encircle and destroy it.
95.	In such circumstances, what can others, or the United Nations, do? For unless action is taken, that war will come, I take it that we are resolved, in so far as we can influence events in this United Nations, that on this issue there should be no war. It would be catastrophic. We have, in fact, taken one positive step to help to avert it. Few can doubt that Security Council resolution 242 (1967), although not perfect, contains the essential ingredients of a peaceful settlement. I know it will be tempting to try to change that resolution for another. I consider, myself-I think that perhaps the great majority here would be with me-that it is the only resolution upon which we can count to command substantial support in this Assembly and in this Organization.
96.	We have, too, in the context of trying to find a solution to this problem, within the grouping of the four Powers, indicated a readiness to guarantee the terms of a settlement between the parties. That is not a task which any of us particularly relishes, but where distrust has run so deep for so long, we must take risks, and it may well be the only way to build the confidence which will lead to a permanent peace, taken together with, of course, measures for demilitarization and for the placing of United Nations personnel in evacuated areas.
97.	But if war is to be avoided, those who are in confrontation must actively help to promote a dialog. The main ingredients of peace are known, and I will not rehearse them. On the one hand practical proposals have been put forward which would satisfy the Arab desire for Israeli withdrawal, and these are contained in Security Council resolution 242 (1967); on the other hand, there are ways and means of meeting the legitimate Israel need for permanent physical security. I will not debate the particular possibilities here in a program of peace-making in this dispute, but I will say this, and positively: that, unless a mechanism of dialog can be established, sooner or later-and maybe sooner than later-the fighting will start again.
98.	Confidence can only be established in this case through dialog: here an interim arrangement providing for phased withdrawal and the opening of the Suez Canal, with a link to the next and final stage of withdrawal, could serve to build confidence and to prove to the parties on the ground that there is more to be gained by dialog and coexistence than by war. I still believe that Mr. Jarring has a crucial role to yiin this process of establishing contact. But whoever stages this dialog, the tempo of it must be quicker than it has been until now, and it must be at closer range. When there is distrust between the parties of this depth and scope, it cannot be removed by long-distance correspondence, and the onus of adopting dialog must rest with those who now confront each other in arms. It is for us to help them to find the way to do it and I emphasize again that the time is short. This is a case where dialog must supplant confrontation.
99.	In spite of the experience of wars in Europe and the Middle East, new confrontations loom. In Asia the world watches the frontiers of India and Pakistan with increasing anxiety. India, by reason of civil disturbance in Pakistan, has been faced with a problem of refugees which distorts its economy and stretches its resources to the limit, and beyond. It has been valiant and resilient in meeting this burden. It has rightly asked for international help. Much has been given through this Organization, but we shall need to mobilize a lot more help in cash and kind than we have yet done.
100.	There is now an added danger of famine in the months to come in East Pakistan, arising mainly from a break-down in communications following civil strife. Relief will be needed here too on a massive scale. I hope that we are all conscious of an obligation to help, and to help urgently, because there could be no greater tragedy for the world-even including that in the Middle East-than that India and Pakistan should find themselves unwillingly at war. The United Kingdom has given £8 million to relief in India and £1 million io East Pakistan, and we are ready now to add substantially to that. Relief is beyond the capacity of Pakistan. Therefore, the machinery of the United Nations on the ground must be strengthened, and if it is to. be adequate to the task of recreating the necessary network of communications, then action must be taken to meet local conditions of famine and to meet them in time.
101.	Again, there is not much time, for recently this problem between India and Pakistan has assumed a new and appalling dimension. Guerrilla warfare and sabotage are adding to the fear and are hampering rescue. I am not sure if we yet understand the scale of the guerrilla warfare in that area; but the operations of the guerrillas, taking advantage of this situation, could create another panic in East Pakistan and start another avalanche mass movement of population from Pakistan into India. So this situation could run both countries unwillingly into war,
102.	Reconstruction of the Constitution of Pakistan must be an internal matter for the people of Pakistan. But the risks to peace, if they fail in that reconstruction, are appealing, and the truth of the matter is that the danger will be finally averted only when there is a return to civil government in East Pakistan which gives confidence to all Pakistanis to stay at home, to return home, and to develop their country in peace. Meanwhile, let the United Nations do the humanitarian work. It must never be said of the politicians that we met here and argued about who was to distribute food while millions of innocent people starved.
103.	In Africa we see the evil of apartheid and the frustration of many at its continued existence. Frustration and impatience can lead to violence. And as we have seen so often that violence, from which the innocent suffer, provokes counter-measures, and the lines of war thus become more sharply drawn.
104.	I am glad to see that, in spite of the deep feelings aroused by apartheid, which we share, the urge to dialog grows and it is being to some extent put into practice. There in Africa, as elsewhere, neighbors have no choice but to live side by side; and ultimately dialog must be resumed and must take charge.
105.	In the Far East, we have seen that China has for too long isolated itself from the world community. That had its dangers. When it plays its full part here in New York, a mighty voice will be added to our counsels and a major step will have been taken towards the true representation here of the balance of world power and world opinion, from which consensus can be hammered out, however painful at. times that process may be. With all the difficulties, I think the majority here recognizes that the future lies, not in isolation, not in confrontation or in ostracism, but in dialog.
106.	I hope that in Western Europe after centuries of conflict we have learn our lesson. The confrontation of Germany and France which nearly destroyed civilized life on our continent was ended because two great nations and two great statesmen were willing to take a risk, to pull down the historic barriers between them and peaceful coexistence. Those two great statesmen in particular took a risk with public opinion.
107.	On that essential political foundation is being built !ready the integrating Community of th? Six, the
European Economic Community. The United Kingdom and other European countries will, we hope, soon expand the Community to one of ten. That should usher in a new era of economic expansion and greatly enhance the prospects for peace. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Schumann, yesterday, in one of his most felicitous phrases, described that enlarged community as a "community of hope" [1942nd meeting, para. 50}. I would underline that forecast. That Community is already committed, by reason of the many special provisions for territories once connected with France and the United Kingdom, to be outward-looking. It exists to encourage trade, and that is the healthiest form of assistance,
108.	Nevertheless, aid from the developed to the under-developed countries is a vital need, and my country and the Community recognize their duty in this. I am glad to be able to announce today that my Government has decided to increase its contribution to the United Nations Development Program. In 1972 to $19,2 Million, an Increase of one third, We had also made an advance pledge of $50 million to the International Development Association, to remedy the failure of the third replenishment this summer. Yesterday in Washington we announced that wo were raising this to $103,680,000, which completes our first year's contribution to that replenishment. Wo hope In this way not only to enable the International Development Association to continue its work but to encourage others to take action also.
109.	There is nothing we in Western Europe should till like better than closer economic and political relations with the countries of Eastern Europe. It was the policy of the Federal Republic of Germany again with a German statesman taking a risk to seek accord there, and thus open the way to East'West agreements, In particular agreement to ease the conditions of life for the people of West Berlin. Once that has been achieved, it should be possible to prepare a conference on the security of Europe, If that is to have any chance of success, each country must demonstrate that it respects the security of others; that is a .sine qua non of cooperation* and that alone can give confidence. With confidence we can do much; without It we can do very little. If this essential respect for one's neighbor Is shown, then in Europe we shall be embarking on a (UHvntv which is embracing and on which better and more enduring relations can be built. The trend, then, in Europe is to turn away from confrontation to detente,
110.	I have been concerned today to stress the responsibility we all bear to find the peaceful way out of our difficulties and differences. 1 believe that the first essential is to make a conscious effort to get back to a climate of good-neighborliness, with those with whom we disagree as well as with our friends.
111.	We have been exhorted to do more about last year's Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)J. I have no quarrel with that; but general declarations are of no avail unless our basic approach is the right one. Surely the right approach is laid down quite specifically in the Preamble to our Charter, where we declare that we are determined "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". "Tolerance" is a word that is all too seldom heard today in these halls. I suggest that it is as Important now as it was in 1945, when the Charter was drafted. When differences and disputes nevertheless arise, neither side can escape the duty of looking to negotiation to secure the peace. Nor can we collectively escape the duty of overcoming the obstacles which stand in the way of the United Nations making an effective intervention before dispute hardens into confrontation and confrontation into conflict.
112.	Peace-keeping is the center of the problem, because so often peace cannot be made until all concerned are confident that it will be kept. The Charter foresaw the Deed. Hie machinery exists and it is available for our use. What has been lacking and I hope is not now lacking is the w21 to use it or to support it.
113, There is even, I regret to say, at the present time one operation of peace-keeping, established by the Security
Council, that Is Involved in a serious financial shortfall. I refer to the endeavor that has successfully maintained the peace For more than seven years In Cyprus and consequently in that part of the Mediterranean. There is now a deficit of up to $70 million, half of which relates to former peacekeeping accounts, and this deficit Is growing every year, Therefore I share the Secretary-General's view that unless a remedy Is found In the very near future It will no longer be possible for us to fulfill the basic purpose and objective of the Charter,
114.	We must not slide backwards in peace-keeping, Every symptom of division In the international field urges us to do better, So let us each and all bend our minds to positive peace-making and positive peace-keeping, Let us prove it in each case where the danger of confrontation raises its stubborn head,
115.	To break the present stalemate In a number of the confrontations will not solve the problems of the world; but we can In this Assembly give the world a sharper instrument for peace, That will narrow the area for the anarchist and his operations and broaden the rule of law.




38.	Mr. President, on behalf of the people of India, we offer you our warmest congratulations on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly. This is a fitting tribute to your achievements as the Foreign Minister of Indonesia and to your interest in the political and economic problems of the world. As a fellow Asian. I take particular pride in your elevation to this high office. Indonesia and India have worked together in so many fields since we both achieved
our independence, and we have so much in common through history and geography, that I need hardly assure you of our fullest co-operation in the discharge of your responsibilities.
39.	We should also like to compliment our outgoing President, Mr. Edvard Hambro of Norway, for the skill, independence and patience with which he guided our deliberations and for his stewardship of the commemorative session last year. The world may not care for nor long remember the millions of words we utter here, but the important documents which we adopted last year will certainly guide and inspire us in our work for years to come. For this achievement much of the credit must go to Mr. Hambro.
40.	During the year that has just passed, our Secretary- General, U Thant, has once again manifested his devotion to the cause of world peace by his scrupulous regard for the purposes and principles of the Charter and by his indefatigable efforts to improve our Organization in all possible ways. We can still hope that his decision to relinquish this rewarding, though onerous, office is not final. The Secretary-General of this Organization has always to be a person of the highest caliber, sensitive to the changing needs of the world situation and fully prepared to meet the administrative requirements of an ever-growing institution. He should also be able to contribute to the creation of conditions in which all nations, big or small, can live in peace and friendship and work in their own ways for their national progress and prosperity.
41.	We extend our special welcome to the three new Members that joined us a few days ago: Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar. We look forward to working in the closest co-operation with these new Members, with which we have had long and friendly association in several spheres. Their entry into the United Nations should increase the value of our debates and the strength of our decisions.
42.	One of the most important issues that we hope will be settled during this session is the question of the rightful representation of China in this Organization. There is only one China; there is only one Chinese seat, and only the Government of the People's Republic of China is entitled to occupy it in the United Nations. We have always been convinced that the presence of the People's Republic of China will make this Organization more effective. Too long have we postponed a realistic decision on this issue; let us not procrastinate any further.
43.	We have also repeatedly pleaded for universality of representation in the United Nations and we believe that the entry of the divided nations into our Organization would help in the reduction and removal of tensions. They could also contribute effectively to our work in many other fields.
44.	For India, the year 1971 opened with many promises. The economy was poised for a high rate of growth. In March we had our general elections. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was returned to power with an overwhelming majority. Her success reflected the solid support of our people for a concerted program for socio-economic progress. Externally we had tried to establish warmer
relations with all countries, particularly with our neighbors. The fact that Pakistan had a little earlier, in December 1970, held the first general elections it had ever held was welcomed in India. The introduction of a democratic process in Pakistan would, we had hoped, bring about improved relations with this important neighbor of ours. Yet the entire picture was changed overnight when the events in the eastern wing of Pakistan took a catastrophic course. An international problem of utmost gravity and concern was created. Several Governments and international authorities have recognized the true character of this problem. The Secretary-General, U Thant, not only has brought the situation to the attention of the members of the Security Council but has included his views in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [Al8401/Add.l]. The Assembly has already heard the concern which the outgoing President, Mr. Hambro, expressed in his speech on 21 September [1934th meeting].
45.	By the middle of April it had become clear that Pakistan had no intention of abandoning its military methods and that we would be faced with an unprecedented flow of Pakistani refugees into our country. Refugee camps had to be speedily organized, and the systematic and detailed registration of the large number of foreigners had to be undertaken. Ration cards and temporary permits for stay in India had to be issued, transport and food supplies had to be organized and medical attention had to be provided. These relief measures could, however, meet only a fraction of the needs of the refugees. We asked the international community for help, and although the response to the Secretary-General's appeal has been warm, it is but a very small part of what is actually needed. By far the largest contribution towards the upkeep of the refugees has had to be made by India from its badly needed resources. We are sheltering and looking after the refugees on behalf of the international community. We simply do not have the capacity and the resources to bear this burden. While we gave them-on purely humanitarian grounds- shelter and refuge when they were fleeing for their lives, we have made it repeatedly clear that they are with us only temporarily and must return home. This has been accepted and endorsed by the world community. It has been impossible to make any firm estimates of what it would cost us in the coming months, but on the basis of the present figure the total cost may well be more than $800 million by the end of next March.
46.	The consequences of this massive influx-some have called it a civilian invasion-of refugees into India cannot be determined in terms of money alone. We are facing grave social, economic and political consequences. In the areas where the refugees are now living in difficult conditions in comps, all of our schools have had to be closed to find shelter for them. All of our hospitals in these areas have had to tend to the urgent need of the refugees rather than to the normal needs of the local inhabitants. Prices are rising as a result of a higher demand for essential commodities. Wages are falling. Crimes of various kinds are on the increase. Local friction and tensions are not unknown. Our local administration has had to be diverted to the work of looking after the refugees, and that in turn has further affected adversely all of our development projects. The fear of epidemics is ever present, even though the outbreak of cholera has been controlled. 
47.	The refugees must go back. The question simply is; How? Can anyone reasonably expect them to go back when thousands and thousands are daily fleeing from the same area? Pointless declarations and exhortations will not make them go back. On 21 May the President of Pakistan, Mr. Yahya Khan, called upon the refugees to go back; yet, since then, more than 5 million more have come into India. They will go back only when they are sure themselves that they can live in their own homeland in safety and freedom, when they are allowed to work as they wish, and when they are assured that their properties will be returned, their jobs restored and their daily lives not interfered with.
48.	To appreciate and understand the background to this unprecedented influx, it is necessary to recall the conditions prevailing in East Pakistan throughout Pakistan's existence. Pakistan is a unique country, in the sense that two parts of it are separated by a distance of 1,000 miles of Indian territory. The majority of the people-75 million- live in the East, and the West has a total population of less than 60 million. None the less, political, military and economic power was concentrated in the West, while the East continued to produce basic raw materials, such as jute and tea, and provided the largest source of foreign exchange for Pakistan. Even the Government of Pakistan has acknowledged that persistent discrimination and exploitation of East Pakistan by West Pakistan has taken place ever since the country became independent.
49.	Just to give one example, in the entire civil service and in the armed forces of Pakistan the Bengalis did not have a share exceeding 10 per cent. The East Pakistanis continued to protest and agitate against that discrimination and exploitation, and, for want of any effective remedy, their grievances accumulated.
50.	However, after the fall of President Ayub Khan in the middle of 1969 a new situation arose. Another General- President Yahya Khan-took over, and declared that he would hold general elections for the first time, on adult franchise with representation to both wings, proportionate to their population. For the first time the people of Pakistan saw in that democratic process a possible rectification of the injustices from which East Pakistan had suffered all those years.
51.	The elections were held in December 1970, after being postponed twice. The results of the elections were greeted in Pakistan as a success of democracy, as indeed they were. The broad results of the elections are worth noting. Out of a total of 313 seats, 169 had been allotted to East Pakistan. Of those 169 seats, the Awami League, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, won as many as 167. Winning 98 per cent of the seats in East Pakistan, Mujibur Rahman gained an absolute majority in the National Assembly and would, in normal circumstances, have been in a position to form the Government and become the Prime Minister of Pakistan. For the elections, the Awami League had adopted a six-point program to obtain specifically a greater degree of autonomy for East Pakistan with a view to putting an end to discrimination and exploitation.
I do not think the comment made by the representative of Pakistan calls for serious notice. What he says is that the Indian Foreign Minister is describing what is known to others. Then, certainly, there can be no grounds for a point of order if one is describing something which is known to others.
56.	What I am trying to give this august Assembly is an account of the circumstances that led to that unprecedented influx of 9 million refugees into Indian territory. Members must have noticed that the Secretary-General, in the introduction to his annual report on the activities of the United Nations, has devoted as many as 15 paragraphs, covering several pages, to highlighting, in a very lucid manner the various aspects-humanitarian and political-of the problem of the influx of the refugees f A/8401IAdd.l, paras. 177-179/.
57.	It is noteworthy also that the representative of Pakistan did not care to point out, as is customary in such cases, the particular provision, either in the Charter or in the rules of procedure, under which he was raising his point of order. I am not asking this august United Nations General Assembly to intervene-if he had Article 2, paragraph 7, in mind. I am saying that this is a problem, unprecedented in history, in which 9 million refugees have crossed over into Indian territory, and I am asking: Is the international community interested in knowing what the root-cause of that is, and what should be the direction in which the efforts of the international community should be directed to find a satisfactory solution of this tragic problem? If I may say so, to treat this matter by a point of order in a light-hearted manner is inconsistent with the international community's responsibilities: responsibilities first to find out and analyze what are the root-causes of these most tragic happenings in that part of the world and then to direct its attention to finding a satisfactory solution. I thought that, while dealing with a problem of such magnitude, this Assembly would be interested in knowing the relevant facts of the situation, so that it might be properly appreciated, and attention might be directed to finding a satisfactory solution.
58.	I am the last person, I would assure the Assembly, to interfere in the internal affairs of another country, but to give a description of the circumstances which led to the uprooting of 9 million people is certainly neither an interference in any other country's internal affairs nor any comment on what is happening in the country itself. One has to understand properly the circumstances of the
situation in order to come to the right conclusion. Therefore, while appreciating the anxiety of the representative of Pakistan, I have carefully avoided referring in any manner to matters which might be barred either by any provisions of the Charter or by any rules of procedure. If anything, we should concentrate on the basic problems, rather than become involved in a procedural debate which is pointless.
59.	Coming to the facts of the situation, I was referring to the elections that took place in Pakistan, giving Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the Awami League a majority of 167 out of 169 seats and thus giving him an absolute majority in the National Assembly of Pakistan. For the elections, the Awami League adopted a six-point program to obtain specifically a greater degree of autonomy for East Pakistan with a view to putting an end to discrimination and exploitation. Apparently, the results of the election so startled the rulers of Pakistan that they saw in them a risk to their economic, military and political domination over ' the eastern wing; this explains their swift action and their desire to continue military rule. So, on the fateful night of 25/26 March, the armed forces set out to crush the verdict of the 75 million Bengalis.
I am sorry that the representative of Pakistan in his wisdom has chosen this path of raising objections after every sentence or after every paragraph of my speech before this Assembly. I am not discussing the internal affairs of Pakistan and I am not interested in the internal affairs of Pakistan; but it would be a truism to say that the conduct of internal affairs by any country, if it results in the uprooting of 9 million people who cross over to the adjoining territory, should be a matter of concern to the international community, which
should be concerned about the circumstances that created a situation in which the conduct of internal affairs in that country compelled 9 million people over a period of a little more than six months to cross into the territory of India. Now, if a strict interpretation were accepted under which conditions in Pakistan could not be mentioned, then we would virtually come to the ridiculous position that a refugee who left his village in East Pakistan should not be described and the conditions prevailing in that part should not be taken note of and only when he crossed into Indian territory should we start mentioning him. I am sure that that would be neither the correct spirit nor the correct manner in which we should deal with such serious matters, I am fully conscious of and have regard for the principle of coexistence. We are not interested in whether there is a presidential system or a military system or a military rule in Pakistan. That is entirely its concern. We have learned to live in a spirit of coexistence with whatever may be the social or economic system prevailing in any part of the world, and this applies particularly to our neighbors. But when, while dealing with their own affairs, within what they describe as domestic matters, they create a situation where 9 million people are shoved on to us, then surely the international community would like to know the circumstances in which these people have left their country. They have not left their country of Pakistan as tourists to do sightseeing in India. This is a very serious matter. Therefore we should view this problem in the proper perspective. The international community will never be able to understand unless it knows the circumstances that prevail in that unfortunate country, where 9 million people, its own citizens, had to cross and come over to Indian territory. I am not interested in its internal set-up, but I am interested in putting across to the international community the circumstances which led to the creation of conditions that compelled these unfortunate men, women and children to leave their homes and hearths.
64.	On the fateful night of 25/26 March, the armed forces set out to crush the verdict of the 75 million Bengalis. However, before the army was given the signal to let loose a reign of terror, protracted negotiations started; in the meantime the strength of the armed forces in East Bengal was considerably increased. 
The suggestion made by the representative of Saudi Arabia -- who perhaps has a longer association with the United Nations than almost any one of us-has been listened to by me with great care. I was thinking that perhaps he had some point of order which came in the way of my proceeding with my speech, but instead of that, I find that he has appealed to me and placed me in the embarrassing position of being called upon to make my comment upon his appeal. I would appeal to him, and also to other representatives, to judge for themselves who is responsible for creating an atmosphere of tension. We have the accepted procedure that any points which might be mentioned by any leader of a delegation can be replied to substantively and also that another viewpoint can be presented before this august Assembly. But instead of adopting that usual procedure, efforts have been made to obstruct me when I am actually delivering my speech before the Assembly.
71.	The situation is such that I would be failing in my < duty if I were to respond much as I would like to-to the appeal made by the representative of Saudi Arabia. I owe it not only to my country, I owe it not only to the 9 million refugees, but, I believe, I owe it to the international community to tell them these things in the frankest possible manner, while trying always to remain within the procedure and the provisions of the Charter in making my presentation.
72.	I believe I have used my words carefully; I have not indulged in rhetoric, But I am sorry that I shall have to crave the indulgence of this august Assembly, and of you, Mr, President, to permit me to place before you in a dispassionate manner the facts which have led to this unprecedented tragedy. It is not pleasant for me to mention these facts, but the situation is so grave and the consequences that might flow from it so serious that I would be failing in my duty, as I said, not only to my country and to the refugees, but to the international community, if, simply for the sake of preventing objections from being raised, I Were not to proceed with giving the facts to the international community. If the facts are wrong, the representative of Pakistan has the right to make his statement and to say that the particular facts I mention are incorrect. Therefore, I would request him, and also the representative of Saudi Arabia, to permit me to present these facts, which are of the utmost importance in an issue that, I think, has resulted in the most tragic events in recent memory.
73.	What the army did, and is continuing to do, in its massive assault on the civilian population is now well known and I do not wish to take up the time of the assembly in describing the innumerable instances of killings and atrocities. A reign of terror prevailed and still prevails. The leader of the Awami League, Mujibur Rahman, was arrested and is still in prison. He is now being secretly tried in a military court on a charge which carries the death penalty. The freedom of the press and civil liberties were totally suppressed, and the foreign journalists were expelled. The International Red Cross was not allowed to visit the area and all attempts were made, not always successfully, to conceal what was happening in. that part of the world. Killing, raping, burning and looting became widespread. The inevitable consequences followed: the people fled from tenor and violence to India, leaving behind all that they had. Their number rose from less than a million, at the end of April, to nearly 4 million at the end of May, crossed the 6-million mark before June was over, and has been rising steadily ever since. Their number now exceeds 9 million, and the exodus still continues. This is an exodus of refugees unprecedented in history, across any international frontier.
74.	Pakistan’s military action and the snuffing-out of all human rights, and the reign of terror, which still continues, have shocked the conscience of mankind. There is a popular revolt against these actions. Some have fled from the tenor, while others are resisting it as best they can. The hard core of this resistance was provided by thousands of men who had defected from the army and the police and various paramilitary organizations at the time of the -military crackdown. They have been joined in ever-increasing numbers by people of all ages.
75.	The Pakistani authorities have tom up solemn declarations and conventions to which Pakistan had subscribed. Pakistan has desperately tried to divert attention from its outrageous actions. Its actions have made so many serious inroads into much that our Charter stands for that it would indeed be a travesty of international law and a mockery of international justice to suggest that what is involved is an internal issue. It is even less an internal issue when one keeps in mind that other nations are having to support the enormous cost of the massive exodus of Pakistani citizens into India.
76.	Apart from accusing others of their own most unwise and deadly activities, the rulers of Pakistan have taken a number of measures which are no more than eyewash. How unrealistic these measures are can be judged from the impact they have had on the flow of refugees. The 
Resident of Pakistan has from time to time called upon the refugees to go back; yet, the flow continues in ever- increasing numbers into India. A so-called civilian government has been formed in East Pakistan consisting of men who have no representative character whatever and who are mere figureheads, obliged to take orders from their military commanders. An amnesty is proclaimed, but Mujibur Rahman and other elected representatives are at the same time treated and tried as traitors. We witness the strange spectacle in which the party which would have been, by right, the Government of Pakistan, has been banned and disqualified from political activities. Half the elected representatives have been disqualified from sitting in the National Assembly. In our view, the flow of refugees will not stop, nor will the refugees already in India begin to go back, until a political solution acceptable to the elected representatives of the people has been found. Secretary- General U Thant and many other distinguished statesmen, politicians and leaders of public opinion have consistently maintained that the problem is essentially political. As a first step towards a political solution, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the leader of the Awami League, should be set at liberty without delay, and negotiations should be started with him. It has been proved beyond doubt that he alone can speak on behalf of the people of East Bengal. He, and he alone, symbolizes and represents the aspirations and will of the people of East Pakistan. Apart from these actions, which the Pakistanis themselves can take, what can the international community do in these circumstances? The first and foremost action which this Assembly, and all other international organs within or without the United Nations system, can take is to impress on the military regime of Islamabad the fact that force will not succeed and that, therefore, a political settlement between the military regime and the already-elected leaders is essential. We consider it wholly short-sighted to wait until worse crises have arisen. Bilaterally, all Governments can do their utmost to ensure, by whatever means are available to them, that the military regime stops its repression, enters into negotiations with the elected leaders to achieve a political settlement with their consent, and sends the army back to the barracks. Only by these measures will the flow of refugees be stopped and the refugees already in India be able to return home. Our only fault has been that we gave temporary shelter to millions of refugees homeless, food-less, without clothing; sick and aged, men and women, helpless children and dying infants-who were fleeing from terror, many of whom bore marks of recent army brutality. Only by the measures I have suggested can the threat of famine be alleviated and normal conditions restored. If these measures are not taken, and if attempts are made to divert attention by false analysis or wrong accusations, then the prospect is indeed gloomy. We here in this Assembly may argue in a sophisticated manner as long as we like, but those who have been the victims of aggression and who are fleeing from terror and massacre will not have such a tolerant outlook. They will not forgive us or those who did not stand by them in their hour of trial.
77.	It is only natural that I should have devoted some time to an important matter which is uppermost in the minds of most Indians, but we are not insensitive to other important issues that the world has faced during the last year. We believe that the world scene is changing and rearranging itself in a manner which is often difficult to comprehend
and even more difficult to analyze. Whether it is in Europe or Asia, in Africa or in the Americas, several trends are noticeable which can affect our traditional values and even some of the concepts on which the Charter is based.
78.	During the last 12 months there have been many welcome signs of reduction of tensions among the great Powers. The progress in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT], though slow, is an important step forward. The treaty between Poland and the Federal Republic of Germany and the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin    are important landmarks and should lead to a better understanding of the German problem. The greater degree of accommodation now evident will contribute to European peace, progress and prosperity. We congratulate all those whose untiring efforts have resulted in an accord over some of the most difficult issues facing the international community.
79.	At the same time, I must utter a note of caution. The concerns of the nations assembled in this hall are far wider than the preoccupations of the great Powers. One of the basic concepts underlying the setting-up of the United Nations was that in the solution of world problems and in the achievement of the political, social and economic objectives of the human race all sovereign States should have a voice. While talks among the great Powers can on suitable occasions be helpful, the viewpoints of other States, and particularly of the developing countries, must not be ignored. The concept of non-alignment, of which Jawaharlal Nehru was one of the principal exponents, was meant to modify the bipolar view of the world. The relevance and validity of non-alignment are not diminished by the lessening of East-West tensions in some fields.
80.	Indeed, with the lessening of cold-war tensions the importance of non-alignment has become even greater. The issues are no longer so clear-cut and, therefore, the non-aligned countries will .have to examine the ever- changing situations in a much more detailed and comprehensive manner. Decisions can then be based on principles, taking into account ail the factors. It is for those reasons that the Lusaka Declaration  was widely welcomed by many speakers in this Assembly last year. It is also for those reasons that we have found it necessary to continue discussions among the non-aligned countries on all important problems. Such a regular and systematic exchange of views will enable us to come to some agreed conclusions, even at short notice. As this Assembly is aware, in two days the non-aligned group of countries will meet at the Foreign Minister level.
81.	In Asia a new political equation is discernible, with rapid industrialization and economic development in several countries. Not only is a new relationship emerging among the Asian countries themselves, but several outside Powers are working for the establishment of new contacts and relations with Asian countries, including China. India is 
conscious of those developments and is adjusting its own attitude in the context of those important changes.
82.	The agony of the people of Viet-Nam has not yet ceased. Their freedom is still to be achieved, although large-scale warfare and massive slaughter are not so much in evidence. Raids, local fighting and a daily toll in lives continue throughout Viet-Nam. We regret particularly that there has been a recent resumption of bombing in parts of North Viet-Nam. Policies, especially in South Viet-Nam, have not shown any signs of moving towards the goal for which many lives have been sacrificed and for which the people of Viet-Nam have suffered so much. We welcome the United States and other foreign troop withdrawals that have already taken place. We hope that, through negotiations in Paris and elsewhere, the agony of Viet-Nam will be brought to an end without further delay; that United States and other foreign troops will be withdrawn completely by a definite date; and that the people of Viet-Nam will be allowed to decide their own future in accordance with their own wishes, without any outside interference. In that context the seven-point proposals made in Paris appear to us to provide a reasonable basis for a negotiated settlement.
83.	In the Middle East, the lack of progress in the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is creating new tensions. The cease-fire, accepted as a, temporary measure to help the parties negotiate a settlement through Ambassador Jarring, has unfortunately tended to freeze the situation in favor of the aggressor, despite the willingness shown by the Arab countries to go to the farthest limit m meeting their obligations under the above-mentioned resolution. Our own conviction that no country should be allowed to retain foreign territories taken by force of arms remains unshaken, and we would reiterate that this problem will not be solved unless Israel withdraws from the Arab territories which it has occupied since 5 June 1967 and restores the legitimate rights of the Palestinian refugees.
84.	In Latin America, too, new economic and political forces are emerging. Various developments in various States in that continent have proved beyond doubt that the conflict between traditional politics and a growing awareness of national interest is adding new dynamism to the situation. That will no doubt have an impact on international issues.
8$. The result of all those trends and tendencies has been to bestir people to new lines of -flunking and to a new realization that problems of great concern to the world cannot be solved by force. It is in this context that our discussions this year on the question of international peace and security will assume added significance. Such a discussion, by enabling all Member States to express their considered views, will substantially increase the effectiveness of the United Nations,
86.	India pointed out at the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly [1932nd meeting! that post-war developments had amply shown that disputes in the traditional sense are not the only situations which become a threat to international peace and security, the structure of which today is more often than not imperiled by actions which
amount to systematic violations of many other important objectives and principles of the Charter. This Organization must acquire and develop the skill and the strength necessary for dealing effectively with complex problems which have far-reaching consequences.
87.	The Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, adopted last year by the General Assembly [resolution 2734 (XXV)], recognizes the integral link between peace, on the one hand, and disarmament, decolonization and development, on the other. General and complete disarmament under effective international control remains the imperative and most urgent need of our time. We are concerned with the threat to mankind posed by the ever-increasing arms race, by the existing large stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction and by the impending new qualitative advance towards even more devastating nuclear armaments.
88.	We are pleased at the emergence of an agreement on bacteriological weapons as a result of the discussions in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, and we look forward to early steps towards an effective agreement on chemical weapons. We are pleased of course that the United States of America and the Soviet Union continue their discussions in the field of disarmament and that those contacts are helping to lessen suspicion and are creating and improving the atmosphere for negotiations in many other fields. However, the proceedings of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament have not been marked by any significant progress this year and we should consider how to strengthen further the mechanism of the Committee on Disarmament. We could perhaps do so by adopting the suggestion made in that regard by the Secretary-General in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [AI8401/Add.l, para. 52]. It is imperative that China and France participate in the deliberations. India also believes that it would be useful to convene a world disarmament conference, after due preparation, with the participation of all the countries of the world.
89.	The Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy has demonstrated the need to make nuclear energy and technology available to a greater extent to the developing countries of the world. We are convinced of the important contribution that the technology for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can make to the economy and the progress of the developing world.
90.	If the lack of progress towards total disarmament continues to be a threat to peace and security, there are other factors which also contribute to that threat. Colonialism and racialism have taken many forms in recent years, and all the efforts of the United Nations have been unavailing in bringing about the independence of such large and important colonial Territories as Angola, Mozambique, Guinea, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia.
91.	We are gratified at the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on Namibia  and our efforts should be concentrated on concrete steps to be taken in asserting the United Nations authority in Namibia. The liberation movements in other colonial Territories need to be encouraged. We are disappointed that the progress in. these fields has not been significant and we shall, at an appropriate stage, propose steps which can be taken to bring all colonial Territories to independence,
92.	Security and political stability cannot be achieved if the international community does not organize economic co-operation for speedy development in a rational and dynamic way. The International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] was a major step forward, but the developments which have taken place since the Strategy was adopted are causing us some uneasiness. The commitments made in the Strategy are still to be fulfilled, and yet attempts are being made to take advantage of the differences of interests, which undoubtedly exist in the developing countries, to modify this commitment. We hope that these attempts will not succeed, and that, on the one hand, the developing countries will present a united front on their basic needs and, on the other hand, that the developed countries will fulfill to the utmost the obligations they have accepted.
93.	The world today is facing a major economic crisis comparable to the one that arose when sterling went off the gold standard and new trade barriers began to disrupt world trade. Something similar is threatening the system of international trade and payments which had been built up after the Second World War. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development have not between them been able to provide the kind of orderly and balanced growth in world economy which was hoped for. The developing countries, which had very little say at the time of their establishment, have long cherished the feeling that a new look at the articles of these three bodies is called for, if the widening gap between the rich nations and the poor nations is not to grow wider each year, as it has unfortunately done in the last two decades. In the crisis that now confronts them,-some of the most developed nations have also begun to feel that the charters of these institutions do not provide adequate answers to the emerging problems. What we are unhappy about is the attempt to ignore and bypass these institutions and to try to seek solutions to the world's economic problems in a small group of the 10 richest countries. We believe that, while we must reform these institutions, we must not wreck them. Concerted thinking on the ways in which a new dynamism can be imparted to them has to be given in a forum which is truly representative of developed and developing countries alike,
94.	Already some of the measures that have been taken to solve the problems of prosperous nations have created serious problems for the less developed countries. Then- trade is confronted with new obstacles. The inflow of capital so essential to their growth and development, which is well below the target of 1 per cent of the gross national product adopted by the United Nations is in danger of being reduced. Poor countries of the world are victims of measures taken in the name of alleviating the payments crisis of the richest nations in the world, even though they themselves had not contributed to the crisis in any
conceivable manner. Without a concerted and cooperative approach, such progress as was made in the first United Nations Development Decade can easily be wiped out in the Second.
95.	Last year the Assembly gave much time and attention to formulating a just regime on the utilization of the resources of the sea and on the preservation of the human environment. During this year some progress has been made for the solution of these problems, but much more remains to be done. Similarly, on the problem of outer space we have achieved some success, particularly in formulating a draft Convention on Liability for Damage Caused by Objects Launched into Outer Space. We would like to record our appreciation to the United States of America and to the Soviet Union for reaching agreement regarding expanded co-operation towards developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems for the spacecraft of both the nations. We look forward, as a developing country, to increasing benefits from progress in the field of earth resources, surface remote sensing and other connected matters.
96.	I have mentioned all these specific problems in order to take into account the various major factors which are changing the conditions of the world we live in. The United Nations, reflecting all these concerns, has to adjust itself to these changing conditions. Our Charier was drawn up 26 years ago. Our methods of work and the procedure of our debates, as indeed our budget all subjects of separate studies-have to be adjusted and adapted to new demands and conditions. We must maintain a flexible attitude towards these matters and we hope that the present session of the Assembly would, in coming to decisions on substantive problems, keep in mind the need for this adjustment. No organization in this rapidly changing world of ours can hope to face successfully new trends and new developments unless its basic concepts can be modified speedily and effectively. Last year we had a World Youth Assembly. Although the people who attended this Assembly did not achieve any concrete results, they did demonstrate a need for the world Organization to be more responsive to the changing situation.
97.	The Prime Minister of India, while speaking at the last session of the General Assembly [1881st meeting], had referred to the unfinished revolution the completion of which is our common purpose. We have endeavored to fulfill purpose though we may not have succeeded fully in our efforts the world still continues to be in turmoil and to. be subject to natural and man-made disasters and tensions. In such an atmosphere of strife and ferment, the United Nations remains the only hope for States and peoples all over the world. The ideals of the Charter are not static norms to which we rededicate ourselves for form's sake every year. Each year representatives from Member countries assemble here to reaffirm their faith in the objectives and activities of this august Organization. It is strange, therefore, that in spite of these declared commitments, the conscience of mankind finds itself reticent and cautious in face of crises born of violations of the very principles of the Charter, violations which are at times deliberate and calculated. If this Organization is to survive and contribute constructively toward a new world in which the rights of the individual are safe, and his welfare ensured
in a just and honorable environment, it is essential that the United Nations assume a credible image on the basis of tangible activities, The foundations for this purpose were laid during the last commemorative session. It is for all of us now to see if we have the strength to build on these foundations. It is my earnest hope that representatives assembled in this session would give thought to this imperative necessity and act in concert to make this Organization an instrument of their common endeavor to achieve peace, stability and justice all over the world.




60.	 Mr. President, you come to the leadership of the General Assembly at a time when eastern Asia stands in the center of international concern. It is in that region alone that war still rages day by day. It is there that a burden of suffering, unparalleled elsewhere, weighs heavily on the conscience of mankind. And it is to Asia that our eyes will turn when we come to take decisions on the future of this Organization and the principles underlying its structure.
61.	It is right at such a time that an Asian statesman of high capacity and repute should preside over our deliberations. Israel wishes you success and pledges itself to your support. You will be fortified by the high example of your eminent predecessor, Edvard Hambro of Norway, and by the experience and patient skill of the Secretary-General, who is completing a full decade of service to the international cause.
62.	Last year the United Nations marked its twenty-fifth anniversary by an act of celebration. I suggested then that the occasion could have been more wisely used for scrutiny and self-criticism (1851st meeting]. There is a manifest decline in the influence of the General Assembly on the main issues affecting human welfare and destiny. Its resonance has diminished. The central currents of international life and policy flow outside its walls. The frustration arises, not so much from defects in the Organization's work, as from discord and contention amongst the Powers. Yet there are some causes which lie within our capacity of correction. I shall mention one.
63.	In the work of the United Nations there is a strong accent on public controversy and a relative neglect of private conciliation. A report by the Secretary-General 11 years ago contained a plea to give greater emphasis to the United Nations as an instrument for negotiation of settlements as distinct from this world debate of issues. The advice was not heeded. Debate, not negotiation, still dominates the United Nations practice. Resolutions are adopted in great numbers, but their texts bear witness to the parliamentary advantages of fragmentation rather than to a balanced view of rights or realities.
64.	For example: in a dispute in the Middle East between two parties one of which has a single vote and the other 16 or, in practice 40, the preordained triumph of automatic majorities has no moral value, little practical effect and a very short life in the world's memory. The same is true of the Security Council, a third of whose members have their diplomatic relations and their ethnic or sentimental predilections exclusively on one side.
65.	This difficulty would not exist if the organs of the United Nations would regard it as their main function to seek consensus which would include the interested parties. They would be better employed in encouraging agreement between the parties at issue, than in sharpening controversy between them by attempts at adjudication. In short, the United Nations should aspire to a diplomatic rather than to a parliamentary role. The test of achievement should be not how many resolutions we have voted but how many solutions we have advanced.
66.	And, indeed, wherever free, direct negotiation has taken place across the world in the past year there has been fruitful issue. There have been the treaties concluded by the Soviet Union and Poland with the Federal Republic of Germany, based, as Mr. Gromyko significantly told us, "on recognition of European realities, especially on the inviolability of frontiers" [1942nd meeting, para. 101]. He was referring to the frontiers established after the war by negotiation and agreement. There has been the four-Power agreement on Berlin where, as Mr. Gromyko again correctly said, it is now up to the two parties directly concerned "to complete the negotiations between them" [ibid., para. 98]. There has been the normalization of relations between Czechoslovakia and the Federal Republic of Germany. There has been direct contact between the United States and the People's Republic of China, to be followed at an early date by a meeting at the highest level of responsibility. The Paris talks on Viet-Nam, with the direct participation of all the parties at issue, have been accompanied by a constant de-escalation of the fighting. There is grave tension between India and Pakistan, as is evident from the general debate here earlier this week; but the two Governments have direct relations which they ca« apply to the solution of their differences. Many hearts are heavy at the reports coming from the boundary between Ireland and
Northern Ireland; but there is also news that the heads of Government concerned have met each other and agreed on a process of political reconciliation. In Washington, agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union are being signed today for modernizing the "hot line" and strengthening safeguards against accidental war.
67.	Is there no lesson to be drawn from the settlements reached and attempted this year? Surely they show that the air is alive with a spirit of innovation. Attitudes of hostility which once seemed to be an organic part of our generation's life are now yielding to a strong impulse for peaceful settlement. Above all we are learning lessons about the immense importance of communication. Time and again the decision of Governments to abandon their cold separation and make contact with each other develops from a procedural advance into a change of substantive positions and thence into binding agreements. The central themes of international life in 1971 are direct contact, the abandonment of traditional conflicts, and flexible, pragmatic negotiation.
68.	There is also a move away from dogmatic attachment to documents. If old formulas and texts have reached deadlock, new ones are sought. There is a particular recognition that after wars the need is to build new systems of relations and not to reproduce the conditions and situations out of which war erupted. This new empiricism affects the juridical domain as well. Governments which seriously seek peace do not hesitate to confer directly with Governments which they do not yet recognize and with which they have no legal relations,
69.	If there is frustration in the Middle East it is because our region is still the exception to all the positive rules which have been applied elsewhere. Whatever is tried successfully in other regions is avoided in the Middle East. Here alone there is still no contact between the parties at issue. Here alone the Governments which will have to live side by side with each other have still not come face to face at a table of negotiation. Here alone we are often told that the only way to get peace is to restore the situations which erupted in war. Here alone it is said in many places that the resumption of an important peace mission is wholly dependent on a single memorandum on which there is deadlock, and that there is no room for any innovation or any versatility of formulas and techniques.
70.	It is true, despite these failures, that the situation in the Middle East today is less explosive than a year ago. The flow of events has not been backward. The cease-fire along the Suez Canal has been effective, with rare and isolated exceptions, for 14 months. Israel does not propose to bring it to an end and Egypt would achieve nothing by violating it. Indeed, the only certainty in the Middle East is that resumed hostilities would serve no interest and advance no settlement. The absence of fighting along the Suez Canal line has released the Middle East and the world from the daily prospect of escalation involving the Soviet forces which were irresponsibly introduced into the' region with the effect of aggravating and enlarging a local tension. There has been a sharp decline in the strength and prestige of the terrorist groups and the pirate organizations that loomed so large a year ago. There has been peaceful movement across open bridges into Israel and the administered territories of scores of thousands of Arabs from neighboring Arab countries which are officially "at war" with Israel. Thus new patterns of coexistence have grown up between Israelis and Palestinian Arabs in daily life and work. Side by side with a violent and incendiary Arab rhetoric there seem to be here and there some beginnings of a greater realism in Arab thinking on the problem of Israel's sovereignty and Israel's deep roots in the life and history of the Middle East. Finally, there are three separate availabilities of good offices which, although not all in active course today, are mutually accepted by the parties: the Jarring mission; the good offices of the United States in pursuit of an agreement concerning the Suez Canal; and the intention of ten African Presidents to authorize four eminent heads of State to go to Jerusalem and Cairo on a mission of information and goodwill.
71.	Yet, with all these consolations the peace efforts are not sufficiently intense. The talks under Ambassador Jarring's auspices, which began in high promise in January, have been at a standstill since the end of February. An exchange of views and positions on a special Suez Canal agreement was inaugurated through the good offices of the United States in April. This effort is still underway, but its pace is slow. In discussing the obstacles to peace it would be easy, but sterile, to fall into recrimination. Nothing would be easier. One of the few things that all Members of the United Nations have in common is the ability to discuss each other's imperfections. Yet what mankind longs to hear is not how deadlocks arose, but how it is proposed to overcome them. The general debate will be well used if Middle Eastern States will give precise definition to what they are prepared to do in order to bring a peaceful settlement into view. All who seek an understanding of Israel's policies must come face to face with two elements in the national mood. There is a sharp preoccupation with security; and there is a vivid memory of the horror and dark peril from which we emerged four years ago.
72.	In reflecting on the theme of security, Israel cannot easily forget the immense loss and burden it has borne through the hostility directed against it for over two decades. Our danger, in 1967 was the climax, but not the whole story, of our predicament. No other people has had to live all its days with a mark of interrogation hanging over its collective and individual survival. Israel's insistence on genuine and stable security takes particular depth from the hideous legacy of Jewish massacre in the European slaughter-house. No people in history has undergone an experience of such tragic depth and scope. And no other State has grown for 23 years amidst such a comprehensive effort to deny it every breath of life.
73.	In particular, Israel's mind preserves a permanent and,, unfading image of the danger and solitude from which it emerged in the summer of 1967. To forget or ignore these memories is to renounce all true understanding of the Middle Eastern reality today. It was only by exceptional vigilance and cruel sacrifice that we repelled a monstrous design that would have ended our people's historic journey and cast all Israel's life and achievement into the flames. Maritime blockade, terrorist incursions, military encirclement, declarations of overt war, a frenzied torrent of threats and a formal announcement from Cairo that the battle was joined for Israel's destruction all these came
together in cumulative assault,"We recall the outrageous silence and apathy with which the Security Council, between one adjournment and the next, calmly observed the only attempt in modern history to wipe a sovereign State off the map of the world. Mr. Gromyko indulges his sense of humour when he tells us that guarantees by the Security Council are among "the firmest guarantees that can be imagined in the modern world" [ibid.., para. 135], The truth has Iden and is that, largely as a result of Soviet policy, the Security Council for 20 years has refused to defend any Israeli right including the right not to have its citizens killed, its ports blockaded, its existence threatened. The policy of the Security Council has been to refuse to adopt any decision of which a single word is unpalatable to the Arab Governments. It has thus surrounded every assault on Israeli lives, Israeli rights and Israeli security with indulgence. At the highest point of tension and of Israel's danger in May 1967, with Israel blockaded and encircled on every side, with all mankind gripped by the apprehension of approaching war, the suggestion of the Soviet Union was that the Security Council should go home and refuse to discuss such an "artificial" matter as the declaration of active war and the formal imposition of a blockade against a Member State. It is largely because of Soviet policy that the Security Council cannot be a guarantor of any Israeli rights. And the future development in the composition of the Security Council, however essential for other reasons, is bound to emphasize its inability to guarantee or even to express an Israeli interest, whatever the majority of its members may think or say.
74.	There are few effective guarantees of peace beyond those inherent in the nature of the peace itself. The greatest danger is lest through lassitude of spirit or impatience or imprecision of diplomatic craftsmanship we again revert to fragile, false and ambiguous solutions, which carry in them the seed of future wars.
75.	But the work of peace, however complex, must be attempted. Israel's deepest aspiration is to take part in a new deployment of energies in the service of a peaceful order of relations in the Middle East. Accordingly I ask the crucial questions: Is the slow rhythm of the peace efforts inevitable? Can nothing be done or at least attempted to set some dialog in swifter motion? Do Israel's policies offer openings through which roads to peace can be discerned and actively explored? My answer is that if the Arab States, and especially Egypt, sincerely desire an honorable and lasting peace, there are many roads leading to that goal.
76.	The first road lies in a Suez Canal agreement. There are many reasons for giving priority to this at attempt. A sudden transition from a conflict of more than two decades to a total settlement has proved difficult. It may be more rational to expect progress by stages. Each stage would bring about a solution of a specific problem while opening the way to further agreements and thus to final peace.
77.	The Suez Canal sector calls urgently for disengagement. It is there that the regional tension is compounded by the military presence of a great Power. Disengagement of forces here is an urgent international interest.
78.	The President of Egypt proposed on 4 February an attempt to open the Suez Canal ahead of a total settlement.
Israel's Prime Minister responded on 9 February. Both Governments subsequently agreed that the United States should use its good offices to explore the prospect. We therefore have an agreed objective and an agreed modality. , We believe that the effort to bridge the gulf between the positions of the parties should be pursued in the general interest of peace. If agreement cannot be reached on such a clearly defined issue in which Egyptian advantage is so strong it would appear to be even more difficult to advance in one step towards an over-all settlement in which all the complex issues would Ml into place. But the contrary is also true. A concrete result in this matter will accelerate and inspire negotiation and agreements on other issues. The peace effort will acquire momentum. It will be surrounded for the first time by an air of confidence and promise.
79.	Having been invited to give its views on this matter, Israel developed a proposal that an arrangement be agreed upon with a view to the opening of the Suez Canal to be cleared and operated by Egypt. Israel would make a withdrawal of its forces from the water-line to an agreed distance. The fighting would not be resumed. Egypt would clear and open the Canal. It would be agreed that there be free passage for all ships and cargoes, including those of Israel. Effective and agreed supervision procedures would be established. Means of deterrence against the danger of violation of the agreement would be assured. The agreement would stand on its own feet, but it would not affect or annul the undertakings which the parties gave in August 1970 to hold discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices in conformity with his mandate under Security Council resolution 242(1967). The line to be held by Israeli forces in accordance with that Canal agreement would not be considered final. When agreement on a final boundary is reached in the framework of the peace settlement Israeli forces will withdraw to it.
80.	We hope that Egypt will give this proposal the detailed and careful consideration which seemed to be its intention in April. It represents far-reaching concessions on Israel's part. It involves a movement from the cease-fire line ahead of peace. It mitigates the accepted legitimate principle that no withdrawal need take place ahead of a contractual and mutually agreed peace. The prestige, benefits and revenues from the Canal, the possible return of three quarters of a million people who live near the Canal in peaceful times, as well as the crossing of the Canal by Egyptian civilian personnel, would all be Egyptian, not Israeli, gains. A new impetus would be given to the Jarring mission, which is now in abeyance. The undertakings which I have given refute the idoa that the Canal agreement would be the last word. On the contrary, its conclusion and observance would create a favorable channel for further agreements.
81.	It is true that neither Egypt nor Israel would attain its final objective in this interim framework, but Egypt's right to present its claims in the over-all peace negotiations would remain intact, as would Israel's freedom to present its own proposals and reservations.
82.	A second road to peace lies through the resumption of negotiations under Ambassado. Jarring's auspices. Israel agreed to resume these talks in January 1971 despite Egypt's refusal to rectify its violation of the missile- standstill agreement. At a meeting with the Prime Minister and myself in January, Ambassador Jarring was requested to communicate to the Governments of Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon a list of principles which, in our view, should be embodied in the peace agreements to be concluded and signed between Israel and each of the Arab Governments concerned. These principles were, at first, vehemently "ejected by the Egyptian Government. Subsequently, on i 5 February, the Government of Egypt commented f A/8541, annex II] on an aide-memoir submitted a week before by Ambassador Jarring [A/8541, annex I], It did not accept Mr. Jarring's precise formulations on navigation in the Suez Canal, on the Straits of Tiran, nor indeed on the definition of the scope of withdrawal. But the Egyptian reply did contain an expression of readiness to enter into a peace agreement with Israel provided that all the Egyptian terms for the agreement were met. One of these terms was the total withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Sinai peninsula, the Gaza strip and all territories beyond the armistice line existing on 4 June 1967.
83.	In its reply on 26 February 1971 [A/8541, annex III] the Israel Government viewed favorably the expression by Egypt of its readiness to enter into a peace agreement with Israel, and reiterated that it was prepared for meaningful negotiation on all subjects relevant to a peace agreement between the two countries.
84.	Why then are the Jarring talks in abeyance? The reason is plain. The Security Council resolution, 242(1967), requires that the withdrawal and boundary clauses of the peace agreement, like all its other provisions, must be determined through agreement, which of course implies negotiation. Egypt declines to hold any dialog or negotiation whatever on this point. It lays down its own position as an ultimate condition to which Israel must submit before negotiation begins. Indeed it is not clear why negotiation would be needed at all if the Egyptian view has to be accepted in advance. In a recent declaration of which President Sadat was a signatory, three Arab Governments, including that of Egypt, reiterated that there can be no negotiation with Israel, no conciliation and no bargaining over the Palestinian issue. This is a more recent and presumably more authoritative statement of Egypt's policy than the one that Mr. Riad, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, communicated to Mr. Jarring six months ago. Together with other declarations in the same mood and spirit, it raises the question whether the February memorandum has the significance that we chose to attach to it at that time.
85.	But on one point alone the February communication from Cairo and the Damascus tripartite statement are one: they both rule out the free, precise and detailed negotiation of the "boundary and withdrawal questions. Our policy is that, instead of cease-fire lines or armistice lines, we should establish secure, recognized and agreed boundaries as part of the peace-making process, and withdraw our armed forces to those boundaries once they are determined. It is important to break away from the temporary and unresolved territorial concepts which have prevailed since 1948 in order to develop for the first time a permanent structure of boundaries and security agreements.
86.	There is no need to be apologetic about the doctrine that peace boundaries may be different from armistice lines. The Arab Governments wrote into the 1949 Armistice Agreements a provision stating that the armistice lines are not the final boundaries and these must be worked out by agreement in the transition to peace. We are now embarked on that transition. Israel's size and strength are smaller than those of the European Powers which insisted on secure and agreed boundaries after the Second World War; but the right to negotiate boundaries that would release Israel from a chronic and desperate vulnerability belongs to it as to every other sovereign State. In this matter we are not in a position of juridical defense.
87.	I shall summarize under three headings the reasons and justifications which give Israel the right to have negotiation on boundaries and security arrangements. The first, as I have already pointed out, is the provisional character of the lines now held as well as those which existed before. Several years before the 1967 war the Deputy Foreign Minister of Egypt correctly said: "There is no legal boundary between Israel and Egypt but only a line that was fixed in the pursuance of the Armistice Agreement."
88.	On 31 May 1967 the representative of Jordan said in the Security Council:
"There is an Armistice Agreement. The Agreement did not fix boundaries; it fixed a demarcation line. The Agreement did not pass judgment on rights political, military or otherwise. Thus I know of no territory; I know of no boundary." 
89.	A second and more contemporary reason in support of Israel's claim to a negotiation on withdrawal and boundaries lies in the Security Council's resolution 242 (1967), which has been accepted by some Arab States and by Israel and which is the constitutive document of the Jarring mission. That resolution was adopted after all attempts to require a withdrawal to the 4 June armistice lines had been defeated by vote or discarded for lack of support. The term "secure and recognized boundaries" was an innovation in the United Nations vocabulary. It first appeared in a United States draft resolution submitted on 7 November 1967 and later embodied in a United Kingdom draft  which was presented for unanimous vote. I must state with full solemnity and knowledge that Israel's adherence to the Security Council resolution and acceptance of the Jarring mission were secured on the most explicit understanding that the resolution offered an opportunity to negotiate agreements on boundaries and withdrawal. Secretary of State Rogers stated for the United States in October 1969:
"Those boundaries were armistice lines not final political borders. The rights, claims and positions of the parties in an ultimate peaceful settlement were reserved by the Armistice Agreements. The Security Council resolution neither endorses nor precludes those armistice lines as the definitive political boundaries."
90.	In a public statement on 12 July 1970, Mr. Sisco, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, declared that he had taken an active part in the formulation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). He added:
"That resolution did not say withdrawal to the pre- June 5 lines. The resolution said the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final secure and recognized borders. In other words the question of the final borders is a matter of negotiation between the parties."
91.	The United Kingdom Government, which sponsored Security Council resolution 242 (1967), put itself on record on 17 November 1969, when its Foreign Secretary, Mr. Michael Stewart, was asked:
"What is the British interpretation of the wording of the 1967 resolution? Does... it... mean that the Israelis should withdraw from all territories taken in the late war? "
He replied:
"No, Sir. That is not the phrase used in the resolution. The resolution speaks of secure and recognized boundaries. Those words must be read concurrently with the statement on withdrawal." 
A month later, on 9 December 1969, in the House of Commons he said:
"... There is reference, in the vital United Nations Security Council resolution, both to withdrawal from territories and to secure and recognized boundaries. As I have told the House previously, we believe that these two things should be read concurrently and that the omission of the word all' before the word 'territories' is deliberate."?
I repeat: "... the omission of the word 'all' before the word 'territories' is deliberate."
92.	It was in the light of these clear undertakings that the Israel Government informed Mr. Jarring in August 1970 that it accepted the Security Council resolution 242 (1967) for implementation in all its parts and that on the establishment of a just and final peace in accordance with the resolution it would withdraw its forces from the cease-fire lines to secure and recognized boundaries to be determined in the negotiations.
93.	The political and juridical aspects of the questions to which I have referred are the expression^ a deeper, more concrete reality. Israel does not have a policy of expansion or annexation. In the negotiations on boundaries and withdrawals it will seek those modifications which are essential to ensure security and to prevent another war.
94.	ihe war of 1967 did not arise exclusively from the vulnerability of the armistice lines. But there is no doubt that some topographical and strategic situations were a permanent temptation to assault. If they are not corrected and adjusted Israel, on withdrawing from the cease-fire lines, would find itself again in a position of intolerable vulnerability. There could be no more horrifying error than to revert, through lack of precise and detailed negotiation, to a territorial structure and security balance capable of reproducing the peril which exploded four years ago.
95.	In the framework of a peace settlement with Egypt, Israel would withdraw from the cease-fire lines. We have never asserted that in a condition of peace it would be necessary for our troops to remain in all of the Sinai peninsula or even in most of it. But there are vital interests affecting security, peace and navigation which impel us to reserve the right to attempt in the peace negotiations to secure a contractual basis for such continued presence as is necessary to protect security and navigation. There are several juridical expressions and precedents for such an arrangement. Our emphasis is on practical security conditions, not on any particular juridical formula. The post-war map of the world is replete with instructive parallels. The peace treaties in Europe and Asia did not bring about a return to the exact military and territorial dispositions that existed before.
96.	Now Israel does not ask Egypt to accept any of its positions as a condition of negotiation. The proposal for the withdrawal of all Israeli troops to the previous positions is legitimate as an Egyptian proposal. It is equally legitimate for Israel to insist on an opportunity of free negotiation in which its own reservations and counter-proposals could be made. And our request from the world community is modest. We do not present specific Israeli proposals for endorsement by other Governments; we ask only that our right to negotiate the issues vital to our future, to our peace and to our security, should not be cut off in advance.
97.	Our position, then, is this: We have taken note of the Egyptian proposal on withdrawal. Israel would withdraw its armed forces from the Israel-United Arab Republic ceasefire line to the secure, recognized and agreed boundaries to be established in the peace agreement. Now that both parties have presented their basic positions, they should pursue their negotiations in a detailed and concrete manner without prior condition to cover all the points I listed in their respective documents with a view to concluding a peace agreement. I continue to adhere to the view which I expressed at the twenty-third session of the General Assembly in October 1968 that
"It is possible to work out a boundary settlement compatible with the security of Israel and the honor of
Arab States	The majority of the United Nations have
recognized that the only durable and reasonable solutions are agreed solutions serving the common interests of our peoples. The new peace structure in the Middle East, including the secure and recognized boundaries, must be built by Arab and Israeli hands" [1686th meeting, para. 111].
Thus if Egypt will present its position for negotiation without the unprecedented request for Israel's acceptance of it in advance, we shall be ready for detailed and concrete negotiation on all the matters mentioned in the Egyptian memorandum of 15 February and the Israeli document of 26 February,
98.	Effective and versatile conciliation must include a capacity to move from one direction to another in a tireless pursuit of peace. In March 1968, Ambassador Jarring suggested a formula for the convening of meetings between the parties in Nicosia on the basis of an agreed term of reference. Egypt rejected that proposal. Those concerned with the conciliation effort did not say that the mission had to be held in suspense until Egypt gave a positive reply to something which its policy did not then allow it to endorse. It would be wrong now to affirm that such a vital objective as the establishment of a negotiated peace between Israel and Egypt will never be possible except on the basis of a working paper which did not happen to secure the agreement of the parties. Egyptian-Israeli peace is too great a cause to be tied and tethered for all time to a single optional memorandum. If Egypt will agree to pursue negotiations in a detailed and concrete manner without prior conditions on all the points listed in the Israeli and Egyptian memoranda of February 1971, this road to meaningful negotiation will lie open,
99.	There are other roads to peace. The Suez Canal agreement and the discussion of an over-all settlement are not the only options available for negotiation. The problem of refugees requires a broad acceptance of regional and international responsibility. We have therefore proposed the convening of a conference of Middle Eastern States, together with Governments which have contributed to refugee relief and the specialized agencies of the United Nations, in order to chart a five-year plan for the solution of the refugee problem and the integration of refugees into productive life.
100.	This problem would now be considered against the background of some alleviating developments in recent months. There is a growing disillusion with the irredentist pretensions of the terrorist groups and the air pirates. The dividing wall which once prevented all human contact between Israelis and Palestine Arabs is falling. It is true that this is due so far to Israeli initiative. Last year not a single Israeli set foot in any Arab land, but 110,000 Arabs from countries "at war" with Israel came into contact with Israel across the open Jordan bridges. An open frontier between Israel and its eastern neighbor similar to the community frontiers in Europe would do much to give human reality to a peace settlement, and indeed might help the settlement to be achieved.
101.	There is a fourth possibility. The problems of boundaries and security are usually considered to be the crux of the negotiation. But there are other unresolved matters in the memoranda presented by Egypt and Israel in February. At first sight there seems to be some proximity between the peace, non-aggression, recognition and navigation clauses suggested by the two Governments. On closer inspection the disparities are substantial, and could become crucial. We suggested in January and later in March that, it might be profitable to attempt to draft some of the clauses of the Egyptian-Israel treaty relating to the principles of peace. It is an accepted negotiating technique to begin with problems in which divergences are less broad and thus to create a favorable atmosphere in which to confront the more acute problems.
102.	There is a fifth road towards negotiating procedure and activity; it concerns the negotiating procedure, but its weight is intensively substantive and not at all procedural I have said that in the early months of 1968 Ambassador Jarring suggested meetings between the parties, under his auspices, in Nicosia, in accordance with a text setting out the terms of reference for the conferences. On 10 March 1968, Ambassador Jarring informed me that Egypt had rejected that proposal. As the Secretary-General's report of 4 January 1971 reveals, Dr. Jarring "was informed of Israel's official acceptance, without conditions, of the text". 
103.	Now that was the negative turning-point in the history of the Jarring mission. Since then it has been limited, through Egyptian insistence, to a bizarre procedure under which Israeli documents are presented to Ambassador Jarring, and by him to the Egyptian representative. If the Israel document contains the words "for communication to the Government of Egypt", the Egyptian representative refuses to take it into his h?nds; or if he has inadvertently accepted its delivery, he comes back to relinquish it with panic-stricken haste as if it were a hot coal. The Israel document is then divulged by the Egyptian representative to the press, accompanied by a burst of invective. Egyptian replies are published without any hint of an intention to communicate them to Israel. The Egyptian position is that Israel may not talk to Egypt directly, may not talk to Egypt indirectly and may not communicate anything to Egypt in writing.
104.	If no other method is available my Government will communicate its views to Egypt by whatever channel or technique is possible. But we cannot conceal our conviction that there is an element of farce in the idea that the word "negotiation" can honestly be applied to the extraordinary procedure followed so far. How can a Government which alleges that it wants a peace agreement with Israel refuse to negotiate the terms of that agreement by a rational method of contact? To say that one is prepared to enter into a peace agreement but not to meet or negotiate even under international chairmanship is to make a mockery of the international community. One thing is clear: No international agreement has been reached on any subject between any States at any time by the methods to which the Jarring mission has so far been confined through Egypt's insistence.
105.	I am convinced that the strongest chance of breaking out of the deadlock lies in a transition to a rational negotiating procedure. The hour is ripe. The gap between the parties is wide, but may not be impossible to bridge. Negotiation is the agent which would transform the potentiality into action.
106.	One of the most important things said about the Middle East in recent days is Sir Alec Douglas-Home's statement yesterday that "distrust... of this depth ... cannot [easily] be removed by long-distance correspondence" [1944th meeting, para. 98] and that "those who are in confrontation must actively help to promote a dialog'' [ibid., para, 97], If all those who hold that view would express it with equal candor, an international movement in favor of abandoning the illusion of long- range correspondence would come to effective expression.
107.	There is no weight or value in. the argument that the Arab Governments would be negotiating from weakness if they accepted direct contact under international chairmanship. Their point of reference would be, not the military situation, but the political forum in which the Arab side would speak from a position of numerical and geographical predominance,
108.	I therefore propose to the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Riad, that we take our guidance from the spirit which inspires the international life of our ags. Let us meet here this month under the auspices of the United States to discuss the details and! principles of a Suez Canal settlement; or under the chairmanship of Ambassador Jarring to discuss the establishment of peace in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) on the basis of our respective memoranda of February 1971. Let us break out of devious procedures and sterile polemics into a new vision and a new hope.
109.	In a recent statement the President of Egypt, Mr. El-Sadat, declared that he would sacrifice a million men to achieve a military victory. What he and we should be considering is how to ensure that the 33 million Egyptians, tin 3 million Israelis and the other millions in the Middle East are saved i.om sacrifice and preserved for the construction of a peaceful regional order. The task will not be served by war or by threats of renewed hostilities which command our vigilance but which are, in effect, an echo of ill-fated bombast in the recent past. Nor will our task be fulfilled by living out the rest of 1971 in ineffective debate or inflammatory resolutions. The Arab States may have enough voting strength to secure the adoption of virulent, unbalanced texts or to give a biased interpretation to the Security Council resolution, which would then cease to be an agreed documentary consensus available as a basis for the ultimate and inevitable negotiation. But what will it profit to gain an Assembly majority, but to lose Israel's adherence to a set of principles common to it and to neighboring States? The roads to peace do not have their starting point in war or in polemical debate. They branch out from one of the many avenues and by-ways of negotiation on which we shall meet Egypt when its choice is made and declared.
110.	This session could mark a recuperation in the career of "the United Nations if the Organization made this the year of negotiation, the year of negotiation in all outstanding disputes. It has other tasks. The Second United Nations Development Decade can be saved from the frustrations of the First if the advanced countries turn aside from the perils of monetary war towards an expanding vocation in the development of emergent societies.
111.	And in the last resort this Organization will be judged according to the role it has played in defense of human welfare and dignity, The call of kinship and of dark memory will bring us to refer at appropriate stages in Committees and in the plenary meetings to two dramas of great intensity and pathos: the Jews of the Soviet Union, of whom some have reached us but of whom the great majority are still restrained from the expression of their cultural identity and their national hope; and the captive remnants of helpless Jews in Arab lands, especially in Syria, whose anguished voice cries out for liberation from terror and despair. This Organization, for all its imperfections, is still the only organized expression of the planetary spirit. It may be bearing within itself the seed of a universal order in which men will come together to save their environment from pollution, their society from disruption, their economy from decline, their life from the stress and grip of violence. There is no room for fatalistic despair. There is still time for men and nations to be, inspired by a new and spacious vision and to invest their thought and labour in defence of the "common heritage of mankind".




164.	 Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure to congratulate the new President of this Assembly. You come to us, Sir, as one of the most distinguished statesmen of South-East Asia, from a great country of that region, and with qualities that will serve us admirably during one of the most important assemblies in the history of this Organization. It is also a pleasure for me to pay a tribute to the previous President of the Assembly, Mr. Hambro of Norway, who presided so well over a session marking another significant juncture in the lifetime of the United Nations.
165.	This session of the General Assembly, meeting under the guidance of an Asian President, is one which will be marked by a degree of preoccupation with matters relating to that most populous of regions which has not always been characteristic of this Organization. For New Zealand, a country of the South Pacific on the fringes of Asia but a full partner, for all that, in many aspects of the increasingly intensive co-operation among the great majority of countries in this region, this will be welcome.
166.	It means that in the first instance the Assembly will, as we hope, at last come to grips in a realistic manner with the position which the People's Republic of China should occupy in the Organization. My Government, along with most of those Governments represented here today, has welcomed the hopeful developments which have taken place in relationships with Peking since the Assembly last met, and particularly during the last few months. The announcement of President Nixon's intention to visit China at some time before May of next year and the preliminary talks which preceded that announcement, no less than the actual visit when it eventuates, have the quality of events which leave their mark on the history of human affairs. They portend the end of an era. Whether it is the beginning of a new order depends on the efforts which will be made by all concerned. For the present we are in a period of transition and of adjustment of relationships which calls for
difficult decisions on the part of Governments, but particularly on the part of those whose future is intimately bound up with the destinies of Asia.
167.	For many years my Government, which in 1961 proposed the inclusion in the Assembly's agenda of an item on the question of the representation of China in the United Nations, has been concerned with the achievement of a solution to the problem of Chinese representation that would be both just and reasonable. We have spoken in favor of the seating in the United Nations of the People's Republic of China. We have also wished to see fair recognition of the reality of the situation, which is the existence of two Governments in full control of their respective territories. Here there is a separation of authority as distinct as there is in the case of what are known as the "divided States", but with the essential difference that the entity, China, is already a Member of the United Nations. The Secretary-General has argued strongly in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization that the admission of the divided countries should not be linked to the problems resulting from their division [Aj8401IAdd.l, para. 104]. My delegation may not be entirely convinced that that is so, but since the argument has been advanced, a fortiori it must apply in the case of two Governments, in control for two full decades of different parts of the territory of what was a founding Member of the United Nations. The legitimacy of either Government is not a matter for the Assembly to determine in the circumstances of the case, where both Governments enjoy wide recognition among United Nations Members. It is for the Assembly rather to make clear that a resolution of the basic conflict lies with the parties concerned, while providing for the seating of both in the Organization.
168.	This is fair; this is reasonable; this is, above all, common sense. That is why my Government, which shares with many others the desire to see the representatives of Peking seated in the Assembly and exercising the powers which should fall to them in the Security Council, has joined in sponsoring a proposal to this effect[A/L.633].
169.	Great Powers have great capacity to achieve good, or equally to inflict damage. Rapprochements involving great Powers must always be welcomed for the relaxation of tension which should accompany them. Yet it is important, and it is the responsibility of this Organization to ensure, that the rights of the less powerful should not be ignored or swept away in the interests of an accommodation among super-States, or between a super-State and the rest of the world community. My delegation believes that this consideration is one to which due weight should be given when the Assembly embarks upon the substantive discussion of this problem.
170.	It is, indeed, the peculiar quality of the General Assembly that, as the Secretary-General stated in paragraph 95 of his introduction, it "offers the smaller and the medium Powers not only a voice, but also a way of influencing the course of events far in excess of what was previously available to them". This is a significant statement, like a number of others made in this year's
introduction, particularly in part one, to which I wish to pay a warm tribute.
171.	My Government believes that the smaller Powers, into whose ranks we have the pleasure of welcoming Bahrains Bhutan, Qatar and soon Oman, have a special role to play both within the United Nations and outside. They bring a different perspective to world affairs which can serve as a useful balance to the interests of larger Powers,, while in many cases they enjoy relationships with such Powers which enable them both to understand the objectives of the latter and to exercise some influence upon them.
172.	The necessity for this three-way relationship between the great Powers, small countries and international institutions has been dramatically evident in recent weeks in the international monetary situation. It is a fact of life we recognize, that the economic weight of the great industrial Powers has a major impact on molding the character of the international monetary system. In the present unstable situation it is the major Powers that must undergo the restructuring needed to restore equilibrium. Naturally it is those Powers that will have a major role in the negotiations that are necessary to lead to long-term international monetary stability.
173.	At the same time, it is essential that the great Powers recognize that -their economic decisions can profoundly affect the economic stability of the smaller nations, many of which do not have sophisticated monetary systems and the resilience to ride out major upheavals. I repeat what I said at the meetings in Washington last week that it is an unfortunate fact that recent measures taken by major countries which to them seemed reasonable arid legitimate-may have damaging repercussions on the economies of small nations whose problems were neither perceived nor discussed.
174.	New Zealand welcomes the improvement in the climate for constructive discussion. While we understand the reasons for the actions of the United States Administration, we firmly believe that all nations, large and small, that are intimately concerned with these events should consider each other's difficulties. We are confident that they will recognize the duty each has to the international community to reach a reasonable compromise before further serious damage is done not only to international trade but also to the institutions that have served us well since Bretton Woods. We are encouraged, therefore, that the International Monetary Fund unanimously recognized that, whereas the present international monetary situation contains the dangers of instability and disorder in currency and trade relationships, it also offers the opportunity for constructive changes in the international monetary system, and in particular it called upon its members to collaborate with the Fund and with each other in order, as promptly as possible, to establish a satisfactory structure of exchange rates, together with the reduction of restrictive trade and exchange practices.
175.	Among other problems confronting small countries is their position in world trade and in relation to large economic groupings, which may so easily develop marked protectionist characteristics. In this debate last year, the leader of the New Zealand delegation spoke of the threat which hung over New Zealand's economic future as negotiations were engaged on the entry of the United Kingdom, its largest export market, into the European Economic Community [1853rd meeting, para. 197]. He said that in a very real sense the role of regional groupings ia world trade was on trial in this test case. He also said that ft would be tragic if, as a result of enlarging the European Economic Community, one of the world's most efficient agricultural producers were to be driven to the wall.
176.	I owe it to this Assembly , and to the countries of the Community, as well as to the Government of the United Kingdom, to record on this occasion the satisfactory outcome of these negotiations from New Zealand's point of view. Having disposed of this area of uncertainty in its immediate trading future, New Zealand is now in a better position to plan ahead, to move forward on the basis of sound economic growth and to play its full part in world trade and development and, with it, in the Second Development Decade.
177.	Regional economic groupings are a fact of international life. They have much to offer to smaller countries by providing the advantages of a market-place of new dimensions. The development of wider opportunities for trade and development throughout many of the countries and territories of the South Pacific is one of the important goals sought by the Heads of State or Government of Western Samoa, Nauru, Fiji, Tonga and the Cook Islands, who joined with the representatives of Australia and New Zealand in the South Pacific Forum held in Wellington in August this year. A second such meeting will be held in Canberra in the first half of 1972, and preparatory work is under way among officials. Co-operation is envisaged over a wide range of fields of practical interest. Combined with the continuing work of the South Pacific Commission and the welcome and increasing commitment of United Nations agencies to the area, we believe these activities should have a significant impact at the development level.
178.	There was another aspect of the growing sense of South Pacific awareness at the recent meeting. This was the unanimous feeling of concern expressed by this group of small countries that, despite the opposition voiced over the years, they should still be faced with the intrusion, as they saw it, of a great Power into the area for the purpose of conducting atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons. Why, they asked, if the hazards are as slight as France claims, should it not test nearer home?
179.	In this and in other ways in recent months a growing impatience has been revealed among countries in and bordering the Pacific. An even wider range of concern has been shown in recent discussions in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the limits of National Jurisdiction. While we welcome the fact that this year's test series has been cut short after five explosions, this is apparently only a temporary relief. What we wait to hear is that this will have been the last series to be conducted in our Pacific area. In saying this, my
delegation is not unmindful of the arguments that France is not a party to the partial test-ban treaty; that it is, after all, only following the path of other nuclear Powers which continue to develop their potential through underground testing; that there is no agreement on measures of nuclear disarmament; and that the People's Republic of China also continues to test in the atmosphere. My delegation will advocate at this session, as it has done in the past, the ending of all nuclear testing, including underground testing. But meanwhile no atmospheric test can escape the condemnation of those who have signed the partial test-ban treaty and who constitute a great majority of this Assembly.
180.	The meeting of the South Pacific Forum to which I have referred brought together all the independent or self-governing countries of the South Pacific. Apart from Australia and New Zealand, none has a population of much more than half a million or a land area greater than 7,000 square miles, and the majority are decidedly smaller. Yet in every case, whether the country concerned had been a Non-Self-Governing or Trust Territory, the right to self-determination had been recognized and freely exercised, and the transition had been a peaceful one in what we like to think is the Pacific way. Nor, so far as New Zealand's remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories of Niue and the Tokelau Islands are concerned, will that right of free choice be denied when the peoples concerned wish to exercise it. The problems which remain, unlike those in some other parts of the world and notably southern Africa, do not relate to this principle: they are simply, in these tiny islands, the problems of size, resources and general viability. It has been a matter of disappointment to my delegation that the bodies concerned with questions of decolonization have not as yet fully studied the special problems inherent in such small Territories. Rather, they have been understandably anxious to assert the basic principles to which my delegation, having voted in favor of resolution 1514 (XV), also subscribes. My delegation has nevertheless been encouraged by the trend of the constructive discussion which took place this year in Sub-Committee II of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
181.	The Assembly will be interested to know that the New Zealand Government, which has long expressed its willingness in principle to receive a visiting mission, has during this year's consideration of Niue and the Tokelaus, invited the Special Committee to send a small mission to both Territories in 1972. It thus continues a pattern of co-operation with the United Nations in the field of decolonization which at different times has involved United Nations presence both in the former Trust Territory of Western Samoa and in the Cook Islands. It is confident that, when a mission of the Special Committee visits Niue and the Tokelau Islands next year, this will be an important element not only in ascertaining the attitudes of the local populations but also in deepening understanding in the United Nations of the conditions in these small Pacific islands. The Secretary-General has provided an excellent summary of the question in paragraph 304 of his introduction where, speaking of small Territories, he says:
".,. the problems involved in their decolonization are nevertheless complex and call for individual solutions which must stem from the full and freely expressed wishes of their peoples and, at the same time, take account of realities."
182.	Once the right to self-determination has been recognized, the search for a realistic solution to the problems of Non-Self-Governing Territories can begin and the United Nations can assist in the process. But there remain those Territories, in particular Angola, Mozambique and Portuguese Guinea, in respect of which that right continues to be denied; and in Southern Rhodesia the problem is overlaid with racial discrimination and apartheid-type policies which deprive large segments of the population of their most elementary human rights. Here, as on the even more arduous question of South. Africa itself, the approach in the United Nations must of necessity be a consistent one: no doubt must be left as to where the international community stands on the principles involved, and its condemnation must be firmly stated where these principles are denied.
183.	In determining its position on the various draft resolutions on questions relating to southern Africa which will be before the present session, the New Zealand delegation will wish to give full weight to this moral imperative. It was for this reason that New Zealand recorded an affirmative vote earlier this year in the Economic and Social Council on its resolution 1591 (L) on apartheid, on which it had previously found it necessary to abstain in the voting on draft resolution V in the Commission on Human Rights. It is at the same time impressed by the view expressed by the Secretary-General in the section of his introduction entitled "Concluding Remarks" where, in the light of his long experience, he states in paragraph 143:
"It is however a weakness when resolutions are adopted which have no prospect of implementation, and the authority and prestige of the world's greatest deliberative body is thereby eroded."
It will be our endeavor in our discussions with the sponsors of resolutions on this topic and during the formal deliberations on them, to ensure that these wise words are given full weight.
184.	New Zealand's view on the questions of apartheid and raciL? discrimination will be set out more fully under the appropriate items on the agenda. I should wish to place on record during this debate, however, my Government's stated intention to proceed to the ratification of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX)J as its major contribution to the International Year. For this purpose, the Government has introduced into the legislature a Race Relations Bill which is currently at the committee stage. We hope it will be enacted in time to allow ratification to take place before the end of this year. Our examination of the situation in New Zealand showed that, in practice as in law, substantial conformity with the provisions of the Convention already exists. A Race Relations Act, which establishes complete legislative compliance with this key international instrument, will nevertheless constitute an important landmark in the evolution of New Zealand's multiracial society, as well as an unequivocal rejection of all doctrines or political systems based on concepts of racial superiority.
185.	Racial discrimination is but one aspect, although a highly important one, of the broader problem of the defense and promotion of human rights. As New Zealand completes two successive terms of membership in the Commission on Human Rights, we can reflect on the gradual but definite progress which has been made. Looking back over the range of human rights instruments which the United Nations has developed over a longer period, we see legitimate grounds for satisfaction with the development of a substantial legal framework in this field. My delegation has considered for some years that what is now required is an institution which can assist in the promotion of human rights in order to enable the Organization and its Members to give effect to the commitments entered into under Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter. The proposed office of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is, in the view of my Government, well conceived to meet this need. This office would provide, moreover, the means of exerting a positive influence on human rights questions, free from political considerations. Let us at this session finally come to grips with this issue. Let us discuss amendments to the terms of reference set out in resolution 1237 (XLII) of the Economic and Social Council so as to enable broad agreement to be reached. Let us strive to remove the doubts which a number of delegations have felt about this proposal. Agreement on this issue would represent an important achievement for this session and for the furtherance of respect for human rights everywhere.
186.	A major item involving human rights in the highest degree has not been separately included on the agenda of the present session, although the Secretary-General has dealt with it in cogent and eloquent terms in paragraphs 177 to 191 of the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization. I refer to the situation in East Pakistan.
187.	The upheaval that has taken place there, causing perhaps the largest refugee problem in modern times, cannot simply be ignored by the Assembly. The consequences that continue to flow from that tragedy have been beyond the resources of both India and Pakistan to cope with and still demand urgent international attention. The United Nations has therefore been called upon to assume an important role in focusing attention on the human desperation involved and in co-ordinating and channeling aid to alleviate the distress.
188.	New Zealanders have been concerned most at the human aspects of the problem the bloodshed and suffering and the far-reaching dislocation which the crisis has caused to the livelihood of both India and Pakistan. But we are also increasingly worried about its implications for the peace of the sub-continent. We have some understanding of the intensity of feelings that have led to this situation and that threaten to increase the human misery if a solution is not found soon, and we have some appreciation of the difficulties that have so far prevented a political solution from being achieved.
the problem. The humanitarian aspects were considered on two occasions this year in the Economic and Social Council. New Zealand took a part in having the question raised, because of the responsibility which we felt that body owed to the refugees themselves and to a shocked public opinion throughout the world. Those discussions served to emphasize, however, that in the absence of a durable political settlement very little can be achieved beyond meeting the immediate day-to-day needs of the refugees,
190.	Shortly after the discussion in the Economic and Social Council the Secretary-General drew the attention of members of the Security Council to the situation in East Pakistan and its implications for international peace and security. That action, in our view, was both timely and a proper exercise of the powers of initiative of the Secretary-General. My delegation wishes to pay a tribute to him for having taken this step and for having set forth at length in paragraphs 124 to 137 of his introduction a concept of the role and powers of the Secretary-General which my delegation takes this opportunity to endorse.
191.	In welcoming the Secretary-General's initiative in a public statement, the New Zealand Prime Minister, Sir Keith Holyoake, observed:
"The essential problem of reaching a political settlement in East Pakistan is one that only Pakistan's own leaders can solve.... But if one is to be reached a climate of confidence must be established., and this requires the co-operation of the Government of India. The Governments of India and Pakistan have so far acted with caution and restraint towards each other. Statements are, however, being made by political figures on both sides that cannot but undermine the positions of the two Governments and add to the tensions between them,"
192.	This deteriorating situation was described graphically by the Secretary-General in his message to the President of the Security Council when he said:
"... I have reluctantly come to the conclusion that the time is past when the international community can continue to stand by, watching the situation deteriorate and hoping that relief programs, humanitarian efforts and good intentions will be enough to turn the side of human misery and potential disaster".
193.	A durable solution can be arrived at only by negotiation and compromise between all the parties directly concerned, and not by further assertions of force. Substantial progress towards a settlement has so far not been achieved largely because of the tension that has developed in the area. That tension, in turn, has arisen in part from desperation at the apparent absence of any hopeful sign of a political settlement being reached in consultation with the elected representatives of East Pakistan. This is the crucial problem the Secretary-General was referring to when he spoke of "a series of vicious circles which largely frustrate the efforts of the authorities concerned and of the international community to deal with the vast humanitarian problems involved"[A/8401/Add.l, para. 184].
189. We have therefore been anxious to see that the United Nations should bring its influence to bear fully on
194. The United Nations has a heavy responsibility for maintaining international peace and security in the area
will not have fulfilled that responsibility simply by attending to the daily physical needs of the refugees, immense though these problems alone have become. As the New Zealand delegation said in the Economic and Social Council on 16 July, "the dictates of humanitarianism do not cease with the provision of food and shelter. They extend to the long-term future of the unfortunate refugees and particularly their right to return of their own free will to their homes in conditions which promise them a normal life as citizens participating fully in their society."9 It is in this area of the problem that the United Nations can exercise a beneficial restraining influence, encouraging the leaders on either side to seek an acceptable accommodation and to act out of a sense of broad humanitarian concern for the interests of the refugees themselves, on whom the greatest burden of all has fallen.
195.	I do not wish to labor, in connexion with the question of East Pakistan any more than in relation to the war in Viet-Nam and the widened Indo-China conflict, the failure of the United Nations to play any real part at the political level. The shortcomings of the Organization in the area of peace and security were widely discussed during the twenty-fifth anniversary session. There are a variety of reasons for this state of affairs, residing mainly in the will of Member States to use the Organization and their concept of their interests outside it.
196.	One element, however, which it should lie within cur power in this Assembly to rectify, is the state of the Organization's finances. This problem, arising from its involvement in peace-keeping activities, is intimately related to its future capacity in that area.
197.	We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his frankness in stating that "there exists no real basis for optimism or for the expectation that an over-all and comprehensive solution is imminent or likely to be found in the foreseeable future" [ibid., para. 119]. I submit, however, that we should nevertheless, during this session, face up to this complex of problems with all the seriousness that we can muster. My delegation, for one, is willing to see negotiations engaged on the basis put forward by the President of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly [A/8497], More specifically, New Zealand, as a bond-holder, is prepared to see its bonds included in a negotiated package on the basis of a reduced face value, as well as to see waived such credits as might stand to it in the peace-keeping accounts of the Organization. It is New Zealand's expectation and hope that all other Members will join, in their various ways, in a united effort to save the Organization from the bankruptcy which is so clear and present a danger to it. This is surely a year when the United Nations is at the cross roads of history. Let us equip it for a vigorous future.
198.	I would like to join previous speakers in expressing our very high regard for the Secretary-General, U Thant, as he completes his final term of office. It was indeed a difficult inheritance to which he succeeded many years ago and he has performed with unexampled steadfastness,
9 This statement was made at the 1783rd meeting of the Economic and Social Council, the official records of which are published in summary form.
honor and devotion the essential task of holding this Organization together over the ensuing period. We have all expected much of, as well as imposed much on, our Secretary-GeneraL May I say for New Zealand that our debt of gratitude to him is very high indeed.




82.	 First of all, Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly of the United Nations and to wish you success in carrying out the responsible tasks which lie before you.
83.	The international situation in which the twenty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly has been convened is complex and variegated. There is undeniably much in it; which is new and which meets the aspirations of the peoples; but the opposite trends are strong and the world is not free from danger. The situation is shaped by the policies of States and is by no means simple.
84.	In analyzing the foreign policy of any State, what we have to determine above all else is whether that State regards the task of strengthening world peace as the focal point of its policy, or whether it gives preference to other objectives which may not correspond to the interests of peace and may even run counter to those interests,
85.	The position of principle of our socialist State on questions of foreign policy was already determined at the time of its inception. Since then, for over half a century, it has never deviated from that policy. It has always done everything in its power to consolidate the security of the peoples and to ensure respect for their rights. It has condemned wars of aggression and annexation and holds the banner of peace firmly in its hands. The Soviet Union will continue to use all its authority, all its resources, its policy and its ideology to influence the course of international events in the direction of peace among the nations.
86.	A policy aimed at worsening the situation and leading to tension, conflicts and international crises is organically alien to us and is rejected by the very nature of the socialist order. At the same time, we shall continue to resist all attempts to pursue such a policy against our country and against our allies and friends.
87.	The general line of the foreign policy of the USSR, which was evolved and bequeathed to us by Lenin, was confirmed and adapted to the circumstances of today by the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Congress carefully weighed and appraised the most important directions and trends of world developments and advanced a broad program of peace and peaceful co-operation.
88.	This program covers all the main aspects of the task of maintaining peace, from the elimination of existing hotbeds of war and the prevention of new conflicts between States to the implementation of the principle of collective security, from measures to ensure a military detente in the areas of the most dangerous confrontations to the prohibition of ail types of weapons of mass destruction, and from the final elimination of colonialism and racism to the development of mutually advantageous co-operation between States in solving major economic, scientific and technological problems.
89.	We make no secret of our feelings of satisfaction at the world-wide acclaim given to the program of peace and co-operation advanced by the Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. All those who show concern for peace, irrespective of their class and ideological outlook, consider this program to be constructive and realistic and to meet the interests of all, peoples. The Soviet Union's efforts in the sphere of foreign affairs are being concentrated on the preparation and execution of measures to give effect to the proposals contained in the program.
90.	Our country is acting in concert with the other socialist States in solving the problem of building a more stable world. Our alliance with them is firm, and the policy of its members is directed towards securing the most advantageous conditions for building up socialism and communism in their countries, a task for which the main prerequisite is peace.
91.	The foreign policy objectives of the socialist alliance coincide with the interests of all peoples and with the purposes solemnly proclaimed in the United Nations Charter. No one is more concerned than we are to ensure that the lofty principles of the United Nations are brought into effect through peaceful relations between States and peoples, .irrespective of their social systems and political structures.
92.	But the socialist countries neither claim nor want to monopolize the policy of peace. On the contrary, the wider the circle of States defending the cause of peace and actively helping to find solutions for acute international problems, the mora opportunities there will be to forge ahead and the greater will be the confidence in success, however difficult the road to stable security may be and whatever obstacles may have to be overcome.
93.	This circle of States has now widened, because the facts of our times are forcing all States into the realization that in spite of the social, political, economic or cultural differences between them, it is in their common interest to ensure that people can live in peace.
94.	The ways in which States express this realization may vary, but its meaning is always the same. It underlies the foreign policies of the socialist States. It is the main guideline of the policy of countries which call themselves non-aligned. It is manifested in the trends towards realism which have recently become more evident in the policy of a considerable number of other States which only a short time ago automatically adjusted their attitudes to the positions of the military blocs into which they had been drawn in the past. That is why in recent years the alienation and even antagonism between States belonging to different social systems has in a number of cases given way to relations based on mutual understanding.
95.	None of this can in any way eliminate the historic confrontation between socialism and imperialism or make less acute the struggle between the two opposing directions in world politics to which we have often referred from this important world platform. But the strengthening of the principle of peaceful coexistence as a real force of international development and the further redeployment of political forces on the international scene in favor of peace can shape to a large extent the relations between States.
96.	If the development of the situation in different parts of the world is compared from this point of view, then it is Europe that attracts most attention. On that continent, where both world wars began, where in the post-war years a dangerous and prolonged confrontation took place between two opposing political systems and two armed camps emerged, 'there are now signs of developments and trends towards a relaxation of tension.
97.	The recently signed Quadripartite Agreement on problems concerning West Berlin will serve to eliminate one of the most dangerous sources of tension and friction and to improve the atmosphere in an unhealthy area of European politics. The Soviet Union has long and consistently pursued this objective.
98.	As we know, neither of the German States participated directly in the negotiations between the four Powers,
but they were constantly consulted and much depended on them. It is now for the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany to complete the negotiations between them which are provided for in the four- Power agreement. We should like to express the hope that this stage of the settlement of the question of West Berlin will also be successful.
99.	Mutual understanding and agreement between two continental European Powers, the Soviet Union and France, has become one of the main pillars of peace in Europe. These relations were given considerable impetus by the Soviet-French Protocol on Consultations, which was signed a year ago  and which during this short time has proved to be an effective instrument of political co-operation. We are in favor of raising the relations between the two Powers to an even higher level, in the interests of European peace and international security.
100.	In the Federal Republic of Germany, the forces which evaluate the situation more soberly and have declared themselves in favor of a policy of peace and a peaceful future are showing more confidence than in the past and gaining the, upper hand. The objectives consistently pursued by the socialist States of Europe in their relations with the Federal Republic of Germany have thus become attainable.
101.	The treaties concluded with the Federal Republic of Germany by the USSR 3 and the Polish People's Republic,  which are based on recognition of European realities, especially on the inviolability of frontiers, meet the interests of all European States. We expect them to be ratified and to enter into force in the near future.
102.	Next on the list is the settlement of relations between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, based on the recognition of the invalidity ab initio of the Munich agreement, and on the normalization of relations between the two countries on the basis of respect for the principles of sovereignty and equal rights in their relations among themselves and with other States.
103.	If the Federal Republic of Germany makes a final break with the disastrous legacy of its past in favor of a peaceful future, no one can cast doubt on the place it should occupy in Europe and in European policy. Another reason why this should be mentioned is the unceasing activity in the Federal Republic of Germany of those forces which look to the past instead of to the future and desire above all to turn West German foreign policy back to its former course of hostility against other countries and peoples, a course which endangers peace and holds oiit'fRT" prospects for the Federal Republic of Germany itself.
104.	We must dwell on yet another aspect of the question, one that has a direct bearing on the United Nations. The, fact that the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany are still not Members of the United Nations is a political anomaly. The reason for this does not
lie in any objective difficulty in solving this problem, but in the unrealistic, discriminatory attitude of certain Powers towards the German Democratic Republic. But the time is definitely past when some people pretended that this State did not exist and that they did not know what its correct name was.
105.	The German Democratic Republic has firmly established itself as a real and active component of the European system of States. To be more precise, it is no longer possible to imagine modern Europe without it. But since that is the case, it is time to remove the artificial obstacles which lie in the way of the admission of the German Democratic Republic to the United Nations. We are also in favor of the simultaneous admission of the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations.
106.	As we know, in the communique on the recent meeting between Leonid Dyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Mr. W. Brandt, Federal Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic declared their intention to promote that very solution of the problem.
107.	What has been and is being done in Europe is significant, but by no means exhausts all the outstanding problems. There are questions which all the European States must settle together, and that is the underlying idea of the well-known proposal of the socialist countries on the convening of an all-European conference on problems of security and co-operation, in which the United States of America and Canada could also take part.
108.	On meeting together, the participants in such a conference could achieve a great deal in the interests of consolidating peace in Europe. Renunciation of the use of force in relations between European States and the expansion of economic, trade, scientific and technical and cultural ties between all these States are requirements dictated by our times, and the solution of these problems should be within the capacity of the conference. This is now recognized by everyone, or nearly everyone, in Europe.
109.	The problem of convening an all-European conference is ripe for solution; this is now obvious, no one questions it, and the problem now is to move from the preparatory to the practical stage of the work.
110.	The problem of relaxing military tension in Europe also insistently demands solution. This is one of the most important problems. The military potential of the opposing sides in Europe has been growing for many years, and though neither the Soviet Union nor the socialist countries were responsible for this, 'they have been obliged to participate in the race. The existing political tension has been adduced as the reason, but we have always regarded this argument as dubious. Now that a certain relaxation may be observed in Europe, there is no longer any room for such assertions, if we wish to face the truth rather than try to base our policy on deception of the peoples.
111.	Reactions to the Soviet Union's proposal to begin negotiations on the reduction of armaments and armed forces in Europe show that many are in favor of this proposal. Accordingly, what we must do is set to work.
112.	The convening of an all-European conference and the progress made towards a military detente in Europe should bring us closer to the solution of the problem of eliminating military blocs in Europe. This would lead to a thorough and comprehensive improvement of the situation. Let the fervent advocates of the policy of military blocs not faint at the thought of such a proposal. While such blocs continue to exist, the danger of a military confrontation between States will also continue to exist.
113.	It may be difficult to achieve this goal at once, although the socialist countries have stated on more than one occasion that they would be prepared to agree forthwith to the elimination of military blocs, or, to begin with, of their military organizations. But even if we have to proceed step by step in this direction, the elimination of military blocs in Europe now seems to be attainable in principle, and this too is something new on the horizon of European politics.
114.	Of course, the task of improving the international situation is not limited to Europe. For all the importance of the relations between States in Europe and for all the influence of European events on the general world situation, the prevention of a new world war depends not only on them, but also on relations in general between States in all regions. When the United Nations Charter speaks of the obligation "to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples", it does not distinguish between European and Asian nations or between American and African nations. Universal peace can be based only on peaceful relations between all nations.
115.	The settlement and development of friendly relations between any countries calls for good will, mutual interest and common peaceful intentions on their part. When these conditions are present and when countries entering into closer relations with each other do so in the context of a common concern for the strengthening of international peace, it is possible to achieve results which benefit not only the countries in question, but the world as a whole.
116.	The treaties of friendship and co-operation which the Soviet Union recently concluded with the Arab Republic of Egypt  and with the Republic of India  may serve as examples. Both instruments are widely regarded as important stages in the development of friendly Soviet-Egyptian and Soviet-Indian relations, as well as significant factors in the general construction of a more stable peace. We are convinced that this is a correct appraisal.
117.	We attach great importance to the development of our relations with Italy, Canada, with which we have concluded a Protocol on Consultations, Algeria, Iran, Afghanistan and Finland, with such an important Asian Power as Japan and with other countries of Europe, Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania. We make no exceptions for anyone and our attitude towards the development of contacts and ties between other countries is the same: the closer these are, the more purposefully they are integrated in the general system of efforts to strengthen peace, the more the forces of aggression will be held in check and the greater will be the benefit to the peoples.
118.	Much has been said recently about the intended normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China. In principle we regard this as a natural development. Normal relations should exist between all States. So far as the position of the Soviet Union is concerned, we have always consistently opposed any unlawful action in respect of the Chinese island of Taiwan, any deprivation of the People's Republic of China of its legitimate rights in the United Nations, the concept of "two Chinas" and any notion of a "dual representation of China". This is our position of principle, and we shall uphold it at this session of the General Assembly.
119.	But the Soviet Union opposes now as before any policy which is directed against the legitimate interests and security ,of other States, including the Soviet Union, however such a policy may be camouflaged. In the past, States combined into many antagonistic groups, which led to international complications and sometimes even to wars. Yet in the end such actions always backfired against those States which had initiated and participated in them, whether they were large States or small. The generation of people who saw such combinations has not yet died out.
120.	The Soviet Union's approach to its relations with the United States of America is also based on the strengthening of peace. We attach due importance to these relations, being aware that they affect international affairs as a whole. The Soviet Union is willing to develop its political contacts and economic, trade, scientific and technical and cultural ties with the United States of America, just as it is with any other State. We are prepared to seek mutually acceptable solutions. But in doing so we are not prepared to adapt our principles in international matters, our firm policy of peace, to any considerations of the moment. The steps we take in our relations with the United States of America are always in keeping with our general line of action in the interests of peace. Speaking at the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev laid special emphasis on the following:
"We proceed from the premise that it is possible to improve relations between the USSR and the United States. Our position of principle with regard to the capitalist countries, including the United States of America, lies in the consistent and comprehensive practical implementation of the principles of peaceful coexistence, the development of mutually advantageous relations and, in the case of States which are prepared for this, co-operation towards the strengthening of peace, by making our relations with them as stable as possible. But we have to consider whether we are confronted by a sincere wish to solve problems at the negotiating table or by attempts to pursue a policy from a 'position of strength'."
121.	However great the power of the Soviet Union may be, we have never used it and never will use it to place our country above others. Nor do we generally accept the division of States into categories according to their sign or military might. The Charter of the United Nations is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of its Members and we fully subscribe to this principle.
122.	Violation of the principles of equal rights, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs and attempts by more powerful States to impose their will on those which they consider to be weaker inevitably lead to critical situations and conflicts. This is the course which is always followed by aggressors.
123.	Is this not essentially what is going on in Indo-China and the Middle East, which have been hotbeds of war for many years?
124.	Statements have been made recently in Washington concerning the intention to withdraw American troops from Indo-China. Information is published practically every week about the number of thousands by which the American forces have been reduced. But the war in Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia is continuing, and the scope of military operations even expands from time to time. The United States of America and its hirelings are continuing the war.
125.	The point is not the percentage of American soldiers in the area, but the number of local troops, and whether they are being trained, armed and sent into battle under orders from Washington. The point is that the United States of America should cease its military and political interference in the affairs of Indo-China and its efforts to impose an order of its own choosing in that area Ly force of arms.
126.	The world now understands full well that from the very outset, right was on the side of the patriots of Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia. Now that information which was formerly carefully concealed has become known, there is simply no more room for discussion about who unleashed the war in Indo-China and with what ends in view. It is also obvious whose fault it is that the Paris negotiations were brought to a deadlock.
127.	In these circumstances, the new proposals for the establishment of peace which have been advanced by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and have been supported by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam acquire even greater importance. These proposals are imbued with a constructive spirit and are directed towards finding a rational solution for the practical problems which arise.
128.	Not only the friends of the Viet-Namese people, but all those who can assess the situation objectively see these proposals as a realistic way out of the prevailing situation. But what is it about them that the United States of America does not like? Why does the United States of America continue the war when all the conditions for peace are there? Why is the bombing of the territory of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam continuing and being intensified of late, although as we know the cessation of this bombing in 1968 was a prerequisite for the beginning
of the Paris negotiations for. a political settlement? These are questions which arise from the logic of events, and they require an answer.
129.	Where the Soviet Union is concerned, our country, resolutely supporting the proposals for a peaceful settlement and pursuing its international duty, will continue to provide all the necessary support to the fraternal VietNamese people and to the peoples of and Cambodia in their legitimate struggle for their rights.
130.	Events in the Middle East centre round the same problem: will the legitimate rights of the Arab States which have suffered aggression be respected, will the territories annexed by force be returned, or will the policy of aggression be allowed to triumph?
131.	Israel and its protectors are obviously counting on the latter alternative. That is why they have paralyzed the mission of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General of the United Nations, who was entrusted with the task of promoting a political settlement in accordance with the well-known decision of the Security Council. That is why the consultations between the four Powers which are permanent members of the Security Council are just marking time, since to be effective they require the co-operation of all the participants.
132.	But Israel has miscalculated. The policy-makers of that country have made their expansionist schemes too evident to receive any support on the international scene. Now no one can believe the claim that Israel is defending its "existence". One by one, the false arguments with which Israel's rulers have tried to cover up the real objective of their policy have fallen to the ground.
133.	Israel has refused to relinquish the occupied territories until the Arab countries agree to put an end to the state of war, yet the Arabs are prepared to agree to this.
134.	Israel has insisted that a treaty of peace should be concluded and the Arab States do not object to this either, provided, of course, that all the occupied territories are returned to them.
135.	Israel has expressed anxiety about its security. It is now clear that, as part of a political settlement in the Middle East, the appropriate guarantees, including those of the Security Council, can be given. These are the firmest guarantees that can be imagined in the modern world.
136.	No one can now have any doubts: Israel does not want peace, or if it does, then it must be an annexationist peace. But this is contrary to the United Nations Charter and to the most elementary principles of international law, and must therefore be rejected.
137.	Israel's rulers apparently believe that since they have been able to hold on to the occupied territories for four years, that situation can be maintained indefinitely. But they must be aware of the alternative to a political settlement in the Middle East!
138.	Is the United Nations capable of contributing to the solution of the problem of a Middle Eastern settlement?
Yes, it will be capable of this if it does not limit itself to adopting yet another resolution expressing pious hopes unsupported by practical measures and if it makes use of all the possibilities afforded it by the United Nations Charter.
139.	The Soviet Union wants to see peace in the Middle East. It will continue to support the Arab States which have suffered aggression and their efforts to liberate their territories. The just cause of the Arab peoples, including the people of Palestine, must prevail.
140.	Indo-China and the Middle East are not the only sources of military danger. In some other parts of Asia tension is not only not declining, but is even increasing. The situation in the area of the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent is becoming increasingly complex. It must be admitted that India has cause for concern at the turn which events have taken in East Pakistan. The flow of refugees into India has given rise to serious difficulties and problems which are not only economic. We are convinced that a political settlement of the problems which have arisen in East Pakistan is the only means of achieving a general relaxation of tension in that region. Moreover, all the States of the region must be associated with such a settlement. The refugees must be returned to East Pakistan, and this will become possible only when their safety there is ensured. The present situation in the area is acute, and this is not merely a domestic problem. The Soviet Government would like to express the hope that this situation will not lead to a military conflict between the States of the region an.: that restraint and reason will prevail.
141.	The peoples of Asia need lasting peace and a situation in which their resources and efforts are not dissipated in conflict, but are directed towards the solution of social and economic problems on which the raising of their standard of living, of their economy and culture, primarily depends.
142.	It will be recalled that the Soviet Union put forward the idea of establishing a system of collective security in Asia which would ensure a state of stability on that continent. Time and effort may be needed to put that idea into practice, but the situation which has arisen in Asia requires that such efforts should be made and should be pursued consistently.
143.	Another essential condition for normalizing the situation in Asia is to put an end to interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people. The United Nations, for its part, should stop serving as a screen concealing the foreign occupation of South Korea. That is the purpose of the proposals submitted to the General Assembly by a number of socialist and non-aligned States concerning the withdrawal of United States and all other foreign troops from South Korea and the dissolution of the so-called United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea. We can only regret that the consideration of these questions, which require immediate solution, has been deferred until the next session of the General Assembly. Such an approach in no way helps to reduce tension in the Korean area. On the other hand, we note with satisfaction that during the discussion of the question whether the items concerning Korea should be included in the agenda of the current session of the General
Assembly, some 30 countries spoke against the clumsy maneuvers of those who are afraid of a broad consideration at this session of the topical questions of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and of the dissolution of the so-called United Nations Commission.
144.	If we are to choose an area of international relations in which the interests of all States coincide and in which an impulse by the United Nations is particularly necessary to speed up progress, such an area is that of questions relating to the cessation of the arms race and to disarmament.
145.	The arms race is fraught with new and unknown dangers and its adverse effects on the life of our society are now more profound and more dangerous than ever before. During the post-war years, the money spent on armaments has been several times greater than the total annual national income of all the developing countries in the world. This waste of material and intellectual resources is taking place at a time when many millions of people have no bread to satisfy their hunger and no roofs over their heads to shelter them from rain and cold and when over one third of the population of our planet are illiterate.
146.	It would be wrong to say that nothing has been done to check the arms race. Nuclear weapons tests in the air, in outer space and under water have been prohibited, the proliferation of these weapons among States has been stopped, and the siting of weapons of mass destruction in outer space, on celestial bodies and on the sea-bed and the ocean floor has been prevented. The conviction is growing that the solution of the problem of banning underground nuclear tests can no longer be postponed. The ideas of the creation of nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world and of the elimination of foreign military bases in the territories of others are gaining increasing support.
147.	Efforts for the prohibition and destruction of bacteriological weapons are proceeding in the right direction. Negotiations for an appropriate convention are nearing conclusion. This should be an important practical step not only in limiting the arms race, but also in actual disarmament. We are dealing here with the elimination of one specific type of weapon and, moreover, a weapon of mass" destruction. The task of also prohibiting and eliminating chemical weapons lies ahead.
148.	There has been growing awareness recently of the need to take measures to prevent the accidental occurrence or deliberate provocation of incidents involving the use of nuclear weapons. This purpose is served by the agreement reached recently between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America.
149.	The talks between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the limitation of strategic arms are continuing and are now concentrated on the preparation of an agreement on anti-missile systems. Unless the expansion of anti-missile defense is halted now, a chain reaction Of competition between offensive and defensive weapons will inevitably take place, as it did in the past between naval armor and the artillery shell, the difference being that this competition would be immeasurably more dangerous and more costly.
150.	The successful outcome of these talks would serve the interests of the peoples of both the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America, as well as the cause of strengthening universal peace. In view of the increasing importance of the talks, the Soviet side is intensifying its efforts to reach agreement, which must of course be based on the principle of equal security. But the success of the talks also depends to the same extent on the other side.
151.	Achievements in limiting the arms race are only the first steps towards disarmament. However important they may be, to stop there would be to shirk the solution of the basic problem. And we are convinced that, from the point of view of what is possible, it can be solved. The whole question is whether there Is a desire for such a solution.
152.	The Soviet Union recently advanced a proposal to convene a conference of the five Powers possessing nuclear weapons-the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America, the People's Republic of China, France and the United Kingdom-with a view to examining questions of nuclear disarmament. One of the nuclear Powers we approached, France, supported this Soviet initiative. But then another announced its opposition, whereupon the remaining two hastened to declare that in the existing circumstances the convening of a conference of the five nuclear Powers had become an "academic'' question.
153.	The Soviet Union does not consider that the other nuclear Powers have said the last word. All those who view matters realistically understand that nuclear disarmament can be achkved only with the participation and agreement of all five iiuclear Powers and that they cannot absolve themselves of this responsibility.
154.	A radical solution of disarmament problems will, of course, call for the united efforts of all States, irrespective of the size of their territories and populations, the level of their military might and their economic potential. The Soviet Government believes that further intensification of efforts to achieve disarmament would be promoted by the convening of a world disarmament conference in which all the States in the world would participate, and that this question should be examined at the current session of the General Assembly. The relevant item has been included in the Assembly's agenda at our proposal fA18491J.
155.	In the not-too-distant past, States have already approached the question of convening a world disarmament conference, but for various reasons it has so far proved impossible to hold such a conference. The general political situation is now more conducive to this.
156.	It is essential to make the most of these developments, bearing in mind the fact that, although during the post-war years disarmament talks have been conducted in the widest variety of places, all States have never yet gathered together to discuss disarmament questions. Yet +his problem affects them all without exception.
157.	The universality of the world conference and the participation of all States might contribute to its success.
158.	The tasks before the world disarmament conference would of course be enormous. That Is why it should perhaps become a permanent forum, or rather one operating over a long period. Its sessions might be convened periodically, say, once every two or three years. In view of the fact that the nuclear arms race arouses the greatest concern among the peoples, first priority should be given, if the majority of the participants in the conference express this wiJh, to questions of the prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons, the use of which cannot be tolerated by the conscience of mankind.
159.	The world conference should be convened outside the United Nations, so that it can be attended by all States, irrespective of whether or not they are Members of the United Nations. It is self-evident that Its convening should in no way detract from the significance of those forms of, and channels for, disarmament talks which are now being used, Including the Committee on Disarmament. On the contrary, the Committee on Disarmament should intensify its work.
160.	Both the existing channels for negotiations and any which may be created in the future would contribute to preparations for the convening of the world disarmament conference, and later to the actual drafting of specific agreements on disarmament in pursuance of the decisions of the world confoiencc.
161.	States must obviously be given some time to conduct the necessary consultations on questions relating to the convening of the world disarmament conference. In this connexion, we consider that the General Assembly might address an appeal to States to agree not later than 1972 on the date of the conference and on its agenda.
162.	In view of the above considerations, the Soviet delegation hereby submits the following draft resolution for the consideration of the General Assembly:
(The speaker then rear? out the text of a draft resolution which was subsequently circulated as document A/L.631. For the text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth session, Annexes, agenda item 97.]
163.	We believe that this draft speaks for itself. We call upon all delegations to give it due attention.
164.	In considering all these questions, within the United Nations or outside it, no one should forget that disarmament negotiations are being conducted in circumstances where the arms race is not only continuing, but is being accelerated. This may appear to be a vicious circle, but it can and must be broken. This is demanded by the most vital interests of mankind.
165.	Disarmament is the most reliable means of strengthening international security and ensuring peace, this is clearly expressed in the United Nations Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security which was adopted at the twenty-fifth, anniversary session of the General Assembly [resolution 2734 (XXV)], at the initiative of the Soviet Union.
166.	The Declaration has been correctly assessed as a program of specific measures which, taken together, can
radically change the international situation for the better. Some of its particularly significant features are that it reaffirms the principle of the inadmissibility of acquiring territories through the use of force and strongly emphasizes the obligation of all States Members of the United Nations to carry out the decisions of the Security Council and to do everything in their power to enhance the authority and effectiveness of this organ, on which the Charter confers the main responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
167.	In this connexion, we should like to state frankly that the Security Council is by no means carrying out its functions as it should under the Charter of our Organization. The founders of the United Nations envisaged the situation rather differently. They envisaged it in such a way that no one should paralyse the Council's activities and that all the States which have been trusted to become members of that organ, especially its permanent members, should carry out their obligations with a sense of responsibility, so that no violator of peace should go unpunished and so that the activities of the Security Council should be based on the agreement reached during the Second World War, when the foundations of the United Nations were laid and its structure was elaborated. We believe, however, that this situation can be remedied, if the policies of States particularly of the great Powers, are directed to the pursuit of genuinely peaceful goals.
168.	The twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly will have to consider the question of how the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security is being implemented [item 34]. It is not enough to adopt even the best possible declaration: every effort should be made to ensure that it does not become a dead letter.
169.	Yet such a danger exists, because not all States Members of the United Nations are in practice acting in accordance with the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security for which they voted. Many of the considerations I expressed earlier can serve as examples of this.
170.	There are yet other facts of the same kind. For example, let us take the clause of the Declaration which calls upon all States to desist from any forcible or other actions against peoples still under colonial rule and to render them assistance in their just struggle. This requirement is not being fulfilled by those very States to which it is primarily addressed.
171.	There are different forms of colonialism and racism, but none of them is better than any other, be it the Portuguese kind, supported and sustained by the NATO military bloc, the South African kind, with its policy of hatred-apartheid, or any other kind.
172.	And now, when the great torrent of national liberation movements has destroyed nearly all the strongholds of colonial empires, there are still people and even governments which vaunt the pseudo-civilizing action of the colonialists and are trying-in one form or another and on some pretext or other-to maintain their rule over the last colonial territories. If they think that the peoples have forgotten how much blood and sweat the policy of certain
States has cost the peoples of Africa, Asia and other parts of the world and if they think that they will be allowed further to oppress and exploit those who still remain under their domination, they are mistaken, and history does not forgive such mistakes. The United Nations has done a good deal to help peoples in their struggle for freedom and independence. It must do even more. Colonialism must be finally eradicated.
173.	The Soviet Union is in favor of the full and unconditional implementation of United Nations decisions on the elimination of remaining colonial and racist regimes. We shall continue to provide material and political assistance and support to all the peoples striving towards that goal.
174.	The United Nations must of course take vigorous action in all the areas provided for in its Charter. We can only welcome the fact that a number of questions arising from developments in the scientific and technical revolution will be considered during this session of the General Assembly. The Soviet Union introduced one such item into the agenda of the session, the question of the preparation of a treaty concerning the moon [A/832* J.
175.	The time has come to reach agreement on universally mandatory rules which would be binding on all States and which would ensure the study and utilization of the moon in the interests of the present and future generations for peaceful purposes only. We hope that our proposal on the conclusion of a treaty concerning the moon will receive the support of all States Members of the United Nations.
176.	Preparations are being made for two important international conferences, one on problems of the human environment and the other on the law of the sea. The United Nations must make its contribution to these conferences, since they will be discussing questions which in modem times are closely linked with conditions of human life and the further progress of civilization.
177.	These are new problems, arising from life itself. The United Nations is also faced with not a few old problems, which have not, however, lost their urgency for its Members, especially for the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America. The problems of international economic co-operation have been discussed in the United Nations for many years, but this has not led to any improvement in the economic situation of most developing countries. That situation remains serious.
178.	The struggle of the developing countries against one-sided, agreements and other forms of neo-colonialist oppression and lawlessness is constantly expanding. It is being conducted both by the young States which have recently gained political independence and by developing countries which ceased to be colonies long ago. The United Nations cannot stand aside from this struggle. It is in duty bound to support those who are defending their legitimate rights to liberation from economic oppression, to free national development and to labor for the well-being of their peoples, not for the profit of foreign monopolies.
179.	More than a quarter of a century has passed since the United Nations was founded. This is a considerable period.
During this time the Organization has experienced some failures. It has not always acted with sufficient resolution in cases where it should have shown firmness and energy. But on the whole it has proved that it can serve as a useful instrument of peace and development of international co-operation if it follows the right course and strictly observes the United Nations Charter.
180.	Nevertheless, even now the question sometimes arises of the priority that should be given to certain United Nations activities. The answer was given in the days when the foundations of this Organization were established, when the Charter of the United Nations was signed. The principal task of the United Nations', the basis of all its activities, is the maintenance and strengthening of peace and the prevention of a new war. The United Nations was established for that purpose and that is its very first priority in its work. The peoples of the world evaluate the results of every session of the General Assembly and of every meeting of the Security Council by considering whether effective steps were taken towards the attainment of that essential goal. The Soviet Union, for its part, will do everything in its power to ensure the success of this session of the United Nations General Assembly.


 Mr. President, I should like first of all to associate myself with the previous speakers who have congratulated you on your election to the high office of President of the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly. The United States is confident that you will pursue the ideals of the Charter with the same dedication as your distinguished predecessors.

2.	The United Nations is an important instrument of peace. It is also the repository of many of the world's hopes. We must ensure that it is true to those hopes; that we here assembled-the representatives of 130 nations- meet our high responsibilities not only to our own world but to the world of the future.
3.	Building a structure of peace-a structure that will stand-requires patience, dedication and realism. Working at peace working at it seriously means more than long hours of careful deliberation. It means putting aside preconceptions; it means weighing carefully what our real interests are, not only as citizens of our own countries, but also as citizens of the world. It means proceeding with urgency, but without impatience; steadfastly, but not stubbornly. And it means recognizing that differences exist, and will continue to exist-differences of view, differences of interests, different systems and different values-and that one of the functions of a structure of peace is to protect and accommodate those differences, not to destroy them.
4.	It is appropriate, I think, to take note of the fact that, by any objective standard, the world is a more peaceful place than it was just a few years ago.
5.	In Africa;, the conflict in Nigeria is now long over. Because of recent developments, prospects in the Far East seem more hopeful. Fighting in Indo-China, though it continues, has been substantially reduced. The cease-fire still holds in the Middle East. The division of Europe is less


threatening because the first stage of agreement has been reached on Berlin. Concrete agreements have been achieved on the periphery of the arms race, and encouraging progress is being made at its center.
6.	Yet there are areas-above all, in South Asia where political instability has tipped the balance toward greater tension. There, man's ancient, enemies-poverty, hunger and disease-gain headway, nurturing within themselves seeds of further unrest. And even in areas where recent progress has been made, tensions remain, and the threat of renewed or increased hostilities continues.
7.	That is why we must accelerate our efforts for peace. The achievement of a peaceful world will depend, not just, on the efforts of a handful of powers, but on the efforts of all Governments.
8.	In recent years we have seen a new diversification of power and influence among the nations of the world. Most colonial States have won their independence and now exert a marked impact on world affairs. Japan has found remarkable new strength. The movement towards cohesion in Western Europe has quickened. This diversified and interdependent world is clearly preferable to the bipolar world which emerged from the Second World War. Nevertheless, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States-both large, continental States, both nuclear States and both dynamic States-are of fundamental importance.
9.	Nothing could better serve the cause of peace than a further relaxation of tension between our two countries and the elimination of its by-product-the arms race.
10.	The foreseeable future cannot, of course, be expected to bring an end to the differences between the Soviet and United States political systems or to the competition between us. But it can bring important and beneficial changes in our relations. Many agreements have been achieved in recent years between us. The success of those agreements has stimulated the effort to negotiate still others. Collectively they could promote not just "coexistence" but-if we proceed to build on durable foundations "co-operation" as well.
11.	Our desire to lay the foundations for such cooperation is in no way lessened by our policy of seeking to improve relations with the People's Republic of China. And we have taken due note of the Soviet Foreign Minister's statement that the Soviet Union regards the normalization or our relations with the People's Republic of China as a "natural development".
12.	Though efforts at improvement in Soviet-United States and in Soviet-European relations have assumed many 
forms, the two most important have been the negotiations on strategic arms and on Berlin.
13.	A Berlin agreement will be a milestone along the road to a more peaceful and co-operative Europe. Pivotal in the portion already agreed to is the firm commitment to unrestricted transit traffic of civilian persons and goods between the Federal Republic of Germany and West Berlin. Particularly significant is the obligation the Soviet Union has undertaken to ensure that this traffic will be unimpeded, that it will be facilitated and that it will receive preferential treatment.
14.	The value of this agreement will depend, not on how the obligations have been formulated on paper, but on how they will be carried out on the ground. Truly unhindered movement to and from Berlin would greatly reduce tensions and remove one of Europe's most dangerous flash-points. Half-hearted or grudging implementation of the agreement would only perpetuate fears and suspicions, The willingness of the German Democratic Republic, in its discussions with the Federal Republic of Germany, to translate general obligations into specific commitments and subsequently to put those commitments into actual practice will be the crucial test.
15.	The achievement of a final Berlin agreement and its effective implementation could lead to broader progress. It would, for example, make more realistic the prospects of a European conference with United States and Canadian participation. It would accelerate the movement desired by the people of Eastern as well as of Western Europe-- towards the reduction of tensions on the continent.
16.	It is to this end that the United States is pursuing the possibilities of negotiation on a mutual and balanced reduction of military forces in Europe.
17.	Two years ago President Nixon pledged to the General Assembly that the United States was determined to limit, and then reverse, the build-up of strategic arms. He said we intended to conduct our negotiations with the Soviet Union "soberly and seriously... seeking to reach agreements rather than to make propaganda" [1755th meeting, para. 69J.
18.	In May of this year the United States and the Soviet Union announced their intention to achieve agreement on both defensive and offensive strategic arms, initiating a new stage of intensive work. As a result, although no agreement has yet been reached, we have come closer together on the concepts and details of an agreement to limit anti-ballistic missile systems. On 20 May we made an announcement that contemplates that agreements to limit defensive and offensive weapons will be reached "together". When talks resume in Vienna next month it is therefore agreed that discussions in greater detail will be undertaken on the limitation of offensive weapons.
19.	Meanwhile, these negotiations have already produced two valuable agreements, one on preventing nuclear accidents from leading to war and the other on improving "hot line" communications between Washington and Moscow by use of satellites,
20.	There has also been encouraging movement in multi-lateral negotiations. Here, too, the United States intends to work constructively for further concrete results. In particular, we urge this session of the General Assembly to seek broad ratification of the draft convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and their destruction [A/8457-DC/234, annex A],
21.	The Soviet Union has suggested the creation of a periodic world disarmament conference to be established outside the United Nations [1942nd meeting, paras. 158' 159J. Frankly, we are skeptical that such a generalized approach would produce specific accomplishments. All post-war experience indicates that a concrete, step-by-step approach offers better prospects for success than more grandiose schemes, which tend to generate many words but few results.
22.	At a time when the prospects are promising for participation in the United Nations by the People's Republic of China, and perhaps others as well, there would seem to be no reason for establishing still more world disarmament machinery outside the United Nations framework.
23.	Accommodations among the stronger nations of the World are vital elements of a lasting peace. But the road to enduring peace is no short cut, passing only through the capitals of the strong. The road to peace must traverse every region where there are human beings who aspire to a better condition of life.
24.	In Africa, where the right to a freer existence is still denied to many, we are constant in our support of practical and peaceful means to achieve self-determination and end racial discrimination. That is the policy which President Nixon and I were pleased to confirm to the President of Mauritania and the distinguished delegation from the Organization of African Unity in Washington last week. Consistent with that objective ve have decided to accept the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences for States of South Africa's continuing occupation of Namibia. .
25.	In South-East Asia, as we proceed with an orderly military withdrawal from Viet-Nam, we will continue to make substantial efforts to aid the region's economic progress.
26.	In this hemisphere, we are moving towards a relation-ship of equal partnership in which rights and responsibilities are shared. We are conscious that such a relationship requires economic growth, greater opportunities for trade, and closer economic co-operation among us.
27.	I especially wish to emphasize our undiminished concern for the economic health of the nations of Latin America and other nations of the developing world at a time when the new economic policy of the United States may have raised certain questions,
28.	Our objectives have not changed. We are not adopting a policy of economic nationalism. We have not abandoned our efforts to assist developing countries-through trade, through aid and through investment. Our faith in a free and open system of economic relations among States has not diminished.
29.	We seek a stronger economy at home. We seek also a more equitable international economic system which meets present-day conditions and thus gives even greater encouragement to the flow of goods and capital across borders. Such a system would contribute to the prosperity of all the world's people, in developing and developed countries alike.
30.	This Organization, during this session, faces a decision on the China question-a decision with major consequences for the United Nations.
31.	In our interdependent world, no significant segment of the world's population and of the world's power should be isolated. It was this consideration which led President Nixon to alter the China policy of the United States. To pursue a policy which did not respond to present realities would risk the future for the sake of the past . On the other hand, to seek to improve relations with the People's Republic of China, and to contribute to its greater contact with the international community, could foster prospects for a stable peace in years to come.
32.	Thus, President Nixon began over two years ago, unilaterally and at first without response, to improve bilateral relations. Recently, he resolved to move decisively into a new era of relations by accepting an invitation to visit Peking before 1 May 1972. And he decided to support the seating of the People's Republic of China in the General Assembly and as a permanent member of the Security Council.
33.	The United States wants to see the People's Republic of China come to the Assembly, take its seat, and participate. We want to see it assume, as a permanent member of the Security Council, the rights and responsibilities which go with that status. On the seating of the People's Republic of China there is widespread agreement in this body.
34.	This Assembly does, however, face a related and momentous issue. It could become the first Assembly in United Nations history to take action to expel a Member -an action which would have the effect of expelling 14 million people from its councils. The path of expulsion is perilous. To open it for one would be to open it for many.
35.	So the United States and 16 other countries have introduced a draft resolution [A/L.633] which would seat the People's Republic of China as a permanent member of the Security Council, while providing representation both for it and for the Republic of China in the General Assembly. That resolution is based on political reality and on basic equity.
36.	It is only realistic to recognize a factual situation which has persisted for more than 20 years: that two Governments now exercise authority over territory and over people who were given representation in the United Nations when China ratified the Charter in 1945 as an original Member.
37.	It is only realistic that all the Chinese people who were once represented there should again be represented and represented by those who actually govern them.
38.	It is only realistic that the Security Council seat should be filled by the People's Republic of China, which exercises control over the largest number of people of all the world's Governments.
39.	It would be unrealistic to expel from this body the Republic of China, which governs a population of Taiwan larger than the populations of two 'thirds of the 130 United Nations Members.
40.	Further, it would be unjust to expel a Member which has participated for over 25 years in the world of this Organization with unfailing devotion to the principles set forth in the Charter.
41.	The proposal that both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China should be represented in the United Nations should commend itself to Member States of varying national policies.
42.	It would assure that the long-prevailing de facto situation in China is reflected in United Nations representation; but it does not ask Member States to alter their recognition policies or their bilateral relations.
43.	It would provide representation for the people concerned by those who actually govern them; but it does not divide China into two separate States; after all, we all know that Byelorussia and the Ukraine are not separate States.
44.	The dual representation draft resolution is founded on the reality of the current situation; but it does not seek to freeze that situation for the future, as it expressly provides that the present decision is without prejudice to a future settlement.
45.	In short, the dual representation draft resolution asks simply, and only, that the United Nations take account of the situation as it exists today, and give all the people of China representation in this Organization. As the Charter has accommodated practical solutions of other unusual situations in the past,, so it is flexible enough to accommodate the realities of this one.
46.	The other proposal before this Assembly the draft resolution advanced by A'bania and others [AjL.630 and Add. 1 ] -is punitive in substance and in intent. It does not seek to deal with facts, but to excoriate and condemn. Its essence is not to admit the People's Republic of China, but to expel the Republic of China and to expel it "forthwith". That draft resolution would exacerbate, not harmonize, relations in Asia. And it would weaken, not strengthen, the moral and political fiber of this Organization.
47.	The issue, then, before this body is the issue of expulsion. That is why we have proposed a draft resolution, which we refer to as the "important question draft resolution" but which more properly should be referred to as the "non-expulsion draft resolution" [AjL.632]. This draft resolution requires a two-thirds vote to expel a present Member of the United Nations. It is consistent with the letter and the spirit of the Charter,
48.	Some Members have argued that, whatever the equities and realism of our proposal to maintain the representation of the Republic of China, it should not be supported because they feel that the People's Republic of China would refuse to take its seat. Such predictions are hazardous. Certainly the People's Republic of China may be expected to oppose the proposal so long as there is any possibility for a draft resolution that meets its maximum demands. But just as certainly, after a General Assembly decision providing the People's Republic of China with the status of a permanent member of, and with a seat on, the Security Council but not expelling the Republic of China, a new situation would exist. In any event, I submit, in deciding how to vote we should look more to what the United Nations should do.
49.	It is ironic that, just as the sentiment for universality in the Assembly is growing, many of those who have long extolled it now seek to violate it. If the United Nations is to. embrace universality-as some have suggested then surely the admission of one Member should not be accompanied by the expulsion of another.
50.	Our task here, it seems to me, must be to make a decision that is reasonable, that accepts the realities of the existing situation, that does not prejudice the ultimate outcome and that provides for representation of all the people concerned. Thereafter, our efforts should be to convince those directly involved to take advantage of the decision we have made. The cause of peace has been greatly benefited in recent years by greater pragmatism in many capitals. It would be served by the same pragmatism on this issue.
51.	As the United Nations becomes a more universal body it will be better able to deal with the lengthening list of global issues confronting it: in conciliating political differences, in reducing the world's armaments, in curbing the epidemic spread of narcotics addiction, in protecting the environment, in assuring the exploitation of the oceans for the benefit of mankind.
52.	In meeting those responsibilities the United Nations must during this session deal with two important matters.
53.	It must choose an outstanding successor to our most able and distinguished Secretary-General, UThant, to whose dedication and idealism we all pay a tribute. And, as I pay respects to the Secretary-General, I am sure my colleagues will understand if I also single out for special attention two United States citizens who are now retiring -Paul Hoffman, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Program, who has devoted himself so effectively to the economic welfare of the developing countries, and Ralph Bunche, Under-Secretary-General for Special Political Affairs, and a Nobel Prize winner, who has contributed so markedly to the cause of peace.
54.	The Assembly must also arrest the continuing deterioration of the United Nations financial position, which, as the Secretary-General has pointed out [A/8401/Add.lJ, has eroded its fiscal credit and undermined confidence in its potential. Responsibility for halting that decline rests primarily on those who fail to pay their share. Given assurances of adequate contributions by others, the United States will be prepared to assist towards an over-all solution. Meanwhile we find it hard to understand why the membership should continue to recommend and approve budget increases beyond those necessary to meet inescapable cost increases.
55.	In two parts of the world in which the United Nations has been particularly active-South Asia and the Middle East urgent progress is needed.
56.	In South Asia, renewed and more widespread violence is an ever-present possibility. The events in East Pakistan are internal events with which the Government and people of Pakistan must deal. But their consequences the flight of refugees into India, the danger of famine, the threat to peace in South Asia-are of grave concern to all nations.
57.	To restore peaceful conditions and to save human lives it is clear that restraint must be exercised in the subcontinent; that the international assistance Program must be expanded to avert famine and to create conditions to encourage the return of refugees; and that efforts towards an effective political settlement in East Pakistan must be actively pursued. We are working to those ends.
58.	The United States strongly supports the efforts of the United Nations to organize an effective international relief Program. We have made available over $200 million for relief in bast Pakistan and for emergency assistance for the refugees in India-well over 50 per cent of the total contributions from all foreign contributors, public and private. Last week, President Nixon asked Congress to appropriate an additional $250 million to sustain a high level of relief assistance. A much wider response from other countries is clearly required. We urge the major powers and others with substantial financial resources to contribute generously.
59.	The other place where progress is urgently required is the Middle East. Over several years the United Nations has made determined and persistent efforts to achieve a lasting peace in that critical area. None the less the opportunities for success and the risks of failure remain in precarious balance.
60.	Security Council resolution 242 (1967), establishing the principles for a durable peace, was the first major step towards reason after 18 years of belligerency and a fragile, often violated, armistice.
61.	The cease-fire along the Suez Canal, now nearing its fifteenth month, was the second major step away from war.
62.	It is time for a third major step towards peace.
63.	For four years Ambassador Jarring has worked diligently to secure the agreement called for in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). We support his efforts. We believe his mission remains the best path to an over-all settlement and to lasting peace. Our views on such a final peace settlement remain those expressed in President Nixon's foreign policy report earlier this year and in my statement of 9 December 1969,
64.	Both sides to the conflict are committed to the fundamental and reciprocal principles to which the Jarring mission is dedicated: living in peace with each other and withdrawal from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict as set forth in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). Despite those commitments a deep gulf ot suspicion and distrust remains.
65.	Each side is convinced of the justice of its cause. Each is concerned about its future security. A political settlement based on mutual accommodation could assure both. An attempt to achieve these ends by force will destroy all possibilities for either.
66.	That is why we believe a third major step towards peace is essential -a step that can be taken now; a step that is practical; a step that could help create the confidence and trust which are now lacking; a step towards full and complete implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
67.	That step is an interim Suez Canal agreement. That is why the United States has welcomed the interest of both Egypt and Israel in such an agreement. That is why, at the request of the parties, the United States has undertaken to play a constructive role in the process of arriving at an agreement.
68.	In order to explore the positions of each side, we have discussed concrete and specific ideas designed to meet the legitimate needs and concerns of both sides. Those ideas, given willingness and good intentions on both sides, could become the basis for a breakthrough. They require further quiet discussions with the parties, an undertaking we now hope can be expedited along the following lines.
69.	A first point is the relationship between an interim agreement and an over-all settlement. A fair approach should be founded on two basic principles:
-That a Suez Canal agreement is merely a step towards complete and full implementation of resolution 242 (1967) within a reasonable period of time, and not an end in itself-that has to be clearly established in any agreement; also
-That neither side can realistically expect \to achieve, as part of an interim agreement, complete agreement on the terms and conditions of an over-all settlement -if it could, there would be no necessity for an interim agreement.
Those final terms and conditions will have to be worked out through negotiations under Ambassador Jarring's auspices. And we would hope that if an interim agreement was reached, active negotiations under Ambassador Jarring's auspices could be renewed.
70.	A second point is the matter of the cease-fire. Its maintenance is in the interest of all of us, of everyone concerned, of everyone in this room, in fact in the interest of the whole world. The ultimate objective, of course, is a permanent end to belligerency, as part of a final, binding peace agreement. But such a commitment is not realizable in the context of an interim agreement. Neither would a cease-fire of short duration be realistic. With goodwill on both sides, it should be possible to find common under-standing between the parties on this issue.
71.	Third is the zone of withdrawal. There are, of course, very important strategic considerations involved in this key point. However, based on our discussions, we believe it should be possible to meet the principal concerns of both sides. Without going into the details, I would merely say that I believe that in the long run the most significant aspect of an interim agreement might prove to be that it established the principle of withdrawal looking to an over-all settlement as a fact rather than as a theory.
72.	Fourth is the nature of the supervisory arrangements. Both sides must have confidence that the agreement will not be violated and that adequate machinery will be provided for prompt detection of any infractions. We are confident that ways reassuring to both Israel and Egypt can be found for altering and strengthening the supervisory mechanisms that have existed in the area for the past two decades.
73.	Fifth is the question of an Egyptian presence east of the Suez Canal. The reopening and operation of the Suez Canal would require Egyptian personnel east of the Canal. It is understandable, too, that normal activities should be pursued in as much of the zone evacuated as possible. The question of an Egyptian military presence east of the Canal is one on which the parties hold opposite views. But here too, based on our discussion, we believe that there are possibilities for compromise on this issue.
74.	Sixth is the use of the Suez Canal. The United States has long held that the Canal should be open to passage for all nations, without discrimination. This principle is clear in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). What is at present at issue in considering an interim agreement is principally the timing at which this right could be exercised. We believe an accommodation on this point is quite possible.
75.	With those six points in mind, let me say this: because the parties have asked us, we intend to continue our determined effort to assist them in arriving at an interim agreement. This effort, we believe, is imperative because  and I think it is important to keep this in mind there is no more realistic and hopeful alternative to pursue.
76.	There are risks to peace: but the greater risk is inaction, unwillingness to face up to the hard decisions. A practical step now-an interim agreement-would make the next step toward peace less difficult for all the parties to take. It would restore the use of the Suez Canal as a waterway for international shipping. It would re-establish Egypt's authority over a major national asset. It would separate the combatants. It would produce the first Israeli withdrawal. It would extend the cease-fire. It would diminish the risk of major-power involvement. It would be an important step toward the complete implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
77.	I submit that the logic for such an agreement is overwhelming. If the leaders of the area would grasp this opportunity, they would give new hope to their peoples for tranquility, for progress and for peace.
78.	In all of our efforts, both in the United Nations and elsewhere, we should recall that nothing we do matters so much as the legacy we leave to those who follow, the bridge that we build between the past and the future. There is a tendency, especially when tensions are high and tempers short, to regard the present as the focal point of all of man's history. But ours is only the latest generation, not the last generation; and nothing we leave to future generations will matter so much as a structure of enduring peace.
79.	Peace must be achieved and maintained, not by the decree of a few, but by accommodation among many. Each Government, in upholding its people's particular interests, must also advance the world interest in a peace which will endure.
80.	To that interest the United Nations, from its creation, has been dedicated.
81.	To that interest the United States pledges anew its best efforts.



1.	 Mr. President, I am glad to have the opportunity today of congratulating you on your election to the office of President of the General Assembly, one which my delegation is sure you will fill with great distinction.
2.	I should like at the same time to pay a tribute to your predecessor, who guided our deliberations so successfully during the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly and the special commemorative session,
3.	When I addressed the General Assembly last year [1857th meeting], I referred in some detail to the progress made by the South African Government in implementing and promoting the ideal of self-determination for all the different nations which comprise the population of South Africa. Since then I have been encouraged by the display of interest in these developments in many quarters, including countries in Africa. I have, therefore, decided to expand on my remarks of a year ago.
4.	Last year I outlined to this Assembly our program in the political field. I stressed that for a number of years my Government had been develop*- j, the political institutions of the various nations in South Africa. As early as in 1951 and again in 1959, legislation was passed to provide for various types of Bantu authorities on the regional and territorial level. A number of such authorities was established, and provided valuable experience in the art of government. In the Transkei, self-government was conferred as far back as 1963. Since then the Transkei has held two general elections. During 1969 and 1970 eight additional territorial governments were established. I said, therefore, that each of the nations living in South Africa had acquired some form of self-government.
5.	During the past year we continued on this road, seeking to accelerate the progress towards self-determination, moving forward step by step in consultation with the nations concerned. Ministers and officials were constantly engaged in discussion with the Bantu, the Colored and the Indian peoples.
6.	Arising from these consultations, legislation was passed enabling the Government to proceed with the constitutional development of the various homelands in the light of prevailing circumstances.
7.	Legislative assembly status was granted to the Tswana, Lebowa, Ciskei, Venda, Machangana and Basotho homelands. Some of these territories will shortly advance to the stage of full self-government. They will attain the same political status as the Transkei and will be that much closer to the eventual goal of full and sovereign independence.
8.	The South African Prime Minister himself very recently held discussions with the members of the Colored People's Representative Council, representing the Colored population group, and the governing bodies of the Ciskei, the Tswanas, the Basothos, the Zulus and the Tsongas. In company, inter alia, with the Minister of Finance, he also recently visited the Venda, Lebowa, Tswana and Machangana homelands, with a population of some 4.5 million, in order to confer with their representatives and to gauge at fust-hand the extent of their progress towards self- determination.
9.	These visits are an integral part of our policy of consultation with the different population groups and have been warmly welcomed as such by all concerned. Indeed, as the Sunday Times, a South African newspaper, which opposes my Government's policies, wrote on 1 August of this year;
"From all accounts* Mr. Vorster's tour has been a great success in the sense of fostering dialog with homeland leaders and making personal contact with the various populations which turned out in their thousands at each function...".
10.	The Rand Daily Mail, another South African paper, which is also opposed to our policies, commented in similar vein. It reported that the Prime Minister's visits had improved the relationship between black and white in. South Africa.
A/PV.1946
11.	The road to self-determination is not always an easy one. However, the South African Government is doing all it can to assist the peoples on this road. It is still too early to say exactly when the Bantu peoples will attain their full independence, when they will become sovereign and be able to play their part in the world at large and also in this Organization. It depends in large measure upon themselves 
and the progress that they make. But they have the right to negotiate at any time with us for the attainment of independence. We do not impose conditions on their right to approach us. We shall listen to them at any time that they feel the moment has arrived to ask for independence.
12.	In this way we shall achieve our ultimate aim of making it possible for the various nations to be associated with one another in mutual harmony and acceptance of each other in a South African constellation of independent nations where no nation would be governed by another.
13.	Consultation fosters co-operation, and without co-operation there can be no real progress on either the internal or the international level. Internally it is necessary for the smooth realization of self-determination and for the material as well as the moral well-being of the various nations. Internationally it is necessary for the greater prosperity and peace of nations, especially for those of us on the African continent.
14.	I have have already outlined how this co-operation is being achieved through consultations within South Africa itself. The political development of the various homelands to which I have referred is not something imposed arbitrarily upon those nations. Each one plays an active part in this development.
15- I have emphasized the importance of consultation in our efforts to co-operate smoothly within the borders of South Africa because there are those who condemn our policy of dialog and contact with other African States on the alleged ground that my Government should rather first conduct a dialog with its own peoples. As I have indicated, that is precisely what we are doing.
16.	It is our firm policy to co-operate to the fullest extent possible also with all other countries, including those of Africa. For South Africa is as much a part of Africa as any other African State and we have a vital interest in our continent's peace and prosperity.
17.	During recent years the emphasis in Africa has been placed more and more on the need for development. The developing States have had to contend with various problems in the economic, health, educational, technical and agricultural fields. And where South Africa has in some instances been able to co-operate in the solution of those problems, it has been happy to do so.
18.	We have, for example, assisted various other African States by way of famine relief, we co-operate with them in respect of the supply of electricity, health and welfare services, the marketing of agricultural produce, the provision of low-interest loans and the planning and construction of various long-term development projects.- The private sector in South Africa has also played its part by assisting African countries in the field of tourism, for instance, with the opening of hotels and, in the field of industrial development and transport, with the establishment of factories, plants and works and the construction of railways.
19.	There are no strings attached to our co-operation; we have tried to help others to help themselves. We believe that progress and economic, growth lead to greater stability at home and hence throughout the continent.
20.	We welcome discussions with any State in Africa which desires to talk to us. We have much to discuss and discussion could well be the first step towards co-operation in many fields of mutual interest. My Prime Minister has' said that he is prepared even to discuss our internal policies with those genuinely interested in conducting a dialog with us.
21.	Throughout our history we have firmly believed in living in friendship and harmony with our neighbors and with those further afield. We do not interfere in their internal affairs. We pose no threat to anyone. We are willing at any time to conclude solemn treaties for the preservation of peace with any African country. We believe in communication with our own peoples and with the peoples of Africa. Without communication we cannot hope to solve our problems. Proof of our sincerity in this respect is to be found in our action in the past year. Thus we have continued to make contact with other African States. My Prime Minister, for instance, last year visited Malawi at the invitation of its President, Dr. Banda.
22.	In November last I led a delegation to another neighboring State to discuss with the Government concerned matters of mutual economic and technical interest and to conclude agreements in connexion with development projects. During this year an official delegation from the same country in turn visited South Africa. In addition, discussions were held .with heads of government and ministers of other neighboring States.
23.	Less than two months ago we were proud to welcome to South Africa the Life President of the Republic of Malawi, H.E. H. Kamuzu Banda. The occasion was a historic and significant one, for it marked the first official visit of an African Head of State to my country.
24.	President Banda has made it clear that there are aspects of our domestic policies which he cannot support. Nevertheless, he came to talk to us. As he said:
"I came here because I sincerely believe in co-operation not only in material things but also in spiritual things ... co-operation of the spirit, co-operation of ideas.... The main reason why we should meet is because if we do not agree and we do not meet, how are we going to resolve our problems? "
25.	The visit of President Banda was an unqualified success. He received a most enthusiastic-indeed, tumultuous-reception from all the South African peoples. President Banda himself remarked on the warmth of the welcome accorded him by the entire population. That, he saiJ, contrasted sharply with what he had been told in certain circles, namely that the black peoples of southern Africa disliked the idea of an African statesman cooperating with the South African Government. In other words the policy of contact and communication between the South African Government and other African Governments is welcome also to the black peoples of South Africa, contrary to what has been alleged.
26.	President Banda saw his visit as a mission to build a bridge between the peoples of our respective countries. His mission captured the imagination of black, Indian, Colored and white alike. In welcoming him we were honored to receive a great and far-sighted son of Africa.
27.	Our domestic and foreign policies are founded on the principles of mutual respect and tolerance for the other man's point of view. We believe that South Africa has a considerable contribution to make to Africa's development and prosperity. By the same token, we realize that we have much to learn from other States of Africa. Although our social, political and economic systems may differ, experience has proved that there need be no barriers to co-operation between parties with a common interest in Africa's welfare. Lack of knowledge and policies of isolation inevitably magnify difference. And we are glad to hear more and more of the voices of Africa calling for a departure from the sterile pattern of the past and for a new approach to the issues which seemingly divide us.
28.	In the words of the South African Prime Minister:
"I know of nothing ... that stands in the way of better understanding between South Africa and other nations who seek peace and prosperity for the peoples of the world and especially for Africa."
29.	Surely, policies of communication, co-operation and accommodation such as I have outlined are appropriate to the spirit of detente and reconciliation which is meeting with increasing acceptance by the international community. Surely, those policies are essential for Africa, if Africa as a whole is to prosper and inherit the greatness which should be its destiny. Surely, those policies are the policies of peace which inspired the Charter, which are the essence of the Charter and which should continue to inspire us all.




1.	  Mr. President, it is my pleasant duty, on behalf of my Government and delegation, as well as on my own behalf, to extend to you our most sincere felicitations on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. This is a fitting tribute both to your distinguished diplomatic career and to the country which you represent. We of the Chinese delegation wish you every success in the discharge of the great responsibilities of your high office.
2.	Notwithstanding the atmosphere of euphoria which seems to have pervaded the current scene, the world is still confronted by war or threats of war. The war in Viet-Nam has now been escalated to embrace the whole of Indo-China. The situation in the Middle East continues to be explosive. Conflicts of one kind or another prevail in various parts of the world. Although some of these may be said to be disputes of a domestic nature, their continuance could endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.
3.	In Viet-Nam the Communists continue to seek a military solution. They count on the pressures of world
public opinion to force the withdrawal of United States forces. The Paris peace talks have served, as far as the Communists are concerned, more as an instrument for political warfare than for serious discussions. Always with an eye on the anti-war sentiments in the United States, the Communist negotiators have been skillful in stirring up popular opposition to United States involvement in Viet- Nam. Division within the United States has made the eventual American pull-out inevitable. But the withdrawal of the United States military establishment from Viet-Nam, however, should not mean the disappearance of United States interest and influence from South-East Asia. We are confident that the United States will continue to fulfill its commitments in that part of the world, even though a nation directly threatened by aggression must now, in the light of the Nixon Doctrine, assume the primary responsibility for providing the manpower for its own national defense.
4.	In terms of Viet-Nam this means that the brunt of the war must henceforth be borne by the people of the Republic of Viet-Nam themselves. Indeed, the South Viet-Namese people have been doing just that for over two years. All evidence points to the fact that they have given a pretty good account of themselves. There is every reason to believe that they will be able to safeguard their independence and freedom against subversion from within and aggression from without after the withdrawal of United States armed forces.
5.	It is gratifying that, in the midst of war and crisis, the Republic of Viet-Nam has continued to make progress in the social, economic and political fields. A general election has just taken place. Bitter fighting on the battlefields and terrorism in the rear failed to keep the voters from the polls. Given the divisive social and intellectual climate, and the disruptions of the war, no one should expect the Republic of Viet-Nam to master the mechanisms of the democratic process overnight. Of the fact that Saigon has done its best to make democracy the dominant element in its future there can be no question. One is doing no favor to the people and Government of South Viet-Nam if one allows oneself to expect too much to happen too soon. In any case, the Republic of Viet-Nam does not merit the kind of abuse and vilification which some critics have been in the habit of meting out. It is ironical that the same critics, while condemning South Viet-Nam for its undemocratic ways, do not hesitate to pay craven homage to the North Viet-Namese Communists, who have nothing but contempt for bourgeois democracy. Obviously, they are less interested in the development of democratic institutions in South Viet-Nam than in sowing the seeds of dissension among the Viet-Namese people. The last thing they want to see is the creation of conditions in which healthy political institutions can flourish and the Viet-Namese may be enabled to work out their own destiny in their own way. 
6.	In the Middle East, guns have for the most part been silent since the acceptance by Israel, Egypt and Jordan in August last year of the United States peace initiative. The cease-fire, while no longer formally in effect after its lapse in March 1971, has by and large been observed. It is to be regretted, however, that the maintenance of the precarious cease-fire has not been accompanied by any progress towards the resolution of the basic issues which have so long embittered the relations between Israel and the Arab States. It is all too obvious that, unless the parties concerned are prepared to accept reasonable and practical compromises or the major interested Powers are willing to bring their influence to bear on the parties, peace in the Middle East will remain unattainable.
7.	There are conflicts which are technically matters of a domestic nature but whose significance for international peace is beyond question. A case in point is the recent civil strife in East Pakistan. As the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report on the work of the Organization, the problems generated by the conflict "are necessarily of concern to the international community" [A/8401[Add.l, para. 177].
8.	In purely human terms the magnitude of the tragedy is staggering. In the six months since March several million refugees have poured into India. The terrible plight in which millions of destitute and helpless people find themselves cannot but arouse the sympathy and compassion of us all. We of the Republic of China know how serious the problem can be in terms of human misery and suffering. Ever since the Communist take-over of the Chinese mainland, millions of our brethren have suffered the same fate as that whicn has now befallen the East Pakistanis. We therefore urge the international community to do everything possible to give relief to the innocent people who, through no fault of their own, have been deprived of their homes and possessions and have been thrown upon the mercies of an alien world.
9.	Lasting peace cannot be built on the foundation of a world community in which the greater part of mankind sinks ever deeper into the miseries of under-development and over-population. It is, of course, no easy matter to close the gap between rich and poor nations. There is no question, however, that there are available material resources for this task. The question is whether there is the will to use the available resources to meet the pressing needs of development. In the view of my delegation, the United Nations is in a special position to create that will. The International Development Strategy for the new Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] is an important step in the right direction.
10.	The third session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development [ UNCTAD], scheduled to convene in a few months, should provide an excellent opportunity for co-operation between developed and developing countries. It is hoped that the developed countries will find it in their own interest to remove the barriers which they have set up and which have operated to the great disadvantage of the developing countries.
11.	The Republic of China is a developing country. It faces many of the problems which plague other developing
 
countries. In so far as lies within the limits of its capabilities, it has always been ready to contribute to the solution of problems which confront countries in various stages of development and to share experiences with them.
12.	It must be admitted that the United Nations has in recent years lost much of its prestige and influence. In Viet-Nam it has contented itself with playing the role of a helpless bystander. In the Middle East its attempts to bring about a settlement have achieved no outstanding success. The advance towards disarmament is being decided not so much in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament meeting at Geneva as in the direct Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] between the Soviet Union and the United States. The recent agreement on the status of Berlin  was concluded outside the walls of the United Nations. The inescapable conclusion is that on the main currents of world events the United Nations has exerted only a marginal influence.
13.	As a free association of sovereign States the United Nations can be only as strong and effective as its Members make it. All too often short-range national interests are allowed to prevail over the common interests of the world community. All too often the United Nations has not hesitated to resort to expediency at the expense of vital Charter principles. Its readiness to yield to force, to disregard justice, or to neglect human rights, has been to a large extent responsible for what has often been called "a crisis of confidence".
14.	It is sad to reflect that, at a time when the effectiveness of the United Nations is being called into question, there are those in our midst who press for the replacement of the Republic of China, a Member of impeccable standing, by a regime whose declared policy has been the destruction of the Organization as an instrument for peace.
15.	I shall have occasion to speak on the so-called question of Chinese representation when the item comes up for debate in the Assembly. I wish to make here a few observations which may help to clarify certain issues in respect of the Chinese Communist regime.
16.	The first observation I wish to make is that it is erroneous to assume that the Communist regime and the Chinese people are an indissoluble whole. The fact of the matter is that the regime and the oppressed millions are two distinct and mutually hostile entities. The overwhelming majority of the people are anti-Mao and anti-Communist. Twenty-two years of unremitting regimentation and brainwashing, torture and terror have failed to make them accept tho Communist regime as anything more than a transient tyranny which, like other tyrannies in Chinese history, will in time pass away. The Chinese people have never ceased to thirst for freedom, and they will struggle on until freedom is won.
17.	In recent months Western journalists who have visited the Chinese mainland have painted a glowing picture of progress and achievement. It is difficult to believe, however that a brief conducted tour to a few cities and villages in a vast land could provide any genuine insight into the real conditions of the country. The Chinese people arc too well experienced in the ways of the world to reveal their true feelings to an outsider. Yet it is possible to get glimpses of the real situation from some of the dispatches. Not a few correspondents, for example, have written admiringly about the wonderful discipline of the common people. Some have reported the existence of a new species of human being on the Chinese mainland the “Maoist men”-austere, self- controlled, all dressed in the same drab clothing, all relating their every activity to the thought of Mao Tse-tung, all shouting the same slogans, all vowing undying fealty to Chairman Mao. What all this amounts to is that, by means of terror and ruthless regimentation, the masses of the people have been reduced to the level of robots, apparently with no will or mind of their own.
18.	Yet it would be a grave mistake to view them as nothing but robots. They conform because conformity is the only way to survive in a world in which life is regulated by harsh decrees, intimidating exhortations, punishment without crime. But below the surface of seeming docility, there is a boiling and ultimately irrepressible mass of resentments and suicidal despairs. No one should give them up as irretrievably lost to the Mao regime. Despite Communist news black-out, bloody anti-Communist and anti-Mao uprisings are still going on in many parts of the mainland.
19.	Nothing is more indicative of the people's profound opposition to the Communist regime than the floods of refugees who have fled, and continue to flee, the mainland. They number in the millions. Today, the border between mainland China and the outside world is closely guarded by army and militia patrols. Yet thousands have daily risked death to escape Communist tyranny. It is estimated that in the first eight months of this year, 12,500 to 15,000 made good their escape. Most of them have done so by swimming, spending up to 10 hours in the water, usually at night, and covering four to six miles. This was reported in The New York Times on 12 September 1971. Clearly, only hatred and revulsion of the first order can account for their decision to leave behind their loved ones, friends and possessions for the uncertainties of life in an inhospitable world.
20.	If the Communist regime and the Chinese people are mutually hostile entities, it follows that the Communist regime cannot possibly represent the Chinese people in the international community. It is thus ridiculous to assert that to bar the Communist regime from the United Nations is to deny 700 million people, a quarter of the world's population, of their representation.
21.	This brings me to the second point I wish to make, namely, that the Chinese Communist Party, whose total membership represents only about 2 per cent of the population, is torn by dissension and factional strife, and that it faces an uncertain future, As is well known, during the Cultural Revolution, the Party apparatus was completely demolished and hundreds of thousands of Party members were subjected to all kinds of indignity and inhuman treatment. Many of them have since been purged. Chou En-lai, in an interview with Arab newsmen in May of
 
this year, said that the number of Communists who had been purged in the Cultural Revolution amounted to about 1 per cent of a total of 17 million, that is, 170,000. In the same breath, however, he added:
“There are still Communists whose problems have not been solved. We are conducting direct investigations with them. They amount to about 50 per cent of the Party membership.""
In other words, the loyalty of no less than 8.5 million Party members is still in doubt. Obviously, something must be basically wrong with the Chinese Communist Party. It seems that the cancer cf fear is gnawing at its vitals. Leaders are suspicious of one another, suspicious of the rank and file. The rank and file live precariously under the whip-lash of their superiors and at the mercy of lick-spittles and informers among their own comrades. It is not surprising that in recent weeks so much speculation should have centered on the cancellation of the customary 1 October military parade and on other developments on the mainland. There is every reason to believe that a new and serious power struggle is braiding up within the Maoist ranks. The schism within the Communist Party militates against the regime's ability to stabilize itself and consolidate control.
22.	The third point I wish to make is that the world should never mistake Peiping's tactical zigzag for a basic change of policy. The cold fact is that both in words and in deeds the regime remains what it has always been oppressive at home and aggressive abroad.
23.	It is easy to understand why Peiping's change of style has been received with so much fanfare and enthusiasm. Weariness with recurrent crises and fear of nuclear holocaust have engendered in the minds of men a yearning for normality and a craving for world-wide detente. They are conditioned to accept Peiping's gestures of goodwill at face value.
24.	It seems to my delegation, however, that this is a dangerous delusion. There is nothing to suggest that the Chinese Communist regime is ready to give up its policy of world domination. It continues to promote the violence of war; it continues to make a fetish of force. It continues to foment armed insurrection in neighboring countries. It continues to supply arms and ammunition to rebel bands in Thailand, Burma, Malaysia and Indonesia. It continues to train, equip and finance guerillas on a global scale. Rhetoric and friendly gestures notwithstanding, there is no evidence that the regime now intends to pursue a course of action consistent with the United Nations Charter. Indeed, all signs point the other way.
25.	The quest for international peace and security is, and will continue to be, the dominating purpose of our age. It is to the Governments represented here that the peoples of the world look for the peace and security that they so desperately long for. So, let us whole-heartedly pledge ourselves to the noble and challenging task of translating the ideals and goals of the Charter into reality. Let us hope that this great international body will remain steadfast and true to the purposes and principles for which it was founded. Let us hope that the Assembly will refuse to subject itself to the humiliation of bowing before force. As 
the Organization enters the second quarter-century of its existence, let us remind ourselves that the road to peace is indeed tortuous and long, and that lasting peace will come only when it is built, not on the quicksand of expediency and appeasement, but on the rock of moral strength.




34.	It is toward Asia where all the problems of the world are in ferment, but whose ancient wisdom never shuts out the possibility of dialog, that our thoughts turn, Mr. President, in welcoming your election. The example given by your country strengthens our hopes. The age-old nature and quality of the relations which unite Indonesia and Europe and which the recent visit to your islands by the Queen of the Netherlands again illustrates, cause us to welcome- even more the choice the Assembly made in naming you to succeed a great European, Mr. Hambro, that great President of the twenty-fifth session.
35.	However, I do not wish to mention the eminent role played by the President of our Assembly during the . twenty-fifth anniversary session without also paying the same tribute to a man who has preserved and guided our Organization for 10 years with patient and serene energy. May U Thant accept our gratitude. It is yet too early to bid him farewell.
4	Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space, and under Water, signed at Moscow on 5 August 1963 (United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 488 (1963), No. 6964).
5	See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda items 27, 28, 29; 30, 31, 93 and 94, document A/8191.
36.	A former French diplomat recently wrote: "One cannot say that politics, the realm of means, is identical to ethics, the realm of ends. But a policy which did not have ethical ends and a certain conception of good and evil, would have no sense. It would be, literally, senseless." I did not mention these three short sentences to proclaim the superiority of one "certain conception" over another, or to give myself the right to trace the boundary between the realm of ends and the realm of means. More modestly, I shall have attained my goal if I succeed in showing members the meaning France wishes to give its policy.
37.	We belleve-as everyone here knows-that the affirmation of national independence of nations, far from being the expression of nationalism, that is, egotism, is on the contrary the manifestation of a profound solidarity: solidarity which brings people together-regardless of distances or differences-people whose sole ambition is not to part with the choice of their own destiny. We believe-as everyone here knows-that refusing to accept any kind of hegemony is the best contribution a country can make to the birth of a truly international community. We must, however, to justify this conviction, assume the consequences and the risks it entails.
38.	Let me take as the first example monetary relations between nations. We are, in fact, here to increase the chances for peace. Now, no one questions the fact that one of the best ways to achieve this is to bring about, for all world economies, the set of conditions needed for truly balanced growth. In the face of this immense task-and the poorest peoples feel this urgency most deeply the major countries have a special responsibility. How can they and how should they undertake it? Recent history gives us the beginnings of an answer.
39.	The Bretton Woods Agreement, the Marshall Plan, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade: one would be pushing forgetfulness or ingratitude very far indeed in failing to mention the benefits and farsightedness of the initiatives which substituted equality of rights, stability, freely endorsed rules of truly international codes for the evils of compartmentalization, that is, shortsighted egocentricity and unchecked competition, which is anarchy. Once and for all, history has given a large part of the credit to the United States. But two cracks have successively threatened the order of this magnificent structure.
40.	First, it has always been obvious that world equilibrium presupposed -even demanded- the participation of the countries of Eastern Europe, and foremost that of the Soviet Union, in the main currents of exchange. This is one of the goals and this is already, to a certain degree, one of the results of the detente whose political advantages it is superfluous to stress. A great Power or group of Powers could no more be kept .on the sidelines by an outside agency than they themselves could remain aloof from circuits of communication, whether technical or scientific, economic or cultural.
41.	However, the other crack is moire disturbing, because it is threatening the structure from within: respect for the international rules which were accepted by Common agreement by all countries, large and small, led the West to make. an unprecedented leap forward. These rules are called free trade and fixed exchange rates. They are irreplaceable. No one has the power, however strong he may be, to substitute other rules for them. To violate them is therefore to replace them by the absence of rules.
42.	So, if the industrialized States reached a point of preferring anarchy or-and this amounts to the same-the unstable law of the strongest to a set of agreed conditions for harmonious development, who, in the long run, would benefit? The betting-dangerous, like all betting-is open. But, while it is difficult to be a winner in this game, it is easy to pick out the first loser. It would undoubtedly be all the victims of under-development. Let us reread the text relating to the International Development Strategy which was solemnly adopted on 24 October 1970 by the General Assembly [resolution 2626 (XXV)] and which should in principle determine-let us not forget-the relations between industrialized and developing countries throughout the present decade. It rests entirely on the idea that the drive against under-development must be a concerted action, undertaken jointly and in close co-operation by the two groups of nations. What will remain of this fine plan if one of the two groups on which the major responsibilities fall begins by dividing against itself and in some way denying or destroying itself?
43.	In those conditions one can imagine the anxiety in the third world caused by the recent announcement of certain trade restrictions. Because they strike indiscriminately at all States, it is in fact the weakest among them which may be hurt the most.
44.	My country, guided by the experience it has been able to acquire in its relations with the African countries to which it is attached by ever-closer ties of friendship, has made itself and will continue to make itself the untiring advocate of a real organization of markets for basic commodities, where the essential goal is to seek stable, just and remunerative prices. As I have once said:
"The problem is not to throw a few provisions into the abyss of hunger, but to throw a lifeline to enable millions of human beings to climb out through their own effort."
We are here-why not say so? -on the level of principles. We put ourselves on this level as early as 1964, when we suggested that a system of preferences such as the one which had been set up between the associated African States and the European Economic Community should become generalized. We are striving to stay on that level when we insert into our own plan the goal proposed by the United Nations, in other words, when we set our rate of participation in development at 1 per cent of the gross national product.
45.	What are we trying to say? Simply that the responsibility of the industrialized States is committed and cannot be denied.
46.	On several occasions during this analysis we have mentioned the European Economic Community. We have observed that its very structure keeps it from becoming inward-looking. That will be even more true the day it brings together 250 million men and women to whom several million others will be joined through more or less close ties.
47.	Latin America can bear witness to this. I had the honor of presiding over the Council of Ministers of the Community when a colloquium-which should not be the last-both reminded us of our affinities, to which France attaches such importance, and encouraged us to continue increasing our exchanges on all levels.
48.	Nevertheless, how can one talk today of Europe before the nations which comprise it, and also before those which observe it, without being struck by the parallel progression of two phenomena which is its present day characteristic?
49.	On the one hand, the European Economic Community is being enlarged, which means that it has an ever-stronger attraction, that it will henceforth be considered irreversible and that its internal difficulties are the manifestation of growing pains. On the other hand, the progress and consolidation of detente justify this reference to "the whole of Europe" that the six countries meeting in The Hague nearly two years ago took care-on France's initiative to include in the final communique of their summit conference. This I repeat, is parallelism, not coincidence.
50.	'	Western Europe was for a long time a community of suffering and anxiety. Through economic integration and political co-operation it is becoming a community of hope. By setting the example, it has shown first that the decisions and rivalries which seemed so persistent could be overcome, then that the refusal to accept any kind of hegemony was, for peoples too long torn by divisions, the best justification and the most effective stimulus for a necessary rapprochement. In learning that Berlin had become the place and the symbol of agreement, everyone said to himself that the time had come for "the whole of Europe" to keep its appointment with destiny.
51.	What name will history give this conference for which preparation must now enter the decisive stage? "East-West Conference"? Certainly not that. Our plan is certainly not to endorse or even to organize a confrontation of the two camps, but on the contrary to reduce it enough to make it fall into disuse. "European Conference"? That title would be incorrect; everyone agrees-and has agreed for some time now thai the two great North American countries should have a place in it. I hope, then, that we would try to live up to the title which summarizes a great design: "Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe". "Security", "co-operation" it is important that those two words remain linked together, because the concepts they encompass are complementary and indivisible.
52.	To reinforce existing ties between all the countries of Europe on the level of economy, culture, science or technology; to open new paths for their co-operation; to lower the barriers which here and there still prevent or hinder the movement of people, the exchange of information, the movement of ideas; to bring about a genuine mutual interpretation, without impairing State Sovereignty, which would by drawing the peoples closer together, enable them to improve their intellectual and material living standards: is not all this contributing at the same time to increasing the security of the continents, and we think that mistrust, lack of understanding, and even glaring inequalities in development, are also factors of instability;
we note that these still exist in Europe, and not only between what is still called the East and the West. We consider that the multiple development of co-operation extended to everyone in order to reduce those factors is imperative if one intends to deal with the problem of European security in depth.
53.	But this problem is also, of course, political and military. France, in so far as disarmament is concerned, neither can nor will be content with words or appearances. Disarmament must be the elimination of existing arms under effective international control, and the prohibition of any new manufacture of them. And yet, the result of all the efforts made in New York, Geneva and elsewhere since the end of the Second World War is that no arms have in fact been destroyed. On the contrary, we are witnessing the most fantastic arms race the world has ever known. Several bans, whose effectiveness remains to be demonstrated, have been declared on the proliferation of nuclear arms or on their deployment in areas which were up to now inaccessible to man.
54.	Those bans, whatever their individual merits, are unfortunately misleading and can give rise to the belief that disarmament has begun, while the existing arsenals and their power to destroy never stop growing. A "disarmament" carried out in this way can only promote the development of hegemonies and would tend to divide the world by installing an order in which only the super-Powers would retain the ability to exercise their sovereignty.
55.	France has obviously not acquiesced in such a prospect. That is why it has insisted on keeping the possibility of providing itself with the necessary means to secure its defense and maintain its independence. But it remains nonetheless highly in favor of any undertaking for true disarmament, which in an age of nuclear armaments demands, first of all, settlement of the problem of those armaments. How can that be achieved, if not by consensus between the States which possess them? That is why France just recently again recalled that it favored a conference of the five nuclear Powers. It hopes that the requirements for such a conference will one day be met.
56.	Is this to say that for the moment nothing can be done to reduce the threats which weigh on humanity? The United States and the USSR have, for their part, begun talks to lessen the risk of nuclear confrontation between them. To that end, in Vienna and in Helsinki, they are planning to set mutual limits on the development of their strategic arms. But the balance they hope to reach that way is not the only thing which could be called upon to avert the risk of nuclear war. In the absence of a true disarmament agreement between the five, but in the hope of opening ways towards it, would it not be possible as of now also to plan nuclear-Power co-operation to prevent accidental, mistaken or surprise release of the terrible weapons at their disposal? Establishing such a security system will surely provide a practical means of moving toward a world where the risks accompanying the existence of nuclear arms, while not yet eliminated, could at least be reduced. France, for its part-and I confirm and announce this formally-is ready to contribute to that.
57.	For it is only to avoid submission to any system of blocs and I deliberately repeat myself of hegemony that we have had to provide ourselves with the means of deterrence, after having asked in vain for an internationally controlled ban on nuclear arms. In this field as in others, the desire for independence is a contribution to world equilibrium and, consequently, to peace. However, our experiments -I voluntarily refrain from mentioning experiments for which other countries are responsible- would, in our view, cease to be legitimate if they were to endanger life-first of all, of course, the life of man, but also the life of the flora or fauna on land and in the sea.
58.	Have we set ourselves up as the sole judges of the adequacy of the precautions taken, and first of all the remoteness of the test sites? Not at all. We have not been satisfied with the installation of a system, now five years old, to survey the development of radio-activity at various points of the globe on our own.
59.	We have invited scientists and researchers from the countries concerned to take part in our observation and surveillance work. This is a unique and unprecedented effort of international scientific cooperation. Each year we report the results of these observations to all the Members of the Organization, without concealment or hindrance.
60.	We have duly reported to the United Nations committee qualified, as its name indicates,  to evaluate the harmfulness or harmlessness of atomic radiation. Consequently, those who would charge us, not only without proof but against all proof, with risking pollution which our experiments, and ours alone, might entail would be taking to task not us, but the indisputable and indeed undisputed authority and the conscience of a scientific committee of the United Nations.
61.	Let me add that those explosions-by the very fact that they take place in the atmosphere-are not registered by even the most sensitive seismographs on the American continent, which respond to all variations, however weak, in the earth's crust; consequently, they cannot have any , relation to any seismic shock. You will then understand that we trust good faith and common sense to do justice to the simple truth.
62.	But the accumulation of forces in the European theater is the consequence, not the cause, of political tensions there. What chance is there of dealing with the effects without troubling to go to the roots?
63.	It is not too early to look beyond the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin,' which is sure to be supplemented soon by the necessary arrangements between the German authorities-a must for its entry into force. A larger settlement will then appear, since the Treaties of Moscow and Warsaw,  Which convey an equal desire to surmount the obstacles built up in the path of reconciliation between peoples by the horrors of war, are going to take effect in their turn. May we not hope that those three elements of a true political reconstruction in the very center of Europe -the Berlin accord, the necessary arrangements between the German authorities, and the entry into force of the Treaties of Moscow and Warsaw-will culminate in a lasting agreement between the two German States? Nothing would contribute more effectively to guaranteeing the stability of the continent as a whole.France, which bears a part of the responsibility regarding this problem, and which as I said right here last year [1842nd meeting], is anxious to see the Organization become universal, will not spare its encouragement and support for the efforts the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany intends to make in order to -come to such an agreement soon, with all the consequences that this would, I believe, entail for the United Nations.
64.	From then it will only be a matter of organizing the relations between European States in such a way that the alliances, as long as they are held necessary, do not take the form of blocs turned in upon themselves, that for each country the right to belong to one alliance or to belong to none will be respected, as well as the right to territorial integrity, the right to sovereignty with all the accompanying prerogatives, the right to be exempt from all forms of pressure, from wherever it comes, from all interference or external attempt at interference. One of the tasks of the conference on security and co-operation in Europe will be to define these rules with the greatest precision and to ensure that their binding force is clearly understood. At stake is the confirmation of a detente which-I purposely repeat myself-is based on respect for and development of national independence, through free co-operation, a detente which, in a continent so rich in possibilities-for the best and for the worst-means both progress and peace.
65.	In bringing up the universality of our Organization a moment ago, I was thinking of Asia, for I see there something which causes great hope, great fear and great impatience.
66.	The hope springs from the awareness that, as France has always hoped, the People's Republic of China and the Unites States of America have entered into a necessary and difficult undertaking whose effects, we strongly feel, will have repercussions on international relations in their entirety. Doubtless the process will be long. But if, as I am convinced, it is not directed against anyone, it will not fail to serve the cause of detente and peace in that area as well as beyond. Will we then finally see the completion, this year, of the debate on the question of China which our Assembly has continued for too long? Logic and realism would point this way, for although it is said that all roads lead to Rome, there is only one, as far as I have been informed, that leads from Peking to New York. No stratagem can change this, any more than it is possible to make our Charter say something it does not say.
67.	Great fear also. How can one not feel it in the face of the horrible drama 'which has already caused one of the most tragic exoduses in modern times and which anyone feels is perhaps only the prelude to more terrible sufferings still to come? Of course, the response the international community gave to the appeal launched by the Secretary-
General for those unfortunate people of East Pakistan shows that the voice of U Thant was not sounded in vain. But if the wrong is not righted at the root, will the flow of people stop? And will it be possible to reverse the flow? We must hope that the wisdom and generosity of some people will respond to the moderation of others and that a political and constitutional solution based on the consent of the Pakistani people will make it possible to come out of the crisis; for, if the tension is not relieved soon, we shall have to expect tragic consequences for peace in Pakistan and in the subcontinent as a whole.
68.	Lastly, great impatience. Impatience caused by the absence of any progress in settling the Indo-Chinese conflict. However, new proposals have recently been advanced. Could they not be discussed? This question, as the Assembly has surely understood, is actually a wish. I have three reasons for making it: my Government is the host for the Paris Conference; it has, for the people of Indo-China, a friendship which it is always ready to express: it believes, lastly, as we all do, that the only lasting solution to this long-drawn-out tragedy is one which will ensure the independence of each State in South-East Asia, a zone which, after so much suffering is yearning at last for peace and neutrality, sheltered from the competition of all the major Powers.
69.	The same moral -if not the same formula- is applicable to the Middle East, with one basic difference however. Here the responsibility of the United Nations is directly committed. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) will be four years old in a few weeks. Will we spend this anniversary in silence? Will it be for us a time to draw up a report of our lack of success? We are not about to be limited to this alternative! Once again, faithful to our maxim, we will not confuse the means with the end. There is, on the one hand, the cease-fire, for which we can never be thankful enough, if only out of horror for the bloodshed though we see how inevitably precarious it is. There is, on the other hand, .the object of the cease-fire, which can and must be only the mutually accepted implementation of the resolution, that is, evacuation of the occupied territories in exchange for guarantees of real peace. Also, we must be grateful to the United Kingdom and its Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, for having warned us against a certain thinking pattern from which we may soon be painfully awakened. We have two good reasons for fearing and refusing to let time run out: elementary prudence and, above all, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Observing our impasse, Africa responded. I wish here to pay tribute to its decision. To the four Heads of State who will make contact with the parties concerned  Presidents Senghor, Ahidjo, Mobutu and Gowan France offers its warmest wishes.
70.	However, the fears and the hopes of the international community as well as the latter's determination for a peaceful settlement must all be expressed, and this can only be done here. Our appeal last year was heeded. Mr. Jarring was able to resume his mission within the desired time- limit. Our hopes, alas, were quickly dashed. Without the required answer, dialog could not begin. Without unanimous determination, the permanent members of the Security Council has so far not been able to formulate their recommendations for a settlement or make known as agreement whose persuasive effect could be decisive. So here we are again faced with the same alternative: either the Assembly speaks out or the international community is doomed to silence. We should lose our raison d'etre if we did not opt for the first choice. The voice of the General Assembly is thus to be heard: with moderation, equity and firmness. May its appeal inspire in all those who carry more direct responsibilities in this sad affair, the desire to act together so that peace can be established-a peace whose durability is guaranteed by respect for justice.
71.	Is it futile to hope that 12 months after having celebrated the foundation of the United Nations we might, on the occasion of this session of the General Assembly, make a new start in some way? Actually, everything prompts us to do this, above all this striking but necessary observation: we have entered a new era. When we compare the world of 1971 with the post-war world or with what was called the "cold-war" era, we see clearly that the dissimilarities far outweigh the similarities: no continent is invulnerable any more; no ideology is sufficient any more to guarantee the monolithism of all the countries which adhere to it; no nation can be subjected to dependence any more.
72.	These changes point to simple and fruitful guidelines: on the one hand, the world community lives and prospers only through national entities-that is, organized, sovereign and ultimately equal nations. On the other hand, national independence is meaningful and final only through its contributions to the community task. The conference of the non-aligned countries in Lusaka  was correct in taking this principle as its motto: "Unity in diversity." General de Gaulle was no less far-sighted almost 30 years ago when he said to us in a voice we shall never hear again:
"Henceforth there cannot be even the slightest connexion between independence and isolation; no State can maintain itself or, still less, develop without support and help."
73.	Given those two rules, is it possible to construct a world where there would be more solidarity and more security? Europe torn asunder for so long has now the best chance of proving the reverse. As we have seen, the union of Western Europe and detente in international relations in Europe as a whole have gone hand in hand. The year 1972 should see both the summit conference, which was proposed by Georges Pompidou on behalf of France and which will strengthen the solidarity of 250 million Europeans, and also the first conference on the security and co-operation of all Europeans.
74.	Yet co-operation, the guarantee of security, -can. neither stop at the frontiers of Europe, nor do without justice. Recently, before the Conference of the InterParliamentary Union, the President of the French Republic termed racism-of which apartheid is only one manifestation-the "scourge of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the most distressing form of.man's scorn for man". But the threats and the violence which cause millions of human beings to flee their homes, extreme poverty and
hunger, are no less incompatible with the dignity, and indeed the very mission, of man.
75.	May I add that those men whose magnificent life's work is to keep the collective conscience alerted by the pen or by the word have never been more necessary; never, consequently, has the protection of journalists on dangerous missions been more pressing or more urgent. Of course, there are countries where industrial civilization has developed in such a way that the public wonders about the effects and about the very goals of this civilization, awed as it is by the scope of the resulting difficulties and disorders: destruction of the natural environment, pollution, moral and social crises chiefly affecting the young. In these countries the idea of economic growth is sometimes called into question.
76.	This obviously does not apply to the majority. The countries of the world, for the most part, strive to ensure that their populations have the basic requirements and that the opportunities for what is too often difficult and precarious progress are preserved.
77.	Before concluding it would be well to re-emphasize the obligations of the industrialized nations for in our hearts we know that the success of our efforts does not depend on any arrangement or mechanical adjustment of our institutions-even though improvements in means and procedures are welcome. We must above all imbue our undertakings with more soul and more action.
78.	Today, new and inspiring horizons are being spread before our weary, burdened nations and the impatient youth of the world, who are astonished at our quarrels and are already tempted to break rank. Away with hegemonies, therefore and the thirst for power and super-power.
79.	The world has grown. It offers our ambitions immense, still little-explored and under-exploited fields, such as space, the sea, and the sea-bed, which science technology are continually opening up.
80.	May these new prospects help us liquidate the sequels of past conflicts and overcome the crises which some day will seem quite petty.
81.	May this "shock of the future" urge us to move on towards tomorrow together-all together.

79.	Mr. President, I should like in the beginning to join with those of my colleagues who have spoken in saying how happy I am that we meet under your guidance and to express my full confidence that you will steer us with complete success through the many difficult problems which face us. I am happy, too, that the honor which is done to you is reflected on your country, Indonesia, with which we have and still maintain the closest and most friendly relations.
80.	I have found myself on this platform on a number of occasions compelled to call attention to a feature of international life which has plagued for far too long the lives of ordinary men and women. It is in short the abuse of the function of politics and diplomacy by what I may call the cult of confrontation and the denial of dialog. To promote dialog is the essential function of this Organization, and, indeed, it is implicit in the very name "United Nations". So it is here, above all, that we should show concern at a development that threatens to drag civilization backwards, down the-road to violence.
81.	Confrontation may develop as an internal problem, as the distinguished Foreign Minister of Canada has just reminded us. I speak today from experience.
82.	In Northern Ireland a terrifying manifestation of the old danger of religious confrontation has reappeared, complicated in this case by other political and social problems.
83.	All through history, in every corner of the world, religion has been the reason or excuse for wars which caught up peoples in their toils and left a trail of misery for ordinary people behind. In the last century or two dogmatic political ideology has supplanted it. But the danger is the same and in fact as we survey the world's scene it is greater than ever. With the rapid communication of ideas, the sophisticated propaganda, these divisions can be exploited^ and exploited on a vast scale. Millions-and we see this every day when we look at the modern means of communication are duped into adopting the prejudices of the few even though they have little or no idea what the confrontation is about. The way is thus open for the anarchist who believes in revolution and sees nothing beyond his nose and no formation of society beyond that; he believes in revolution by destruction. The way is open, too, for the terrorist who wishes to enforce one point of view and rejects compromise and reason.
84.	In the unhappy situation which exists today in one part of the United Kingdom, such people care nothing for the beliefs and legitimate views of Roman Catholics or Protestants. Their snipers and bombs and land-mines are intended to bring about the total disintegration of society. They are able to exploit the fears and prejudices of others, to intimidate witnesses and even to stir up children to destroy, to throw fire-bombs and to harass forces whose only task is to keep the peace.
85.	I illustrate my theme with this example because our experience of it is first-hand. And though it is our own internal problem in Britain, and it is not always possible so easily to compare internal and international confrontations, the lesson to be drawn is surely universal, It has application to every one of the intractable international problems which face us in this Organization. Each of us has the means to redress legitimate grievances within our own community; that is what gives u& the right to insist that violence within the borders of our State shall not be used. But international confrontations cannot be so easily resolved.
86.	We have not yet succeeded in providing effective remedies for international wrongs. Peace-making is at a discount because we have no means to impose solutions, and a tiny minority interest, therefore, which is interested in confusion can thwart the majority will. I think we are all familiar with the perennial agenda of problems before the international community, situations that have threatened peace in the past and situations that could do so in future. I do not underrate for one moment the difficulty when the parties believe that their vital interests in security, or even their survival, are at stake. But I think the evidence must be-and it has accumulated in these last few dangerous years that time does not resolve many of these confrontations. On the contrary, time works for the anarchist. Sooner or later, uncompromising confrontation leads to violence; neighbors who will not live together will one day fight together. When intransigence escalates into violence the anarchist will find his opportunity and the innocent will be drawn in and will suffer and will die.
87.	I remember last year on this platform, speaking in the context of hijacking of aircraft, I drew attention then to this danger of anarchy-anarchy superseding the law of nations and with it the inherent challenge to all governmental authority. For us to face the fundamental dangers of condoning those who take the law into their own hands I said:
"We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down ... even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice" [1848th meeting, paras. 128429],
88.	Last year's General Assembly resolution on aerial hijacking [resolution 2645 (XXV)] and the subsequent Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft,  which my Government has signed and will shortly ratify, have brought encouraging progress in this particular field. Last week my Government also signed the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.  I hope that as many nations as possible will sign and ratify both those Conventions so that this particular form of anarchy can be stopped. It may be modest progress, when we survey the whole field, but it is some progress.
89.	This year my plea goes wider. It is that in every case where there is international confrontation, existing or threatening, a conscious and urgent effort should be made by all the parties engaged, talking each situation one by one, to achieve a modus vivendi before the stage of open violence is reached, before the anarchist, armed with all the modern techniques of terror, infiltrates and takes charge and levies his fatal toll on society and on the law. This obligation lies plainly on each and all of us. But I think the effort • must first and foremost be made within the framework of the United Nations. Our Charter has equipped us with a whole range of remedies for these situations. There are the traditional diplomatic tools of mediation, conciliation and inquiry. If these fail us we are bound by the Charter to seek other peaceful means, and it provides new powers to investigate and to recommend.
90.	I think if we are honest with ourselves in this Organization we must admit that we have failed to make full use of this potential. Our Secretary-General-whose coming retirement deprives us of a devoted and wise counselor has lately given us a timely reminder of the true character of his role as a peace-maker as envisaged by the Charter. We have not allowed him or his predecessors to realize that capacity to the full. He has also made recently an important comment on the influence of this Assembly in peace-making. He said:
.. the majority must make it plain that they will listen to both sides of a case and not only to the larger faction. The majority must prove that they will seek a realistic way out of difficulties rather than resort to condemnations or threats" [A/8401jAdd. 1, para. 95].
I feel that he is right; but we have not taken those words of his seriously enough as yet. Too often in this Assembly and in the Security Council undisguised propaganda and the search for tactical advantages by this or that group block efforts to reach a just and a comprehensive solution of a problem.
91.	But until we can perfect the remedies which the United Nations offers I must also address this plea concerning confrontation to those who find themselves at this moment in direct and dangerous dispute. At this time of day challenge and confrontation are-to put it in plain language-just too dangerous. Compromise may be dull, but it is the sole recipe for peace and, with patience, it can usually-1 am tempted to say always-be had in honor.
92.	The confrontation which today carries the greatest risk of war is that between Israel and the Arab States. It is one which could draw into the lines of antagonism the most powerful countries in the world.
93.	A whole generation has matured in the Middle East in the shadow of war. A generation on the one side has grown up as homeless refugees; a generation on the other ride has been brought up in the fear of being swept by force into the sea. Violence and counter-violence have been the order of the day; and war has been and remains very near. And that war-so great has been the escalation of armament in the area in recent years-would be fought with modern weapons amply reinforced by the greatest Power.
94.	This dispute is concerned with the most emotional of all issues: the security, and therefore the life, of those who confront each other. The Arabs are totally convinced that the Israelis want to expand their territory at the Arabs' expense, and Israel is convinced that the Arabs want to encircle and destroy it.
95.	In such circumstances, what can others, or the United Nations, do? For unless action is taken, that war will come, I take it that we are resolved, in so far as we can influence events in this United Nations, that on this issue there should be no war. It would be catastrophic. We have, in fact, taken one positive step to help to avert it. Few can doubt that Security Council resolution 242 (1967), although not perfect, contains the essential ingredients of a peaceful settlement. I know it will be tempting to try to change that resolution for another. I consider, myself-I think that perhaps the great majority here would be with me-that it is the only resolution upon which we can count to command substantial support in this Assembly and in this Organization.
96.	We have, too, in the context of trying to find a solution to this problem, within the grouping of the four Powers, indicated a readiness to guarantee the terms of a settlement between the parties. That is not a task which any of us particularly relishes, but where distrust has run so deep for so long, we must take risks, and it may well be the only way to build the confidence which will lead to a permanent peace, taken together with, of course, measures for demilitarization and for the placing of United Nations personnel in evacuated areas.
97.	But if war is to be avoided, those who are in confrontation must actively help to promote a dialog. The main ingredients of peace are known, and I will not rehearse them. On the one hand practical proposals have been put forward which would satisfy the Arab desire for Israeli withdrawal, and these are contained in Security Council resolution 242 (1967); on the other hand, there are ways and means of meeting the legitimate Israel need for permanent physical security. I will not debate the particular possibilities here in a program of peace-making in this dispute, but I will say this, and positively: that, unless a mechanism of dialog can be established, sooner or later-and maybe sooner than later-the fighting will start again.
98.	Confidence can only be established in this case through dialog: here an interim arrangement providing for phased withdrawal and the opening of the Suez Canal, with a link to the next and final stage of withdrawal, could serve to build confidence and to prove to the parties on the ground that there is more to be gained by dialog and coexistence than by war. I still believe that Mr. Jarring has a crucial role to yiin this process of establishing contact. But whoever stages this dialog, the tempo of it must be quicker than it has been until now, and it must be at closer range. When there is distrust between the parties of this depth and scope, it cannot be removed by long-distance correspondence, and the onus of adopting dialog must rest with those who now confront each other in arms. It is for us to help them to find the way to do it and I emphasize again that the time is short. This is a case where dialog must supplant confrontation.
99.	In spite of the experience of wars in Europe and the Middle East, new confrontations loom. In Asia the world watches the frontiers of India and Pakistan with increasing anxiety. India, by reason of civil disturbance in Pakistan, has been faced with a problem of refugees which distorts its economy and stretches its resources to the limit, and beyond. It has been valiant and resilient in meeting this burden. It has rightly asked for international help. Much has been given through this Organization, but we shall need to mobilize a lot more help in cash and kind than we have yet done.
100.	There is now an added danger of famine in the months to come in East Pakistan, arising mainly from a break-down in communications following civil strife. Relief will be needed here too on a massive scale. I hope that we are all conscious of an obligation to help, and to help urgently, because there could be no greater tragedy for the world-even including that in the Middle East-than that India and Pakistan should find themselves unwillingly at war. The United Kingdom has given £8 million to relief in India and £1 million io East Pakistan, and we are ready now to add substantially to that. Relief is beyond the capacity of Pakistan. Therefore, the machinery of the United Nations on the ground must be strengthened, and if it is to. be adequate to the task of recreating the necessary network of communications, then action must be taken to meet local conditions of famine and to meet them in time.
101.	Again, there is not much time, for recently this problem between India and Pakistan has assumed a new and appalling dimension. Guerrilla warfare and sabotage are adding to the fear and are hampering rescue. I am not sure if we yet understand the scale of the guerrilla warfare in that area; but the operations of the guerrillas, taking advantage of this situation, could create another panic in East Pakistan and start another avalanche mass movement of population from Pakistan into India. So this situation could run both countries unwillingly into war,
102.	Reconstruction of the Constitution of Pakistan must be an internal matter for the people of Pakistan. But the risks to peace, if they fail in that reconstruction, are appealing, and the truth of the matter is that the danger will be finally averted only when there is a return to civil government in East Pakistan which gives confidence to all Pakistanis to stay at home, to return home, and to develop their country in peace. Meanwhile, let the United Nations do the humanitarian work. It must never be said of the politicians that we met here and argued about who was to distribute food while millions of innocent people starved.
103.	In Africa we see the evil of apartheid and the frustration of many at its continued existence. Frustration and impatience can lead to violence. And as we have seen so often that violence, from which the innocent suffer, provokes counter-measures, and the lines of war thus become more sharply drawn.
104.	I am glad to see that, in spite of the deep feelings aroused by apartheid, which we share, the urge to dialog grows and it is being to some extent put into practice. There in Africa, as elsewhere, neighbors have no choice but to live side by side; and ultimately dialog must be resumed and must take charge.
105.	In the Far East, we have seen that China has for too long isolated itself from the world community. That had its dangers. When it plays its full part here in New York, a mighty voice will be added to our counsels and a major step will have been taken towards the true representation here of the balance of world power and world opinion, from which consensus can be hammered out, however painful at. times that process may be. With all the difficulties, I think the majority here recognizes that the future lies, not in isolation, not in confrontation or in ostracism, but in dialog.
106.	I hope that in Western Europe after centuries of conflict we have learn our lesson. The confrontation of Germany and France which nearly destroyed civilized life on our continent was ended because two great nations and two great statesmen were willing to take a risk, to pull down the historic barriers between them and peaceful coexistence. Those two great statesmen in particular took a risk with public opinion.
107.	On that essential political foundation is being built !ready the integrating Community of th? Six, the
European Economic Community. The United Kingdom and other European countries will, we hope, soon expand the Community to one of ten. That should usher in a new era of economic expansion and greatly enhance the prospects for peace. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Schumann, yesterday, in one of his most felicitous phrases, described that enlarged community as a "community of hope" [1942nd meeting, para. 50}. I would underline that forecast. That Community is already committed, by reason of the many special provisions for territories once connected with France and the United Kingdom, to be outward-looking. It exists to encourage trade, and that is the healthiest form of assistance,
108.	Nevertheless, aid from the developed to the under-developed countries is a vital need, and my country and the Community recognize their duty in this. I am glad to be able to announce today that my Government has decided to increase its contribution to the United Nations Development Program. In 1972 to $19,2 Million, an Increase of one third, We had also made an advance pledge of $50 million to the International Development Association, to remedy the failure of the third replenishment this summer. Yesterday in Washington we announced that wo were raising this to $103,680,000, which completes our first year's contribution to that replenishment. Wo hope In this way not only to enable the International Development Association to continue its work but to encourage others to take action also.
109.	There is nothing we in Western Europe should till like better than closer economic and political relations with the countries of Eastern Europe. It was the policy of the Federal Republic of Germany again with a German statesman taking a risk to seek accord there, and thus open the way to East'West agreements, In particular agreement to ease the conditions of life for the people of West Berlin. Once that has been achieved, it should be possible to prepare a conference on the security of Europe, If that is to have any chance of success, each country must demonstrate that it respects the security of others; that is a .sine qua non of cooperation* and that alone can give confidence. With confidence we can do much; without It we can do very little. If this essential respect for one's neighbor Is shown, then in Europe we shall be embarking on a (UHvntv which is embracing and on which better and more enduring relations can be built. The trend, then, in Europe is to turn away from confrontation to detente,
110.	I have been concerned today to stress the responsibility we all bear to find the peaceful way out of our difficulties and differences. 1 believe that the first essential is to make a conscious effort to get back to a climate of good-neighborliness, with those with whom we disagree as well as with our friends.
111.	We have been exhorted to do more about last year's Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)J. I have no quarrel with that; but general declarations are of no avail unless our basic approach is the right one. Surely the right approach is laid down quite specifically in the Preamble to our Charter, where we declare that we are determined "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". "Tolerance" is a word that is all too seldom heard today in these halls. I suggest that it is as Important now as it was in 1945, when the Charter was drafted. When differences and disputes nevertheless arise, neither side can escape the duty of looking to negotiation to secure the peace. Nor can we collectively escape the duty of overcoming the obstacles which stand in the way of the United Nations making an effective intervention before dispute hardens into confrontation and confrontation into conflict.
112.	Peace-keeping is the center of the problem, because so often peace cannot be made until all concerned are confident that it will be kept. The Charter foresaw the Deed. Hie machinery exists and it is available for our use. What has been lacking and I hope is not now lacking is the w21 to use it or to support it.
113, There is even, I regret to say, at the present time one operation of peace-keeping, established by the Security
Council, that Is Involved in a serious financial shortfall. I refer to the endeavor that has successfully maintained the peace For more than seven years In Cyprus and consequently in that part of the Mediterranean. There is now a deficit of up to $70 million, half of which relates to former peacekeeping accounts, and this deficit Is growing every year, Therefore I share the Secretary-General's view that unless a remedy Is found In the very near future It will no longer be possible for us to fulfill the basic purpose and objective of the Charter,
114.	We must not slide backwards in peace-keeping, Every symptom of division In the international field urges us to do better, So let us each and all bend our minds to positive peace-making and positive peace-keeping, Let us prove it in each case where the danger of confrontation raises its stubborn head,
115.	To break the present stalemate In a number of the confrontations will not solve the problems of the world; but we can In this Assembly give the world a sharper instrument for peace, That will narrow the area for the anarchist and his operations and broaden the rule of law.




38.	Mr. President, on behalf of the people of India, we offer you our warmest congratulations on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly. This is a fitting tribute to your achievements as the Foreign Minister of Indonesia and to your interest in the political and economic problems of the world. As a fellow Asian. I take particular pride in your elevation to this high office. Indonesia and India have worked together in so many fields since we both achieved
our independence, and we have so much in common through history and geography, that I need hardly assure you of our fullest co-operation in the discharge of your responsibilities.
39.	We should also like to compliment our outgoing President, Mr. Edvard Hambro of Norway, for the skill, independence and patience with which he guided our deliberations and for his stewardship of the commemorative session last year. The world may not care for nor long remember the millions of words we utter here, but the important documents which we adopted last year will certainly guide and inspire us in our work for years to come. For this achievement much of the credit must go to Mr. Hambro.
40.	During the year that has just passed, our Secretary- General, U Thant, has once again manifested his devotion to the cause of world peace by his scrupulous regard for the purposes and principles of the Charter and by his indefatigable efforts to improve our Organization in all possible ways. We can still hope that his decision to relinquish this rewarding, though onerous, office is not final. The Secretary-General of this Organization has always to be a person of the highest caliber, sensitive to the changing needs of the world situation and fully prepared to meet the administrative requirements of an ever-growing institution. He should also be able to contribute to the creation of conditions in which all nations, big or small, can live in peace and friendship and work in their own ways for their national progress and prosperity.
41.	We extend our special welcome to the three new Members that joined us a few days ago: Bhutan, Bahrain and Qatar. We look forward to working in the closest co-operation with these new Members, with which we have had long and friendly association in several spheres. Their entry into the United Nations should increase the value of our debates and the strength of our decisions.
42.	One of the most important issues that we hope will be settled during this session is the question of the rightful representation of China in this Organization. There is only one China; there is only one Chinese seat, and only the Government of the People's Republic of China is entitled to occupy it in the United Nations. We have always been convinced that the presence of the People's Republic of China will make this Organization more effective. Too long have we postponed a realistic decision on this issue; let us not procrastinate any further.
43.	We have also repeatedly pleaded for universality of representation in the United Nations and we believe that the entry of the divided nations into our Organization would help in the reduction and removal of tensions. They could also contribute effectively to our work in many other fields.
44.	For India, the year 1971 opened with many promises. The economy was poised for a high rate of growth. In March we had our general elections. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was returned to power with an overwhelming majority. Her success reflected the solid support of our people for a concerted program for socio-economic progress. Externally we had tried to establish warmer
relations with all countries, particularly with our neighbors. The fact that Pakistan had a little earlier, in December 1970, held the first general elections it had ever held was welcomed in India. The introduction of a democratic process in Pakistan would, we had hoped, bring about improved relations with this important neighbor of ours. Yet the entire picture was changed overnight when the events in the eastern wing of Pakistan took a catastrophic course. An international problem of utmost gravity and concern was created. Several Governments and international authorities have recognized the true character of this problem. The Secretary-General, U Thant, not only has brought the situation to the attention of the members of the Security Council but has included his views in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [Al8401/Add.l]. The Assembly has already heard the concern which the outgoing President, Mr. Hambro, expressed in his speech on 21 September [1934th meeting].
45.	By the middle of April it had become clear that Pakistan had no intention of abandoning its military methods and that we would be faced with an unprecedented flow of Pakistani refugees into our country. Refugee camps had to be speedily organized, and the systematic and detailed registration of the large number of foreigners had to be undertaken. Ration cards and temporary permits for stay in India had to be issued, transport and food supplies had to be organized and medical attention had to be provided. These relief measures could, however, meet only a fraction of the needs of the refugees. We asked the international community for help, and although the response to the Secretary-General's appeal has been warm, it is but a very small part of what is actually needed. By far the largest contribution towards the upkeep of the refugees has had to be made by India from its badly needed resources. We are sheltering and looking after the refugees on behalf of the international community. We simply do not have the capacity and the resources to bear this burden. While we gave them-on purely humanitarian grounds- shelter and refuge when they were fleeing for their lives, we have made it repeatedly clear that they are with us only temporarily and must return home. This has been accepted and endorsed by the world community. It has been impossible to make any firm estimates of what it would cost us in the coming months, but on the basis of the present figure the total cost may well be more than $800 million by the end of next March.
46.	The consequences of this massive influx-some have called it a civilian invasion-of refugees into India cannot be determined in terms of money alone. We are facing grave social, economic and political consequences. In the areas where the refugees are now living in difficult conditions in comps, all of our schools have had to be closed to find shelter for them. All of our hospitals in these areas have had to tend to the urgent need of the refugees rather than to the normal needs of the local inhabitants. Prices are rising as a result of a higher demand for essential commodities. Wages are falling. Crimes of various kinds are on the increase. Local friction and tensions are not unknown. Our local administration has had to be diverted to the work of looking after the refugees, and that in turn has further affected adversely all of our development projects. The fear of epidemics is ever present, even though the outbreak of cholera has been controlled. 
47.	The refugees must go back. The question simply is; How? Can anyone reasonably expect them to go back when thousands and thousands are daily fleeing from the same area? Pointless declarations and exhortations will not make them go back. On 21 May the President of Pakistan, Mr. Yahya Khan, called upon the refugees to go back; yet, since then, more than 5 million more have come into India. They will go back only when they are sure themselves that they can live in their own homeland in safety and freedom, when they are allowed to work as they wish, and when they are assured that their properties will be returned, their jobs restored and their daily lives not interfered with.
48.	To appreciate and understand the background to this unprecedented influx, it is necessary to recall the conditions prevailing in East Pakistan throughout Pakistan's existence. Pakistan is a unique country, in the sense that two parts of it are separated by a distance of 1,000 miles of Indian territory. The majority of the people-75 million- live in the East, and the West has a total population of less than 60 million. None the less, political, military and economic power was concentrated in the West, while the East continued to produce basic raw materials, such as jute and tea, and provided the largest source of foreign exchange for Pakistan. Even the Government of Pakistan has acknowledged that persistent discrimination and exploitation of East Pakistan by West Pakistan has taken place ever since the country became independent.
49.	Just to give one example, in the entire civil service and in the armed forces of Pakistan the Bengalis did not have a share exceeding 10 per cent. The East Pakistanis continued to protest and agitate against that discrimination and exploitation, and, for want of any effective remedy, their grievances accumulated.
50.	However, after the fall of President Ayub Khan in the middle of 1969 a new situation arose. Another General- President Yahya Khan-took over, and declared that he would hold general elections for the first time, on adult franchise with representation to both wings, proportionate to their population. For the first time the people of Pakistan saw in that democratic process a possible rectification of the injustices from which East Pakistan had suffered all those years.
51.	The elections were held in December 1970, after being postponed twice. The results of the elections were greeted in Pakistan as a success of democracy, as indeed they were. The broad results of the elections are worth noting. Out of a total of 313 seats, 169 had been allotted to East Pakistan. Of those 169 seats, the Awami League, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, won as many as 167. Winning 98 per cent of the seats in East Pakistan, Mujibur Rahman gained an absolute majority in the National Assembly and would, in normal circumstances, have been in a position to form the Government and become the Prime Minister of Pakistan. For the elections, the Awami League had adopted a six-point program to obtain specifically a greater degree of autonomy for East Pakistan with a view to putting an end to discrimination and exploitation.
I do not think the comment made by the representative of Pakistan calls for serious notice. What he says is that the Indian Foreign Minister is describing what is known to others. Then, certainly, there can be no grounds for a point of order if one is describing something which is known to others.
56.	What I am trying to give this august Assembly is an account of the circumstances that led to that unprecedented influx of 9 million refugees into Indian territory. Members must have noticed that the Secretary-General, in the introduction to his annual report on the activities of the United Nations, has devoted as many as 15 paragraphs, covering several pages, to highlighting, in a very lucid manner the various aspects-humanitarian and political-of the problem of the influx of the refugees f A/8401IAdd.l, paras. 177-179/.
57.	It is noteworthy also that the representative of Pakistan did not care to point out, as is customary in such cases, the particular provision, either in the Charter or in the rules of procedure, under which he was raising his point of order. I am not asking this august United Nations General Assembly to intervene-if he had Article 2, paragraph 7, in mind. I am saying that this is a problem, unprecedented in history, in which 9 million refugees have crossed over into Indian territory, and I am asking: Is the international community interested in knowing what the root-cause of that is, and what should be the direction in which the efforts of the international community should be directed to find a satisfactory solution of this tragic problem? If I may say so, to treat this matter by a point of order in a light-hearted manner is inconsistent with the international community's responsibilities: responsibilities first to find out and analyze what are the root-causes of these most tragic happenings in that part of the world and then to direct its attention to finding a satisfactory solution. I thought that, while dealing with a problem of such magnitude, this Assembly would be interested in knowing the relevant facts of the situation, so that it might be properly appreciated, and attention might be directed to finding a satisfactory solution.
58.	I am the last person, I would assure the Assembly, to interfere in the internal affairs of another country, but to give a description of the circumstances which led to the uprooting of 9 million people is certainly neither an interference in any other country's internal affairs nor any comment on what is happening in the country itself. One has to understand properly the circumstances of the
situation in order to come to the right conclusion. Therefore, while appreciating the anxiety of the representative of Pakistan, I have carefully avoided referring in any manner to matters which might be barred either by any provisions of the Charter or by any rules of procedure. If anything, we should concentrate on the basic problems, rather than become involved in a procedural debate which is pointless.
59.	Coming to the facts of the situation, I was referring to the elections that took place in Pakistan, giving Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the Awami League a majority of 167 out of 169 seats and thus giving him an absolute majority in the National Assembly of Pakistan. For the elections, the Awami League adopted a six-point program to obtain specifically a greater degree of autonomy for East Pakistan with a view to putting an end to discrimination and exploitation. Apparently, the results of the election so startled the rulers of Pakistan that they saw in them a risk to their economic, military and political domination over ' the eastern wing; this explains their swift action and their desire to continue military rule. So, on the fateful night of 25/26 March, the armed forces set out to crush the verdict of the 75 million Bengalis.
I am sorry that the representative of Pakistan in his wisdom has chosen this path of raising objections after every sentence or after every paragraph of my speech before this Assembly. I am not discussing the internal affairs of Pakistan and I am not interested in the internal affairs of Pakistan; but it would be a truism to say that the conduct of internal affairs by any country, if it results in the uprooting of 9 million people who cross over to the adjoining territory, should be a matter of concern to the international community, which
should be concerned about the circumstances that created a situation in which the conduct of internal affairs in that country compelled 9 million people over a period of a little more than six months to cross into the territory of India. Now, if a strict interpretation were accepted under which conditions in Pakistan could not be mentioned, then we would virtually come to the ridiculous position that a refugee who left his village in East Pakistan should not be described and the conditions prevailing in that part should not be taken note of and only when he crossed into Indian territory should we start mentioning him. I am sure that that would be neither the correct spirit nor the correct manner in which we should deal with such serious matters, I am fully conscious of and have regard for the principle of coexistence. We are not interested in whether there is a presidential system or a military system or a military rule in Pakistan. That is entirely its concern. We have learned to live in a spirit of coexistence with whatever may be the social or economic system prevailing in any part of the world, and this applies particularly to our neighbors. But when, while dealing with their own affairs, within what they describe as domestic matters, they create a situation where 9 million people are shoved on to us, then surely the international community would like to know the circumstances in which these people have left their country. They have not left their country of Pakistan as tourists to do sightseeing in India. This is a very serious matter. Therefore we should view this problem in the proper perspective. The international community will never be able to understand unless it knows the circumstances that prevail in that unfortunate country, where 9 million people, its own citizens, had to cross and come over to Indian territory. I am not interested in its internal set-up, but I am interested in putting across to the international community the circumstances which led to the creation of conditions that compelled these unfortunate men, women and children to leave their homes and hearths.
64.	On the fateful night of 25/26 March, the armed forces set out to crush the verdict of the 75 million Bengalis. However, before the army was given the signal to let loose a reign of terror, protracted negotiations started; in the meantime the strength of the armed forces in East Bengal was considerably increased. 
The suggestion made by the representative of Saudi Arabia -- who perhaps has a longer association with the United Nations than almost any one of us-has been listened to by me with great care. I was thinking that perhaps he had some point of order which came in the way of my proceeding with my speech, but instead of that, I find that he has appealed to me and placed me in the embarrassing position of being called upon to make my comment upon his appeal. I would appeal to him, and also to other representatives, to judge for themselves who is responsible for creating an atmosphere of tension. We have the accepted procedure that any points which might be mentioned by any leader of a delegation can be replied to substantively and also that another viewpoint can be presented before this august Assembly. But instead of adopting that usual procedure, efforts have been made to obstruct me when I am actually delivering my speech before the Assembly.
71.	The situation is such that I would be failing in my < duty if I were to respond much as I would like to-to the appeal made by the representative of Saudi Arabia. I owe it not only to my country, I owe it not only to the 9 million refugees, but, I believe, I owe it to the international community to tell them these things in the frankest possible manner, while trying always to remain within the procedure and the provisions of the Charter in making my presentation.
72.	I believe I have used my words carefully; I have not indulged in rhetoric, But I am sorry that I shall have to crave the indulgence of this august Assembly, and of you, Mr, President, to permit me to place before you in a dispassionate manner the facts which have led to this unprecedented tragedy. It is not pleasant for me to mention these facts, but the situation is so grave and the consequences that might flow from it so serious that I would be failing in my duty, as I said, not only to my country and to the refugees, but to the international community, if, simply for the sake of preventing objections from being raised, I Were not to proceed with giving the facts to the international community. If the facts are wrong, the representative of Pakistan has the right to make his statement and to say that the particular facts I mention are incorrect. Therefore, I would request him, and also the representative of Saudi Arabia, to permit me to present these facts, which are of the utmost importance in an issue that, I think, has resulted in the most tragic events in recent memory.
73.	What the army did, and is continuing to do, in its massive assault on the civilian population is now well known and I do not wish to take up the time of the assembly in describing the innumerable instances of killings and atrocities. A reign of terror prevailed and still prevails. The leader of the Awami League, Mujibur Rahman, was arrested and is still in prison. He is now being secretly tried in a military court on a charge which carries the death penalty. The freedom of the press and civil liberties were totally suppressed, and the foreign journalists were expelled. The International Red Cross was not allowed to visit the area and all attempts were made, not always successfully, to conceal what was happening in. that part of the world. Killing, raping, burning and looting became widespread. The inevitable consequences followed: the people fled from tenor and violence to India, leaving behind all that they had. Their number rose from less than a million, at the end of April, to nearly 4 million at the end of May, crossed the 6-million mark before June was over, and has been rising steadily ever since. Their number now exceeds 9 million, and the exodus still continues. This is an exodus of refugees unprecedented in history, across any international frontier.
74.	Pakistan’s military action and the snuffing-out of all human rights, and the reign of terror, which still continues, have shocked the conscience of mankind. There is a popular revolt against these actions. Some have fled from the tenor, while others are resisting it as best they can. The hard core of this resistance was provided by thousands of men who had defected from the army and the police and various paramilitary organizations at the time of the -military crackdown. They have been joined in ever-increasing numbers by people of all ages.
75.	The Pakistani authorities have tom up solemn declarations and conventions to which Pakistan had subscribed. Pakistan has desperately tried to divert attention from its outrageous actions. Its actions have made so many serious inroads into much that our Charter stands for that it would indeed be a travesty of international law and a mockery of international justice to suggest that what is involved is an internal issue. It is even less an internal issue when one keeps in mind that other nations are having to support the enormous cost of the massive exodus of Pakistani citizens into India.
76.	Apart from accusing others of their own most unwise and deadly activities, the rulers of Pakistan have taken a number of measures which are no more than eyewash. How unrealistic these measures are can be judged from the impact they have had on the flow of refugees. The 
Resident of Pakistan has from time to time called upon the refugees to go back; yet, the flow continues in ever- increasing numbers into India. A so-called civilian government has been formed in East Pakistan consisting of men who have no representative character whatever and who are mere figureheads, obliged to take orders from their military commanders. An amnesty is proclaimed, but Mujibur Rahman and other elected representatives are at the same time treated and tried as traitors. We witness the strange spectacle in which the party which would have been, by right, the Government of Pakistan, has been banned and disqualified from political activities. Half the elected representatives have been disqualified from sitting in the National Assembly. In our view, the flow of refugees will not stop, nor will the refugees already in India begin to go back, until a political solution acceptable to the elected representatives of the people has been found. Secretary- General U Thant and many other distinguished statesmen, politicians and leaders of public opinion have consistently maintained that the problem is essentially political. As a first step towards a political solution, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the leader of the Awami League, should be set at liberty without delay, and negotiations should be started with him. It has been proved beyond doubt that he alone can speak on behalf of the people of East Bengal. He, and he alone, symbolizes and represents the aspirations and will of the people of East Pakistan. Apart from these actions, which the Pakistanis themselves can take, what can the international community do in these circumstances? The first and foremost action which this Assembly, and all other international organs within or without the United Nations system, can take is to impress on the military regime of Islamabad the fact that force will not succeed and that, therefore, a political settlement between the military regime and the already-elected leaders is essential. We consider it wholly short-sighted to wait until worse crises have arisen. Bilaterally, all Governments can do their utmost to ensure, by whatever means are available to them, that the military regime stops its repression, enters into negotiations with the elected leaders to achieve a political settlement with their consent, and sends the army back to the barracks. Only by these measures will the flow of refugees be stopped and the refugees already in India be able to return home. Our only fault has been that we gave temporary shelter to millions of refugees homeless, food-less, without clothing; sick and aged, men and women, helpless children and dying infants-who were fleeing from terror, many of whom bore marks of recent army brutality. Only by the measures I have suggested can the threat of famine be alleviated and normal conditions restored. If these measures are not taken, and if attempts are made to divert attention by false analysis or wrong accusations, then the prospect is indeed gloomy. We here in this Assembly may argue in a sophisticated manner as long as we like, but those who have been the victims of aggression and who are fleeing from terror and massacre will not have such a tolerant outlook. They will not forgive us or those who did not stand by them in their hour of trial.
77.	It is only natural that I should have devoted some time to an important matter which is uppermost in the minds of most Indians, but we are not insensitive to other important issues that the world has faced during the last year. We believe that the world scene is changing and rearranging itself in a manner which is often difficult to comprehend
and even more difficult to analyze. Whether it is in Europe or Asia, in Africa or in the Americas, several trends are noticeable which can affect our traditional values and even some of the concepts on which the Charter is based.
78.	During the last 12 months there have been many welcome signs of reduction of tensions among the great Powers. The progress in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT], though slow, is an important step forward. The treaty between Poland and the Federal Republic of Germany and the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin    are important landmarks and should lead to a better understanding of the German problem. The greater degree of accommodation now evident will contribute to European peace, progress and prosperity. We congratulate all those whose untiring efforts have resulted in an accord over some of the most difficult issues facing the international community.
79.	At the same time, I must utter a note of caution. The concerns of the nations assembled in this hall are far wider than the preoccupations of the great Powers. One of the basic concepts underlying the setting-up of the United Nations was that in the solution of world problems and in the achievement of the political, social and economic objectives of the human race all sovereign States should have a voice. While talks among the great Powers can on suitable occasions be helpful, the viewpoints of other States, and particularly of the developing countries, must not be ignored. The concept of non-alignment, of which Jawaharlal Nehru was one of the principal exponents, was meant to modify the bipolar view of the world. The relevance and validity of non-alignment are not diminished by the lessening of East-West tensions in some fields.
80.	Indeed, with the lessening of cold-war tensions the importance of non-alignment has become even greater. The issues are no longer so clear-cut and, therefore, the non-aligned countries will .have to examine the ever- changing situations in a much more detailed and comprehensive manner. Decisions can then be based on principles, taking into account ail the factors. It is for those reasons that the Lusaka Declaration  was widely welcomed by many speakers in this Assembly last year. It is also for those reasons that we have found it necessary to continue discussions among the non-aligned countries on all important problems. Such a regular and systematic exchange of views will enable us to come to some agreed conclusions, even at short notice. As this Assembly is aware, in two days the non-aligned group of countries will meet at the Foreign Minister level.
81.	In Asia a new political equation is discernible, with rapid industrialization and economic development in several countries. Not only is a new relationship emerging among the Asian countries themselves, but several outside Powers are working for the establishment of new contacts and relations with Asian countries, including China. India is 
conscious of those developments and is adjusting its own attitude in the context of those important changes.
82.	The agony of the people of Viet-Nam has not yet ceased. Their freedom is still to be achieved, although large-scale warfare and massive slaughter are not so much in evidence. Raids, local fighting and a daily toll in lives continue throughout Viet-Nam. We regret particularly that there has been a recent resumption of bombing in parts of North Viet-Nam. Policies, especially in South Viet-Nam, have not shown any signs of moving towards the goal for which many lives have been sacrificed and for which the people of Viet-Nam have suffered so much. We welcome the United States and other foreign troop withdrawals that have already taken place. We hope that, through negotiations in Paris and elsewhere, the agony of Viet-Nam will be brought to an end without further delay; that United States and other foreign troops will be withdrawn completely by a definite date; and that the people of Viet-Nam will be allowed to decide their own future in accordance with their own wishes, without any outside interference. In that context the seven-point proposals made in Paris appear to us to provide a reasonable basis for a negotiated settlement.
83.	In the Middle East, the lack of progress in the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is creating new tensions. The cease-fire, accepted as a, temporary measure to help the parties negotiate a settlement through Ambassador Jarring, has unfortunately tended to freeze the situation in favor of the aggressor, despite the willingness shown by the Arab countries to go to the farthest limit m meeting their obligations under the above-mentioned resolution. Our own conviction that no country should be allowed to retain foreign territories taken by force of arms remains unshaken, and we would reiterate that this problem will not be solved unless Israel withdraws from the Arab territories which it has occupied since 5 June 1967 and restores the legitimate rights of the Palestinian refugees.
84.	In Latin America, too, new economic and political forces are emerging. Various developments in various States in that continent have proved beyond doubt that the conflict between traditional politics and a growing awareness of national interest is adding new dynamism to the situation. That will no doubt have an impact on international issues.
8$. The result of all those trends and tendencies has been to bestir people to new lines of -flunking and to a new realization that problems of great concern to the world cannot be solved by force. It is in this context that our discussions this year on the question of international peace and security will assume added significance. Such a discussion, by enabling all Member States to express their considered views, will substantially increase the effectiveness of the United Nations,
86.	India pointed out at the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly [1932nd meeting! that post-war developments had amply shown that disputes in the traditional sense are not the only situations which become a threat to international peace and security, the structure of which today is more often than not imperiled by actions which
amount to systematic violations of many other important objectives and principles of the Charter. This Organization must acquire and develop the skill and the strength necessary for dealing effectively with complex problems which have far-reaching consequences.
87.	The Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, adopted last year by the General Assembly [resolution 2734 (XXV)], recognizes the integral link between peace, on the one hand, and disarmament, decolonization and development, on the other. General and complete disarmament under effective international control remains the imperative and most urgent need of our time. We are concerned with the threat to mankind posed by the ever-increasing arms race, by the existing large stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction and by the impending new qualitative advance towards even more devastating nuclear armaments.
88.	We are pleased at the emergence of an agreement on bacteriological weapons as a result of the discussions in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, and we look forward to early steps towards an effective agreement on chemical weapons. We are pleased of course that the United States of America and the Soviet Union continue their discussions in the field of disarmament and that those contacts are helping to lessen suspicion and are creating and improving the atmosphere for negotiations in many other fields. However, the proceedings of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament have not been marked by any significant progress this year and we should consider how to strengthen further the mechanism of the Committee on Disarmament. We could perhaps do so by adopting the suggestion made in that regard by the Secretary-General in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [AI8401/Add.l, para. 52]. It is imperative that China and France participate in the deliberations. India also believes that it would be useful to convene a world disarmament conference, after due preparation, with the participation of all the countries of the world.
89.	The Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy has demonstrated the need to make nuclear energy and technology available to a greater extent to the developing countries of the world. We are convinced of the important contribution that the technology for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy can make to the economy and the progress of the developing world.
90.	If the lack of progress towards total disarmament continues to be a threat to peace and security, there are other factors which also contribute to that threat. Colonialism and racialism have taken many forms in recent years, and all the efforts of the United Nations have been unavailing in bringing about the independence of such large and important colonial Territories as Angola, Mozambique, Guinea, Southern Rhodesia and Namibia.
91.	We are gratified at the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on Namibia  and our efforts should be concentrated on concrete steps to be taken in asserting the United Nations authority in Namibia. The liberation movements in other colonial Territories need to be encouraged. We are disappointed that the progress in. these fields has not been significant and we shall, at an appropriate stage, propose steps which can be taken to bring all colonial Territories to independence,
92.	Security and political stability cannot be achieved if the international community does not organize economic co-operation for speedy development in a rational and dynamic way. The International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] was a major step forward, but the developments which have taken place since the Strategy was adopted are causing us some uneasiness. The commitments made in the Strategy are still to be fulfilled, and yet attempts are being made to take advantage of the differences of interests, which undoubtedly exist in the developing countries, to modify this commitment. We hope that these attempts will not succeed, and that, on the one hand, the developing countries will present a united front on their basic needs and, on the other hand, that the developed countries will fulfill to the utmost the obligations they have accepted.
93.	The world today is facing a major economic crisis comparable to the one that arose when sterling went off the gold standard and new trade barriers began to disrupt world trade. Something similar is threatening the system of international trade and payments which had been built up after the Second World War. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development have not between them been able to provide the kind of orderly and balanced growth in world economy which was hoped for. The developing countries, which had very little say at the time of their establishment, have long cherished the feeling that a new look at the articles of these three bodies is called for, if the widening gap between the rich nations and the poor nations is not to grow wider each year, as it has unfortunately done in the last two decades. In the crisis that now confronts them,-some of the most developed nations have also begun to feel that the charters of these institutions do not provide adequate answers to the emerging problems. What we are unhappy about is the attempt to ignore and bypass these institutions and to try to seek solutions to the world's economic problems in a small group of the 10 richest countries. We believe that, while we must reform these institutions, we must not wreck them. Concerted thinking on the ways in which a new dynamism can be imparted to them has to be given in a forum which is truly representative of developed and developing countries alike,
94.	Already some of the measures that have been taken to solve the problems of prosperous nations have created serious problems for the less developed countries. Then- trade is confronted with new obstacles. The inflow of capital so essential to their growth and development, which is well below the target of 1 per cent of the gross national product adopted by the United Nations is in danger of being reduced. Poor countries of the world are victims of measures taken in the name of alleviating the payments crisis of the richest nations in the world, even though they themselves had not contributed to the crisis in any
conceivable manner. Without a concerted and cooperative approach, such progress as was made in the first United Nations Development Decade can easily be wiped out in the Second.
95.	Last year the Assembly gave much time and attention to formulating a just regime on the utilization of the resources of the sea and on the preservation of the human environment. During this year some progress has been made for the solution of these problems, but much more remains to be done. Similarly, on the problem of outer space we have achieved some success, particularly in formulating a draft Convention on Liability for Damage Caused by Objects Launched into Outer Space. We would like to record our appreciation to the United States of America and to the Soviet Union for reaching agreement regarding expanded co-operation towards developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems for the spacecraft of both the nations. We look forward, as a developing country, to increasing benefits from progress in the field of earth resources, surface remote sensing and other connected matters.
96.	I have mentioned all these specific problems in order to take into account the various major factors which are changing the conditions of the world we live in. The United Nations, reflecting all these concerns, has to adjust itself to these changing conditions. Our Charier was drawn up 26 years ago. Our methods of work and the procedure of our debates, as indeed our budget all subjects of separate studies-have to be adjusted and adapted to new demands and conditions. We must maintain a flexible attitude towards these matters and we hope that the present session of the Assembly would, in coming to decisions on substantive problems, keep in mind the need for this adjustment. No organization in this rapidly changing world of ours can hope to face successfully new trends and new developments unless its basic concepts can be modified speedily and effectively. Last year we had a World Youth Assembly. Although the people who attended this Assembly did not achieve any concrete results, they did demonstrate a need for the world Organization to be more responsive to the changing situation.
97.	The Prime Minister of India, while speaking at the last session of the General Assembly [1881st meeting], had referred to the unfinished revolution the completion of which is our common purpose. We have endeavored to fulfill purpose though we may not have succeeded fully in our efforts the world still continues to be in turmoil and to. be subject to natural and man-made disasters and tensions. In such an atmosphere of strife and ferment, the United Nations remains the only hope for States and peoples all over the world. The ideals of the Charter are not static norms to which we rededicate ourselves for form's sake every year. Each year representatives from Member countries assemble here to reaffirm their faith in the objectives and activities of this august Organization. It is strange, therefore, that in spite of these declared commitments, the conscience of mankind finds itself reticent and cautious in face of crises born of violations of the very principles of the Charter, violations which are at times deliberate and calculated. If this Organization is to survive and contribute constructively toward a new world in which the rights of the individual are safe, and his welfare ensured
in a just and honorable environment, it is essential that the United Nations assume a credible image on the basis of tangible activities, The foundations for this purpose were laid during the last commemorative session. It is for all of us now to see if we have the strength to build on these foundations. It is my earnest hope that representatives assembled in this session would give thought to this imperative necessity and act in concert to make this Organization an instrument of their common endeavor to achieve peace, stability and justice all over the world.




60.	 Mr. President, you come to the leadership of the General Assembly at a time when eastern Asia stands in the center of international concern. It is in that region alone that war still rages day by day. It is there that a burden of suffering, unparalleled elsewhere, weighs heavily on the conscience of mankind. And it is to Asia that our eyes will turn when we come to take decisions on the future of this Organization and the principles underlying its structure.
61.	It is right at such a time that an Asian statesman of high capacity and repute should preside over our deliberations. Israel wishes you success and pledges itself to your support. You will be fortified by the high example of your eminent predecessor, Edvard Hambro of Norway, and by the experience and patient skill of the Secretary-General, who is completing a full decade of service to the international cause.
62.	Last year the United Nations marked its twenty-fifth anniversary by an act of celebration. I suggested then that the occasion could have been more wisely used for scrutiny and self-criticism (1851st meeting]. There is a manifest decline in the influence of the General Assembly on the main issues affecting human welfare and destiny. Its resonance has diminished. The central currents of international life and policy flow outside its walls. The frustration arises, not so much from defects in the Organization's work, as from discord and contention amongst the Powers. Yet there are some causes which lie within our capacity of correction. I shall mention one.
63.	In the work of the United Nations there is a strong accent on public controversy and a relative neglect of private conciliation. A report by the Secretary-General 11 years ago contained a plea to give greater emphasis to the United Nations as an instrument for negotiation of settlements as distinct from this world debate of issues. The advice was not heeded. Debate, not negotiation, still dominates the United Nations practice. Resolutions are adopted in great numbers, but their texts bear witness to the parliamentary advantages of fragmentation rather than to a balanced view of rights or realities.
64.	For example: in a dispute in the Middle East between two parties one of which has a single vote and the other 16 or, in practice 40, the preordained triumph of automatic majorities has no moral value, little practical effect and a very short life in the world's memory. The same is true of the Security Council, a third of whose members have their diplomatic relations and their ethnic or sentimental predilections exclusively on one side.
65.	This difficulty would not exist if the organs of the United Nations would regard it as their main function to seek consensus which would include the interested parties. They would be better employed in encouraging agreement between the parties at issue, than in sharpening controversy between them by attempts at adjudication. In short, the United Nations should aspire to a diplomatic rather than to a parliamentary role. The test of achievement should be not how many resolutions we have voted but how many solutions we have advanced.
66.	And, indeed, wherever free, direct negotiation has taken place across the world in the past year there has been fruitful issue. There have been the treaties concluded by the Soviet Union and Poland with the Federal Republic of Germany, based, as Mr. Gromyko significantly told us, "on recognition of European realities, especially on the inviolability of frontiers" [1942nd meeting, para. 101]. He was referring to the frontiers established after the war by negotiation and agreement. There has been the four-Power agreement on Berlin where, as Mr. Gromyko again correctly said, it is now up to the two parties directly concerned "to complete the negotiations between them" [ibid., para. 98]. There has been the normalization of relations between Czechoslovakia and the Federal Republic of Germany. There has been direct contact between the United States and the People's Republic of China, to be followed at an early date by a meeting at the highest level of responsibility. The Paris talks on Viet-Nam, with the direct participation of all the parties at issue, have been accompanied by a constant de-escalation of the fighting. There is grave tension between India and Pakistan, as is evident from the general debate here earlier this week; but the two Governments have direct relations which they ca« apply to the solution of their differences. Many hearts are heavy at the reports coming from the boundary between Ireland and
Northern Ireland; but there is also news that the heads of Government concerned have met each other and agreed on a process of political reconciliation. In Washington, agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union are being signed today for modernizing the "hot line" and strengthening safeguards against accidental war.
67.	Is there no lesson to be drawn from the settlements reached and attempted this year? Surely they show that the air is alive with a spirit of innovation. Attitudes of hostility which once seemed to be an organic part of our generation's life are now yielding to a strong impulse for peaceful settlement. Above all we are learning lessons about the immense importance of communication. Time and again the decision of Governments to abandon their cold separation and make contact with each other develops from a procedural advance into a change of substantive positions and thence into binding agreements. The central themes of international life in 1971 are direct contact, the abandonment of traditional conflicts, and flexible, pragmatic negotiation.
68.	There is also a move away from dogmatic attachment to documents. If old formulas and texts have reached deadlock, new ones are sought. There is a particular recognition that after wars the need is to build new systems of relations and not to reproduce the conditions and situations out of which war erupted. This new empiricism affects the juridical domain as well. Governments which seriously seek peace do not hesitate to confer directly with Governments which they do not yet recognize and with which they have no legal relations,
69.	If there is frustration in the Middle East it is because our region is still the exception to all the positive rules which have been applied elsewhere. Whatever is tried successfully in other regions is avoided in the Middle East. Here alone there is still no contact between the parties at issue. Here alone the Governments which will have to live side by side with each other have still not come face to face at a table of negotiation. Here alone we are often told that the only way to get peace is to restore the situations which erupted in war. Here alone it is said in many places that the resumption of an important peace mission is wholly dependent on a single memorandum on which there is deadlock, and that there is no room for any innovation or any versatility of formulas and techniques.
70.	It is true, despite these failures, that the situation in the Middle East today is less explosive than a year ago. The flow of events has not been backward. The cease-fire along the Suez Canal has been effective, with rare and isolated exceptions, for 14 months. Israel does not propose to bring it to an end and Egypt would achieve nothing by violating it. Indeed, the only certainty in the Middle East is that resumed hostilities would serve no interest and advance no settlement. The absence of fighting along the Suez Canal line has released the Middle East and the world from the daily prospect of escalation involving the Soviet forces which were irresponsibly introduced into the' region with the effect of aggravating and enlarging a local tension. There has been a sharp decline in the strength and prestige of the terrorist groups and the pirate organizations that loomed so large a year ago. There has been peaceful movement across open bridges into Israel and the administered territories of scores of thousands of Arabs from neighboring Arab countries which are officially "at war" with Israel. Thus new patterns of coexistence have grown up between Israelis and Palestinian Arabs in daily life and work. Side by side with a violent and incendiary Arab rhetoric there seem to be here and there some beginnings of a greater realism in Arab thinking on the problem of Israel's sovereignty and Israel's deep roots in the life and history of the Middle East. Finally, there are three separate availabilities of good offices which, although not all in active course today, are mutually accepted by the parties: the Jarring mission; the good offices of the United States in pursuit of an agreement concerning the Suez Canal; and the intention of ten African Presidents to authorize four eminent heads of State to go to Jerusalem and Cairo on a mission of information and goodwill.
71.	Yet, with all these consolations the peace efforts are not sufficiently intense. The talks under Ambassador Jarring's auspices, which began in high promise in January, have been at a standstill since the end of February. An exchange of views and positions on a special Suez Canal agreement was inaugurated through the good offices of the United States in April. This effort is still underway, but its pace is slow. In discussing the obstacles to peace it would be easy, but sterile, to fall into recrimination. Nothing would be easier. One of the few things that all Members of the United Nations have in common is the ability to discuss each other's imperfections. Yet what mankind longs to hear is not how deadlocks arose, but how it is proposed to overcome them. The general debate will be well used if Middle Eastern States will give precise definition to what they are prepared to do in order to bring a peaceful settlement into view. All who seek an understanding of Israel's policies must come face to face with two elements in the national mood. There is a sharp preoccupation with security; and there is a vivid memory of the horror and dark peril from which we emerged four years ago.
72.	In reflecting on the theme of security, Israel cannot easily forget the immense loss and burden it has borne through the hostility directed against it for over two decades. Our danger, in 1967 was the climax, but not the whole story, of our predicament. No other people has had to live all its days with a mark of interrogation hanging over its collective and individual survival. Israel's insistence on genuine and stable security takes particular depth from the hideous legacy of Jewish massacre in the European slaughter-house. No people in history has undergone an experience of such tragic depth and scope. And no other State has grown for 23 years amidst such a comprehensive effort to deny it every breath of life.
73.	In particular, Israel's mind preserves a permanent and,, unfading image of the danger and solitude from which it emerged in the summer of 1967. To forget or ignore these memories is to renounce all true understanding of the Middle Eastern reality today. It was only by exceptional vigilance and cruel sacrifice that we repelled a monstrous design that would have ended our people's historic journey and cast all Israel's life and achievement into the flames. Maritime blockade, terrorist incursions, military encirclement, declarations of overt war, a frenzied torrent of threats and a formal announcement from Cairo that the battle was joined for Israel's destruction all these came
together in cumulative assault,"We recall the outrageous silence and apathy with which the Security Council, between one adjournment and the next, calmly observed the only attempt in modern history to wipe a sovereign State off the map of the world. Mr. Gromyko indulges his sense of humour when he tells us that guarantees by the Security Council are among "the firmest guarantees that can be imagined in the modern world" [ibid.., para. 135], The truth has Iden and is that, largely as a result of Soviet policy, the Security Council for 20 years has refused to defend any Israeli right including the right not to have its citizens killed, its ports blockaded, its existence threatened. The policy of the Security Council has been to refuse to adopt any decision of which a single word is unpalatable to the Arab Governments. It has thus surrounded every assault on Israeli lives, Israeli rights and Israeli security with indulgence. At the highest point of tension and of Israel's danger in May 1967, with Israel blockaded and encircled on every side, with all mankind gripped by the apprehension of approaching war, the suggestion of the Soviet Union was that the Security Council should go home and refuse to discuss such an "artificial" matter as the declaration of active war and the formal imposition of a blockade against a Member State. It is largely because of Soviet policy that the Security Council cannot be a guarantor of any Israeli rights. And the future development in the composition of the Security Council, however essential for other reasons, is bound to emphasize its inability to guarantee or even to express an Israeli interest, whatever the majority of its members may think or say.
74.	There are few effective guarantees of peace beyond those inherent in the nature of the peace itself. The greatest danger is lest through lassitude of spirit or impatience or imprecision of diplomatic craftsmanship we again revert to fragile, false and ambiguous solutions, which carry in them the seed of future wars.
75.	But the work of peace, however complex, must be attempted. Israel's deepest aspiration is to take part in a new deployment of energies in the service of a peaceful order of relations in the Middle East. Accordingly I ask the crucial questions: Is the slow rhythm of the peace efforts inevitable? Can nothing be done or at least attempted to set some dialog in swifter motion? Do Israel's policies offer openings through which roads to peace can be discerned and actively explored? My answer is that if the Arab States, and especially Egypt, sincerely desire an honorable and lasting peace, there are many roads leading to that goal.
76.	The first road lies in a Suez Canal agreement. There are many reasons for giving priority to this at attempt. A sudden transition from a conflict of more than two decades to a total settlement has proved difficult. It may be more rational to expect progress by stages. Each stage would bring about a solution of a specific problem while opening the way to further agreements and thus to final peace.
77.	The Suez Canal sector calls urgently for disengagement. It is there that the regional tension is compounded by the military presence of a great Power. Disengagement of forces here is an urgent international interest.
78.	The President of Egypt proposed on 4 February an attempt to open the Suez Canal ahead of a total settlement.
Israel's Prime Minister responded on 9 February. Both Governments subsequently agreed that the United States should use its good offices to explore the prospect. We therefore have an agreed objective and an agreed modality. , We believe that the effort to bridge the gulf between the positions of the parties should be pursued in the general interest of peace. If agreement cannot be reached on such a clearly defined issue in which Egyptian advantage is so strong it would appear to be even more difficult to advance in one step towards an over-all settlement in which all the complex issues would Ml into place. But the contrary is also true. A concrete result in this matter will accelerate and inspire negotiation and agreements on other issues. The peace effort will acquire momentum. It will be surrounded for the first time by an air of confidence and promise.
79.	Having been invited to give its views on this matter, Israel developed a proposal that an arrangement be agreed upon with a view to the opening of the Suez Canal to be cleared and operated by Egypt. Israel would make a withdrawal of its forces from the water-line to an agreed distance. The fighting would not be resumed. Egypt would clear and open the Canal. It would be agreed that there be free passage for all ships and cargoes, including those of Israel. Effective and agreed supervision procedures would be established. Means of deterrence against the danger of violation of the agreement would be assured. The agreement would stand on its own feet, but it would not affect or annul the undertakings which the parties gave in August 1970 to hold discussions under Ambassador Jarring's auspices in conformity with his mandate under Security Council resolution 242(1967). The line to be held by Israeli forces in accordance with that Canal agreement would not be considered final. When agreement on a final boundary is reached in the framework of the peace settlement Israeli forces will withdraw to it.
80.	We hope that Egypt will give this proposal the detailed and careful consideration which seemed to be its intention in April. It represents far-reaching concessions on Israel's part. It involves a movement from the cease-fire line ahead of peace. It mitigates the accepted legitimate principle that no withdrawal need take place ahead of a contractual and mutually agreed peace. The prestige, benefits and revenues from the Canal, the possible return of three quarters of a million people who live near the Canal in peaceful times, as well as the crossing of the Canal by Egyptian civilian personnel, would all be Egyptian, not Israeli, gains. A new impetus would be given to the Jarring mission, which is now in abeyance. The undertakings which I have given refute the idoa that the Canal agreement would be the last word. On the contrary, its conclusion and observance would create a favorable channel for further agreements.
81.	It is true that neither Egypt nor Israel would attain its final objective in this interim framework, but Egypt's right to present its claims in the over-all peace negotiations would remain intact, as would Israel's freedom to present its own proposals and reservations.
82.	A second road to peace lies through the resumption of negotiations under Ambassado. Jarring's auspices. Israel agreed to resume these talks in January 1971 despite Egypt's refusal to rectify its violation of the missile- standstill agreement. At a meeting with the Prime Minister and myself in January, Ambassador Jarring was requested to communicate to the Governments of Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon a list of principles which, in our view, should be embodied in the peace agreements to be concluded and signed between Israel and each of the Arab Governments concerned. These principles were, at first, vehemently "ejected by the Egyptian Government. Subsequently, on i 5 February, the Government of Egypt commented f A/8541, annex II] on an aide-memoir submitted a week before by Ambassador Jarring [A/8541, annex I], It did not accept Mr. Jarring's precise formulations on navigation in the Suez Canal, on the Straits of Tiran, nor indeed on the definition of the scope of withdrawal. But the Egyptian reply did contain an expression of readiness to enter into a peace agreement with Israel provided that all the Egyptian terms for the agreement were met. One of these terms was the total withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Sinai peninsula, the Gaza strip and all territories beyond the armistice line existing on 4 June 1967.
83.	In its reply on 26 February 1971 [A/8541, annex III] the Israel Government viewed favorably the expression by Egypt of its readiness to enter into a peace agreement with Israel, and reiterated that it was prepared for meaningful negotiation on all subjects relevant to a peace agreement between the two countries.
84.	Why then are the Jarring talks in abeyance? The reason is plain. The Security Council resolution, 242(1967), requires that the withdrawal and boundary clauses of the peace agreement, like all its other provisions, must be determined through agreement, which of course implies negotiation. Egypt declines to hold any dialog or negotiation whatever on this point. It lays down its own position as an ultimate condition to which Israel must submit before negotiation begins. Indeed it is not clear why negotiation would be needed at all if the Egyptian view has to be accepted in advance. In a recent declaration of which President Sadat was a signatory, three Arab Governments, including that of Egypt, reiterated that there can be no negotiation with Israel, no conciliation and no bargaining over the Palestinian issue. This is a more recent and presumably more authoritative statement of Egypt's policy than the one that Mr. Riad, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, communicated to Mr. Jarring six months ago. Together with other declarations in the same mood and spirit, it raises the question whether the February memorandum has the significance that we chose to attach to it at that time.
85.	But on one point alone the February communication from Cairo and the Damascus tripartite statement are one: they both rule out the free, precise and detailed negotiation of the "boundary and withdrawal questions. Our policy is that, instead of cease-fire lines or armistice lines, we should establish secure, recognized and agreed boundaries as part of the peace-making process, and withdraw our armed forces to those boundaries once they are determined. It is important to break away from the temporary and unresolved territorial concepts which have prevailed since 1948 in order to develop for the first time a permanent structure of boundaries and security agreements.
86.	There is no need to be apologetic about the doctrine that peace boundaries may be different from armistice lines. The Arab Governments wrote into the 1949 Armistice Agreements a provision stating that the armistice lines are not the final boundaries and these must be worked out by agreement in the transition to peace. We are now embarked on that transition. Israel's size and strength are smaller than those of the European Powers which insisted on secure and agreed boundaries after the Second World War; but the right to negotiate boundaries that would release Israel from a chronic and desperate vulnerability belongs to it as to every other sovereign State. In this matter we are not in a position of juridical defense.
87.	I shall summarize under three headings the reasons and justifications which give Israel the right to have negotiation on boundaries and security arrangements. The first, as I have already pointed out, is the provisional character of the lines now held as well as those which existed before. Several years before the 1967 war the Deputy Foreign Minister of Egypt correctly said: "There is no legal boundary between Israel and Egypt but only a line that was fixed in the pursuance of the Armistice Agreement."
88.	On 31 May 1967 the representative of Jordan said in the Security Council:
"There is an Armistice Agreement. The Agreement did not fix boundaries; it fixed a demarcation line. The Agreement did not pass judgment on rights political, military or otherwise. Thus I know of no territory; I know of no boundary." 
89.	A second and more contemporary reason in support of Israel's claim to a negotiation on withdrawal and boundaries lies in the Security Council's resolution 242 (1967), which has been accepted by some Arab States and by Israel and which is the constitutive document of the Jarring mission. That resolution was adopted after all attempts to require a withdrawal to the 4 June armistice lines had been defeated by vote or discarded for lack of support. The term "secure and recognized boundaries" was an innovation in the United Nations vocabulary. It first appeared in a United States draft resolution submitted on 7 November 1967 and later embodied in a United Kingdom draft  which was presented for unanimous vote. I must state with full solemnity and knowledge that Israel's adherence to the Security Council resolution and acceptance of the Jarring mission were secured on the most explicit understanding that the resolution offered an opportunity to negotiate agreements on boundaries and withdrawal. Secretary of State Rogers stated for the United States in October 1969:
"Those boundaries were armistice lines not final political borders. The rights, claims and positions of the parties in an ultimate peaceful settlement were reserved by the Armistice Agreements. The Security Council resolution neither endorses nor precludes those armistice lines as the definitive political boundaries."
90.	In a public statement on 12 July 1970, Mr. Sisco, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, declared that he had taken an active part in the formulation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). He added:
"That resolution did not say withdrawal to the pre- June 5 lines. The resolution said the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final secure and recognized borders. In other words the question of the final borders is a matter of negotiation between the parties."
91.	The United Kingdom Government, which sponsored Security Council resolution 242 (1967), put itself on record on 17 November 1969, when its Foreign Secretary, Mr. Michael Stewart, was asked:
"What is the British interpretation of the wording of the 1967 resolution? Does... it... mean that the Israelis should withdraw from all territories taken in the late war? "
He replied:
"No, Sir. That is not the phrase used in the resolution. The resolution speaks of secure and recognized boundaries. Those words must be read concurrently with the statement on withdrawal." 
A month later, on 9 December 1969, in the House of Commons he said:
"... There is reference, in the vital United Nations Security Council resolution, both to withdrawal from territories and to secure and recognized boundaries. As I have told the House previously, we believe that these two things should be read concurrently and that the omission of the word all' before the word 'territories' is deliberate."?
I repeat: "... the omission of the word 'all' before the word 'territories' is deliberate."
92.	It was in the light of these clear undertakings that the Israel Government informed Mr. Jarring in August 1970 that it accepted the Security Council resolution 242 (1967) for implementation in all its parts and that on the establishment of a just and final peace in accordance with the resolution it would withdraw its forces from the cease-fire lines to secure and recognized boundaries to be determined in the negotiations.
93.	The political and juridical aspects of the questions to which I have referred are the expression^ a deeper, more concrete reality. Israel does not have a policy of expansion or annexation. In the negotiations on boundaries and withdrawals it will seek those modifications which are essential to ensure security and to prevent another war.
94.	ihe war of 1967 did not arise exclusively from the vulnerability of the armistice lines. But there is no doubt that some topographical and strategic situations were a permanent temptation to assault. If they are not corrected and adjusted Israel, on withdrawing from the cease-fire lines, would find itself again in a position of intolerable vulnerability. There could be no more horrifying error than to revert, through lack of precise and detailed negotiation, to a territorial structure and security balance capable of reproducing the peril which exploded four years ago.
95.	In the framework of a peace settlement with Egypt, Israel would withdraw from the cease-fire lines. We have never asserted that in a condition of peace it would be necessary for our troops to remain in all of the Sinai peninsula or even in most of it. But there are vital interests affecting security, peace and navigation which impel us to reserve the right to attempt in the peace negotiations to secure a contractual basis for such continued presence as is necessary to protect security and navigation. There are several juridical expressions and precedents for such an arrangement. Our emphasis is on practical security conditions, not on any particular juridical formula. The post-war map of the world is replete with instructive parallels. The peace treaties in Europe and Asia did not bring about a return to the exact military and territorial dispositions that existed before.
96.	Now Israel does not ask Egypt to accept any of its positions as a condition of negotiation. The proposal for the withdrawal of all Israeli troops to the previous positions is legitimate as an Egyptian proposal. It is equally legitimate for Israel to insist on an opportunity of free negotiation in which its own reservations and counter-proposals could be made. And our request from the world community is modest. We do not present specific Israeli proposals for endorsement by other Governments; we ask only that our right to negotiate the issues vital to our future, to our peace and to our security, should not be cut off in advance.
97.	Our position, then, is this: We have taken note of the Egyptian proposal on withdrawal. Israel would withdraw its armed forces from the Israel-United Arab Republic ceasefire line to the secure, recognized and agreed boundaries to be established in the peace agreement. Now that both parties have presented their basic positions, they should pursue their negotiations in a detailed and concrete manner without prior condition to cover all the points I listed in their respective documents with a view to concluding a peace agreement. I continue to adhere to the view which I expressed at the twenty-third session of the General Assembly in October 1968 that
"It is possible to work out a boundary settlement compatible with the security of Israel and the honor of
Arab States	The majority of the United Nations have
recognized that the only durable and reasonable solutions are agreed solutions serving the common interests of our peoples. The new peace structure in the Middle East, including the secure and recognized boundaries, must be built by Arab and Israeli hands" [1686th meeting, para. 111].
Thus if Egypt will present its position for negotiation without the unprecedented request for Israel's acceptance of it in advance, we shall be ready for detailed and concrete negotiation on all the matters mentioned in the Egyptian memorandum of 15 February and the Israeli document of 26 February,
98.	Effective and versatile conciliation must include a capacity to move from one direction to another in a tireless pursuit of peace. In March 1968, Ambassador Jarring suggested a formula for the convening of meetings between the parties in Nicosia on the basis of an agreed term of reference. Egypt rejected that proposal. Those concerned with the conciliation effort did not say that the mission had to be held in suspense until Egypt gave a positive reply to something which its policy did not then allow it to endorse. It would be wrong now to affirm that such a vital objective as the establishment of a negotiated peace between Israel and Egypt will never be possible except on the basis of a working paper which did not happen to secure the agreement of the parties. Egyptian-Israeli peace is too great a cause to be tied and tethered for all time to a single optional memorandum. If Egypt will agree to pursue negotiations in a detailed and concrete manner without prior conditions on all the points listed in the Israeli and Egyptian memoranda of February 1971, this road to meaningful negotiation will lie open,
99.	There are other roads to peace. The Suez Canal agreement and the discussion of an over-all settlement are not the only options available for negotiation. The problem of refugees requires a broad acceptance of regional and international responsibility. We have therefore proposed the convening of a conference of Middle Eastern States, together with Governments which have contributed to refugee relief and the specialized agencies of the United Nations, in order to chart a five-year plan for the solution of the refugee problem and the integration of refugees into productive life.
100.	This problem would now be considered against the background of some alleviating developments in recent months. There is a growing disillusion with the irredentist pretensions of the terrorist groups and the air pirates. The dividing wall which once prevented all human contact between Israelis and Palestine Arabs is falling. It is true that this is due so far to Israeli initiative. Last year not a single Israeli set foot in any Arab land, but 110,000 Arabs from countries "at war" with Israel came into contact with Israel across the open Jordan bridges. An open frontier between Israel and its eastern neighbor similar to the community frontiers in Europe would do much to give human reality to a peace settlement, and indeed might help the settlement to be achieved.
101.	There is a fourth possibility. The problems of boundaries and security are usually considered to be the crux of the negotiation. But there are other unresolved matters in the memoranda presented by Egypt and Israel in February. At first sight there seems to be some proximity between the peace, non-aggression, recognition and navigation clauses suggested by the two Governments. On closer inspection the disparities are substantial, and could become crucial. We suggested in January and later in March that, it might be profitable to attempt to draft some of the clauses of the Egyptian-Israel treaty relating to the principles of peace. It is an accepted negotiating technique to begin with problems in which divergences are less broad and thus to create a favorable atmosphere in which to confront the more acute problems.
102.	There is a fifth road towards negotiating procedure and activity; it concerns the negotiating procedure, but its weight is intensively substantive and not at all procedural I have said that in the early months of 1968 Ambassador Jarring suggested meetings between the parties, under his auspices, in Nicosia, in accordance with a text setting out the terms of reference for the conferences. On 10 March 1968, Ambassador Jarring informed me that Egypt had rejected that proposal. As the Secretary-General's report of 4 January 1971 reveals, Dr. Jarring "was informed of Israel's official acceptance, without conditions, of the text". 
103.	Now that was the negative turning-point in the history of the Jarring mission. Since then it has been limited, through Egyptian insistence, to a bizarre procedure under which Israeli documents are presented to Ambassador Jarring, and by him to the Egyptian representative. If the Israel document contains the words "for communication to the Government of Egypt", the Egyptian representative refuses to take it into his h?nds; or if he has inadvertently accepted its delivery, he comes back to relinquish it with panic-stricken haste as if it were a hot coal. The Israel document is then divulged by the Egyptian representative to the press, accompanied by a burst of invective. Egyptian replies are published without any hint of an intention to communicate them to Israel. The Egyptian position is that Israel may not talk to Egypt directly, may not talk to Egypt indirectly and may not communicate anything to Egypt in writing.
104.	If no other method is available my Government will communicate its views to Egypt by whatever channel or technique is possible. But we cannot conceal our conviction that there is an element of farce in the idea that the word "negotiation" can honestly be applied to the extraordinary procedure followed so far. How can a Government which alleges that it wants a peace agreement with Israel refuse to negotiate the terms of that agreement by a rational method of contact? To say that one is prepared to enter into a peace agreement but not to meet or negotiate even under international chairmanship is to make a mockery of the international community. One thing is clear: No international agreement has been reached on any subject between any States at any time by the methods to which the Jarring mission has so far been confined through Egypt's insistence.
105.	I am convinced that the strongest chance of breaking out of the deadlock lies in a transition to a rational negotiating procedure. The hour is ripe. The gap between the parties is wide, but may not be impossible to bridge. Negotiation is the agent which would transform the potentiality into action.
106.	One of the most important things said about the Middle East in recent days is Sir Alec Douglas-Home's statement yesterday that "distrust... of this depth ... cannot [easily] be removed by long-distance correspondence" [1944th meeting, para. 98] and that "those who are in confrontation must actively help to promote a dialog'' [ibid., para, 97], If all those who hold that view would express it with equal candor, an international movement in favor of abandoning the illusion of long- range correspondence would come to effective expression.
107.	There is no weight or value in. the argument that the Arab Governments would be negotiating from weakness if they accepted direct contact under international chairmanship. Their point of reference would be, not the military situation, but the political forum in which the Arab side would speak from a position of numerical and geographical predominance,
108.	I therefore propose to the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Riad, that we take our guidance from the spirit which inspires the international life of our ags. Let us meet here this month under the auspices of the United States to discuss the details and! principles of a Suez Canal settlement; or under the chairmanship of Ambassador Jarring to discuss the establishment of peace in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) on the basis of our respective memoranda of February 1971. Let us break out of devious procedures and sterile polemics into a new vision and a new hope.
109.	In a recent statement the President of Egypt, Mr. El-Sadat, declared that he would sacrifice a million men to achieve a military victory. What he and we should be considering is how to ensure that the 33 million Egyptians, tin 3 million Israelis and the other millions in the Middle East are saved i.om sacrifice and preserved for the construction of a peaceful regional order. The task will not be served by war or by threats of renewed hostilities which command our vigilance but which are, in effect, an echo of ill-fated bombast in the recent past. Nor will our task be fulfilled by living out the rest of 1971 in ineffective debate or inflammatory resolutions. The Arab States may have enough voting strength to secure the adoption of virulent, unbalanced texts or to give a biased interpretation to the Security Council resolution, which would then cease to be an agreed documentary consensus available as a basis for the ultimate and inevitable negotiation. But what will it profit to gain an Assembly majority, but to lose Israel's adherence to a set of principles common to it and to neighboring States? The roads to peace do not have their starting point in war or in polemical debate. They branch out from one of the many avenues and by-ways of negotiation on which we shall meet Egypt when its choice is made and declared.
110.	This session could mark a recuperation in the career of "the United Nations if the Organization made this the year of negotiation, the year of negotiation in all outstanding disputes. It has other tasks. The Second United Nations Development Decade can be saved from the frustrations of the First if the advanced countries turn aside from the perils of monetary war towards an expanding vocation in the development of emergent societies.
111.	And in the last resort this Organization will be judged according to the role it has played in defense of human welfare and dignity, The call of kinship and of dark memory will bring us to refer at appropriate stages in Committees and in the plenary meetings to two dramas of great intensity and pathos: the Jews of the Soviet Union, of whom some have reached us but of whom the great majority are still restrained from the expression of their cultural identity and their national hope; and the captive remnants of helpless Jews in Arab lands, especially in Syria, whose anguished voice cries out for liberation from terror and despair. This Organization, for all its imperfections, is still the only organized expression of the planetary spirit. It may be bearing within itself the seed of a universal order in which men will come together to save their environment from pollution, their society from disruption, their economy from decline, their life from the stress and grip of violence. There is no room for fatalistic despair. There is still time for men and nations to be, inspired by a new and spacious vision and to invest their thought and labour in defence of the "common heritage of mankind".




164.	 Mr. President, it is a particular pleasure to congratulate the new President of this Assembly. You come to us, Sir, as one of the most distinguished statesmen of South-East Asia, from a great country of that region, and with qualities that will serve us admirably during one of the most important assemblies in the history of this Organization. It is also a pleasure for me to pay a tribute to the previous President of the Assembly, Mr. Hambro of Norway, who presided so well over a session marking another significant juncture in the lifetime of the United Nations.
165.	This session of the General Assembly, meeting under the guidance of an Asian President, is one which will be marked by a degree of preoccupation with matters relating to that most populous of regions which has not always been characteristic of this Organization. For New Zealand, a country of the South Pacific on the fringes of Asia but a full partner, for all that, in many aspects of the increasingly intensive co-operation among the great majority of countries in this region, this will be welcome.
166.	It means that in the first instance the Assembly will, as we hope, at last come to grips in a realistic manner with the position which the People's Republic of China should occupy in the Organization. My Government, along with most of those Governments represented here today, has welcomed the hopeful developments which have taken place in relationships with Peking since the Assembly last met, and particularly during the last few months. The announcement of President Nixon's intention to visit China at some time before May of next year and the preliminary talks which preceded that announcement, no less than the actual visit when it eventuates, have the quality of events which leave their mark on the history of human affairs. They portend the end of an era. Whether it is the beginning of a new order depends on the efforts which will be made by all concerned. For the present we are in a period of transition and of adjustment of relationships which calls for
difficult decisions on the part of Governments, but particularly on the part of those whose future is intimately bound up with the destinies of Asia.
167.	For many years my Government, which in 1961 proposed the inclusion in the Assembly's agenda of an item on the question of the representation of China in the United Nations, has been concerned with the achievement of a solution to the problem of Chinese representation that would be both just and reasonable. We have spoken in favor of the seating in the United Nations of the People's Republic of China. We have also wished to see fair recognition of the reality of the situation, which is the existence of two Governments in full control of their respective territories. Here there is a separation of authority as distinct as there is in the case of what are known as the "divided States", but with the essential difference that the entity, China, is already a Member of the United Nations. The Secretary-General has argued strongly in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization that the admission of the divided countries should not be linked to the problems resulting from their division [Aj8401IAdd.l, para. 104]. My delegation may not be entirely convinced that that is so, but since the argument has been advanced, a fortiori it must apply in the case of two Governments, in control for two full decades of different parts of the territory of what was a founding Member of the United Nations. The legitimacy of either Government is not a matter for the Assembly to determine in the circumstances of the case, where both Governments enjoy wide recognition among United Nations Members. It is for the Assembly rather to make clear that a resolution of the basic conflict lies with the parties concerned, while providing for the seating of both in the Organization.
168.	This is fair; this is reasonable; this is, above all, common sense. That is why my Government, which shares with many others the desire to see the representatives of Peking seated in the Assembly and exercising the powers which should fall to them in the Security Council, has joined in sponsoring a proposal to this effect[A/L.633].
169.	Great Powers have great capacity to achieve good, or equally to inflict damage. Rapprochements involving great Powers must always be welcomed for the relaxation of tension which should accompany them. Yet it is important, and it is the responsibility of this Organization to ensure, that the rights of the less powerful should not be ignored or swept away in the interests of an accommodation among super-States, or between a super-State and the rest of the world community. My delegation believes that this consideration is one to which due weight should be given when the Assembly embarks upon the substantive discussion of this problem.
170.	It is, indeed, the peculiar quality of the General Assembly that, as the Secretary-General stated in paragraph 95 of his introduction, it "offers the smaller and the medium Powers not only a voice, but also a way of influencing the course of events far in excess of what was previously available to them". This is a significant statement, like a number of others made in this year's
introduction, particularly in part one, to which I wish to pay a warm tribute.
171.	My Government believes that the smaller Powers, into whose ranks we have the pleasure of welcoming Bahrains Bhutan, Qatar and soon Oman, have a special role to play both within the United Nations and outside. They bring a different perspective to world affairs which can serve as a useful balance to the interests of larger Powers,, while in many cases they enjoy relationships with such Powers which enable them both to understand the objectives of the latter and to exercise some influence upon them.
172.	The necessity for this three-way relationship between the great Powers, small countries and international institutions has been dramatically evident in recent weeks in the international monetary situation. It is a fact of life we recognize, that the economic weight of the great industrial Powers has a major impact on molding the character of the international monetary system. In the present unstable situation it is the major Powers that must undergo the restructuring needed to restore equilibrium. Naturally it is those Powers that will have a major role in the negotiations that are necessary to lead to long-term international monetary stability.
173.	At the same time, it is essential that the great Powers recognize that -their economic decisions can profoundly affect the economic stability of the smaller nations, many of which do not have sophisticated monetary systems and the resilience to ride out major upheavals. I repeat what I said at the meetings in Washington last week that it is an unfortunate fact that recent measures taken by major countries which to them seemed reasonable arid legitimate-may have damaging repercussions on the economies of small nations whose problems were neither perceived nor discussed.
174.	New Zealand welcomes the improvement in the climate for constructive discussion. While we understand the reasons for the actions of the United States Administration, we firmly believe that all nations, large and small, that are intimately concerned with these events should consider each other's difficulties. We are confident that they will recognize the duty each has to the international community to reach a reasonable compromise before further serious damage is done not only to international trade but also to the institutions that have served us well since Bretton Woods. We are encouraged, therefore, that the International Monetary Fund unanimously recognized that, whereas the present international monetary situation contains the dangers of instability and disorder in currency and trade relationships, it also offers the opportunity for constructive changes in the international monetary system, and in particular it called upon its members to collaborate with the Fund and with each other in order, as promptly as possible, to establish a satisfactory structure of exchange rates, together with the reduction of restrictive trade and exchange practices.
175.	Among other problems confronting small countries is their position in world trade and in relation to large economic groupings, which may so easily develop marked protectionist characteristics. In this debate last year, the leader of the New Zealand delegation spoke of the threat which hung over New Zealand's economic future as negotiations were engaged on the entry of the United Kingdom, its largest export market, into the European Economic Community [1853rd meeting, para. 197]. He said that in a very real sense the role of regional groupings ia world trade was on trial in this test case. He also said that ft would be tragic if, as a result of enlarging the European Economic Community, one of the world's most efficient agricultural producers were to be driven to the wall.
176.	I owe it to this Assembly , and to the countries of the Community, as well as to the Government of the United Kingdom, to record on this occasion the satisfactory outcome of these negotiations from New Zealand's point of view. Having disposed of this area of uncertainty in its immediate trading future, New Zealand is now in a better position to plan ahead, to move forward on the basis of sound economic growth and to play its full part in world trade and development and, with it, in the Second Development Decade.
177.	Regional economic groupings are a fact of international life. They have much to offer to smaller countries by providing the advantages of a market-place of new dimensions. The development of wider opportunities for trade and development throughout many of the countries and territories of the South Pacific is one of the important goals sought by the Heads of State or Government of Western Samoa, Nauru, Fiji, Tonga and the Cook Islands, who joined with the representatives of Australia and New Zealand in the South Pacific Forum held in Wellington in August this year. A second such meeting will be held in Canberra in the first half of 1972, and preparatory work is under way among officials. Co-operation is envisaged over a wide range of fields of practical interest. Combined with the continuing work of the South Pacific Commission and the welcome and increasing commitment of United Nations agencies to the area, we believe these activities should have a significant impact at the development level.
178.	There was another aspect of the growing sense of South Pacific awareness at the recent meeting. This was the unanimous feeling of concern expressed by this group of small countries that, despite the opposition voiced over the years, they should still be faced with the intrusion, as they saw it, of a great Power into the area for the purpose of conducting atmospheric tests of nuclear weapons. Why, they asked, if the hazards are as slight as France claims, should it not test nearer home?
179.	In this and in other ways in recent months a growing impatience has been revealed among countries in and bordering the Pacific. An even wider range of concern has been shown in recent discussions in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the limits of National Jurisdiction. While we welcome the fact that this year's test series has been cut short after five explosions, this is apparently only a temporary relief. What we wait to hear is that this will have been the last series to be conducted in our Pacific area. In saying this, my
delegation is not unmindful of the arguments that France is not a party to the partial test-ban treaty; that it is, after all, only following the path of other nuclear Powers which continue to develop their potential through underground testing; that there is no agreement on measures of nuclear disarmament; and that the People's Republic of China also continues to test in the atmosphere. My delegation will advocate at this session, as it has done in the past, the ending of all nuclear testing, including underground testing. But meanwhile no atmospheric test can escape the condemnation of those who have signed the partial test-ban treaty and who constitute a great majority of this Assembly.
180.	The meeting of the South Pacific Forum to which I have referred brought together all the independent or self-governing countries of the South Pacific. Apart from Australia and New Zealand, none has a population of much more than half a million or a land area greater than 7,000 square miles, and the majority are decidedly smaller. Yet in every case, whether the country concerned had been a Non-Self-Governing or Trust Territory, the right to self-determination had been recognized and freely exercised, and the transition had been a peaceful one in what we like to think is the Pacific way. Nor, so far as New Zealand's remaining Non-Self-Governing Territories of Niue and the Tokelau Islands are concerned, will that right of free choice be denied when the peoples concerned wish to exercise it. The problems which remain, unlike those in some other parts of the world and notably southern Africa, do not relate to this principle: they are simply, in these tiny islands, the problems of size, resources and general viability. It has been a matter of disappointment to my delegation that the bodies concerned with questions of decolonization have not as yet fully studied the special problems inherent in such small Territories. Rather, they have been understandably anxious to assert the basic principles to which my delegation, having voted in favor of resolution 1514 (XV), also subscribes. My delegation has nevertheless been encouraged by the trend of the constructive discussion which took place this year in Sub-Committee II of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
181.	The Assembly will be interested to know that the New Zealand Government, which has long expressed its willingness in principle to receive a visiting mission, has during this year's consideration of Niue and the Tokelaus, invited the Special Committee to send a small mission to both Territories in 1972. It thus continues a pattern of co-operation with the United Nations in the field of decolonization which at different times has involved United Nations presence both in the former Trust Territory of Western Samoa and in the Cook Islands. It is confident that, when a mission of the Special Committee visits Niue and the Tokelau Islands next year, this will be an important element not only in ascertaining the attitudes of the local populations but also in deepening understanding in the United Nations of the conditions in these small Pacific islands. The Secretary-General has provided an excellent summary of the question in paragraph 304 of his introduction where, speaking of small Territories, he says:
".,. the problems involved in their decolonization are nevertheless complex and call for individual solutions which must stem from the full and freely expressed wishes of their peoples and, at the same time, take account of realities."
182.	Once the right to self-determination has been recognized, the search for a realistic solution to the problems of Non-Self-Governing Territories can begin and the United Nations can assist in the process. But there remain those Territories, in particular Angola, Mozambique and Portuguese Guinea, in respect of which that right continues to be denied; and in Southern Rhodesia the problem is overlaid with racial discrimination and apartheid-type policies which deprive large segments of the population of their most elementary human rights. Here, as on the even more arduous question of South. Africa itself, the approach in the United Nations must of necessity be a consistent one: no doubt must be left as to where the international community stands on the principles involved, and its condemnation must be firmly stated where these principles are denied.
183.	In determining its position on the various draft resolutions on questions relating to southern Africa which will be before the present session, the New Zealand delegation will wish to give full weight to this moral imperative. It was for this reason that New Zealand recorded an affirmative vote earlier this year in the Economic and Social Council on its resolution 1591 (L) on apartheid, on which it had previously found it necessary to abstain in the voting on draft resolution V in the Commission on Human Rights. It is at the same time impressed by the view expressed by the Secretary-General in the section of his introduction entitled "Concluding Remarks" where, in the light of his long experience, he states in paragraph 143:
"It is however a weakness when resolutions are adopted which have no prospect of implementation, and the authority and prestige of the world's greatest deliberative body is thereby eroded."
It will be our endeavor in our discussions with the sponsors of resolutions on this topic and during the formal deliberations on them, to ensure that these wise words are given full weight.
184.	New Zealand's view on the questions of apartheid and raciL? discrimination will be set out more fully under the appropriate items on the agenda. I should wish to place on record during this debate, however, my Government's stated intention to proceed to the ratification of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX)J as its major contribution to the International Year. For this purpose, the Government has introduced into the legislature a Race Relations Bill which is currently at the committee stage. We hope it will be enacted in time to allow ratification to take place before the end of this year. Our examination of the situation in New Zealand showed that, in practice as in law, substantial conformity with the provisions of the Convention already exists. A Race Relations Act, which establishes complete legislative compliance with this key international instrument, will nevertheless constitute an important landmark in the evolution of New Zealand's multiracial society, as well as an unequivocal rejection of all doctrines or political systems based on concepts of racial superiority.
185.	Racial discrimination is but one aspect, although a highly important one, of the broader problem of the defense and promotion of human rights. As New Zealand completes two successive terms of membership in the Commission on Human Rights, we can reflect on the gradual but definite progress which has been made. Looking back over the range of human rights instruments which the United Nations has developed over a longer period, we see legitimate grounds for satisfaction with the development of a substantial legal framework in this field. My delegation has considered for some years that what is now required is an institution which can assist in the promotion of human rights in order to enable the Organization and its Members to give effect to the commitments entered into under Articles 55 and 56 of the Charter. The proposed office of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights is, in the view of my Government, well conceived to meet this need. This office would provide, moreover, the means of exerting a positive influence on human rights questions, free from political considerations. Let us at this session finally come to grips with this issue. Let us discuss amendments to the terms of reference set out in resolution 1237 (XLII) of the Economic and Social Council so as to enable broad agreement to be reached. Let us strive to remove the doubts which a number of delegations have felt about this proposal. Agreement on this issue would represent an important achievement for this session and for the furtherance of respect for human rights everywhere.
186.	A major item involving human rights in the highest degree has not been separately included on the agenda of the present session, although the Secretary-General has dealt with it in cogent and eloquent terms in paragraphs 177 to 191 of the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization. I refer to the situation in East Pakistan.
187.	The upheaval that has taken place there, causing perhaps the largest refugee problem in modern times, cannot simply be ignored by the Assembly. The consequences that continue to flow from that tragedy have been beyond the resources of both India and Pakistan to cope with and still demand urgent international attention. The United Nations has therefore been called upon to assume an important role in focusing attention on the human desperation involved and in co-ordinating and channeling aid to alleviate the distress.
188.	New Zealanders have been concerned most at the human aspects of the problem the bloodshed and suffering and the far-reaching dislocation which the crisis has caused to the livelihood of both India and Pakistan. But we are also increasingly worried about its implications for the peace of the sub-continent. We have some understanding of the intensity of feelings that have led to this situation and that threaten to increase the human misery if a solution is not found soon, and we have some appreciation of the difficulties that have so far prevented a political solution from being achieved.
the problem. The humanitarian aspects were considered on two occasions this year in the Economic and Social Council. New Zealand took a part in having the question raised, because of the responsibility which we felt that body owed to the refugees themselves and to a shocked public opinion throughout the world. Those discussions served to emphasize, however, that in the absence of a durable political settlement very little can be achieved beyond meeting the immediate day-to-day needs of the refugees,
190.	Shortly after the discussion in the Economic and Social Council the Secretary-General drew the attention of members of the Security Council to the situation in East Pakistan and its implications for international peace and security. That action, in our view, was both timely and a proper exercise of the powers of initiative of the Secretary-General. My delegation wishes to pay a tribute to him for having taken this step and for having set forth at length in paragraphs 124 to 137 of his introduction a concept of the role and powers of the Secretary-General which my delegation takes this opportunity to endorse.
191.	In welcoming the Secretary-General's initiative in a public statement, the New Zealand Prime Minister, Sir Keith Holyoake, observed:
"The essential problem of reaching a political settlement in East Pakistan is one that only Pakistan's own leaders can solve.... But if one is to be reached a climate of confidence must be established., and this requires the co-operation of the Government of India. The Governments of India and Pakistan have so far acted with caution and restraint towards each other. Statements are, however, being made by political figures on both sides that cannot but undermine the positions of the two Governments and add to the tensions between them,"
192.	This deteriorating situation was described graphically by the Secretary-General in his message to the President of the Security Council when he said:
"... I have reluctantly come to the conclusion that the time is past when the international community can continue to stand by, watching the situation deteriorate and hoping that relief programs, humanitarian efforts and good intentions will be enough to turn the side of human misery and potential disaster".
193.	A durable solution can be arrived at only by negotiation and compromise between all the parties directly concerned, and not by further assertions of force. Substantial progress towards a settlement has so far not been achieved largely because of the tension that has developed in the area. That tension, in turn, has arisen in part from desperation at the apparent absence of any hopeful sign of a political settlement being reached in consultation with the elected representatives of East Pakistan. This is the crucial problem the Secretary-General was referring to when he spoke of "a series of vicious circles which largely frustrate the efforts of the authorities concerned and of the international community to deal with the vast humanitarian problems involved"[A/8401/Add.l, para. 184].
189. We have therefore been anxious to see that the United Nations should bring its influence to bear fully on
194. The United Nations has a heavy responsibility for maintaining international peace and security in the area
will not have fulfilled that responsibility simply by attending to the daily physical needs of the refugees, immense though these problems alone have become. As the New Zealand delegation said in the Economic and Social Council on 16 July, "the dictates of humanitarianism do not cease with the provision of food and shelter. They extend to the long-term future of the unfortunate refugees and particularly their right to return of their own free will to their homes in conditions which promise them a normal life as citizens participating fully in their society."9 It is in this area of the problem that the United Nations can exercise a beneficial restraining influence, encouraging the leaders on either side to seek an acceptable accommodation and to act out of a sense of broad humanitarian concern for the interests of the refugees themselves, on whom the greatest burden of all has fallen.
195.	I do not wish to labor, in connexion with the question of East Pakistan any more than in relation to the war in Viet-Nam and the widened Indo-China conflict, the failure of the United Nations to play any real part at the political level. The shortcomings of the Organization in the area of peace and security were widely discussed during the twenty-fifth anniversary session. There are a variety of reasons for this state of affairs, residing mainly in the will of Member States to use the Organization and their concept of their interests outside it.
196.	One element, however, which it should lie within cur power in this Assembly to rectify, is the state of the Organization's finances. This problem, arising from its involvement in peace-keeping activities, is intimately related to its future capacity in that area.
197.	We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his frankness in stating that "there exists no real basis for optimism or for the expectation that an over-all and comprehensive solution is imminent or likely to be found in the foreseeable future" [ibid., para. 119]. I submit, however, that we should nevertheless, during this session, face up to this complex of problems with all the seriousness that we can muster. My delegation, for one, is willing to see negotiations engaged on the basis put forward by the President of the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly [A/8497], More specifically, New Zealand, as a bond-holder, is prepared to see its bonds included in a negotiated package on the basis of a reduced face value, as well as to see waived such credits as might stand to it in the peace-keeping accounts of the Organization. It is New Zealand's expectation and hope that all other Members will join, in their various ways, in a united effort to save the Organization from the bankruptcy which is so clear and present a danger to it. This is surely a year when the United Nations is at the cross roads of history. Let us equip it for a vigorous future.
198.	I would like to join previous speakers in expressing our very high regard for the Secretary-General, U Thant, as he completes his final term of office. It was indeed a difficult inheritance to which he succeeded many years ago and he has performed with unexampled steadfastness,
9 This statement was made at the 1783rd meeting of the Economic and Social Council, the official records of which are published in summary form.
honor and devotion the essential task of holding this Organization together over the ensuing period. We have all expected much of, as well as imposed much on, our Secretary-GeneraL May I say for New Zealand that our debt of gratitude to him is very high indeed.




82.	 First of all, Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly of the United Nations and to wish you success in carrying out the responsible tasks which lie before you.
83.	The international situation in which the twenty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly has been convened is complex and variegated. There is undeniably much in it; which is new and which meets the aspirations of the peoples; but the opposite trends are strong and the world is not free from danger. The situation is shaped by the policies of States and is by no means simple.
84.	In analyzing the foreign policy of any State, what we have to determine above all else is whether that State regards the task of strengthening world peace as the focal point of its policy, or whether it gives preference to other objectives which may not correspond to the interests of peace and may even run counter to those interests,
85.	The position of principle of our socialist State on questions of foreign policy was already determined at the time of its inception. Since then, for over half a century, it has never deviated from that policy. It has always done everything in its power to consolidate the security of the peoples and to ensure respect for their rights. It has condemned wars of aggression and annexation and holds the banner of peace firmly in its hands. The Soviet Union will continue to use all its authority, all its resources, its policy and its ideology to influence the course of international events in the direction of peace among the nations.
86.	A policy aimed at worsening the situation and leading to tension, conflicts and international crises is organically alien to us and is rejected by the very nature of the socialist order. At the same time, we shall continue to resist all attempts to pursue such a policy against our country and against our allies and friends.
87.	The general line of the foreign policy of the USSR, which was evolved and bequeathed to us by Lenin, was confirmed and adapted to the circumstances of today by the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. The Congress carefully weighed and appraised the most important directions and trends of world developments and advanced a broad program of peace and peaceful co-operation.
88.	This program covers all the main aspects of the task of maintaining peace, from the elimination of existing hotbeds of war and the prevention of new conflicts between States to the implementation of the principle of collective security, from measures to ensure a military detente in the areas of the most dangerous confrontations to the prohibition of ail types of weapons of mass destruction, and from the final elimination of colonialism and racism to the development of mutually advantageous co-operation between States in solving major economic, scientific and technological problems.
89.	We make no secret of our feelings of satisfaction at the world-wide acclaim given to the program of peace and co-operation advanced by the Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. All those who show concern for peace, irrespective of their class and ideological outlook, consider this program to be constructive and realistic and to meet the interests of all, peoples. The Soviet Union's efforts in the sphere of foreign affairs are being concentrated on the preparation and execution of measures to give effect to the proposals contained in the program.
90.	Our country is acting in concert with the other socialist States in solving the problem of building a more stable world. Our alliance with them is firm, and the policy of its members is directed towards securing the most advantageous conditions for building up socialism and communism in their countries, a task for which the main prerequisite is peace.
91.	The foreign policy objectives of the socialist alliance coincide with the interests of all peoples and with the purposes solemnly proclaimed in the United Nations Charter. No one is more concerned than we are to ensure that the lofty principles of the United Nations are brought into effect through peaceful relations between States and peoples, .irrespective of their social systems and political structures.
92.	But the socialist countries neither claim nor want to monopolize the policy of peace. On the contrary, the wider the circle of States defending the cause of peace and actively helping to find solutions for acute international problems, the mora opportunities there will be to forge ahead and the greater will be the confidence in success, however difficult the road to stable security may be and whatever obstacles may have to be overcome.
93.	This circle of States has now widened, because the facts of our times are forcing all States into the realization that in spite of the social, political, economic or cultural differences between them, it is in their common interest to ensure that people can live in peace.
94.	The ways in which States express this realization may vary, but its meaning is always the same. It underlies the foreign policies of the socialist States. It is the main guideline of the policy of countries which call themselves non-aligned. It is manifested in the trends towards realism which have recently become more evident in the policy of a considerable number of other States which only a short time ago automatically adjusted their attitudes to the positions of the military blocs into which they had been drawn in the past. That is why in recent years the alienation and even antagonism between States belonging to different social systems has in a number of cases given way to relations based on mutual understanding.
95.	None of this can in any way eliminate the historic confrontation between socialism and imperialism or make less acute the struggle between the two opposing directions in world politics to which we have often referred from this important world platform. But the strengthening of the principle of peaceful coexistence as a real force of international development and the further redeployment of political forces on the international scene in favor of peace can shape to a large extent the relations between States.
96.	If the development of the situation in different parts of the world is compared from this point of view, then it is Europe that attracts most attention. On that continent, where both world wars began, where in the post-war years a dangerous and prolonged confrontation took place between two opposing political systems and two armed camps emerged, 'there are now signs of developments and trends towards a relaxation of tension.
97.	The recently signed Quadripartite Agreement on problems concerning West Berlin will serve to eliminate one of the most dangerous sources of tension and friction and to improve the atmosphere in an unhealthy area of European politics. The Soviet Union has long and consistently pursued this objective.
98.	As we know, neither of the German States participated directly in the negotiations between the four Powers,
but they were constantly consulted and much depended on them. It is now for the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany to complete the negotiations between them which are provided for in the four- Power agreement. We should like to express the hope that this stage of the settlement of the question of West Berlin will also be successful.
99.	Mutual understanding and agreement between two continental European Powers, the Soviet Union and France, has become one of the main pillars of peace in Europe. These relations were given considerable impetus by the Soviet-French Protocol on Consultations, which was signed a year ago  and which during this short time has proved to be an effective instrument of political co-operation. We are in favor of raising the relations between the two Powers to an even higher level, in the interests of European peace and international security.
100.	In the Federal Republic of Germany, the forces which evaluate the situation more soberly and have declared themselves in favor of a policy of peace and a peaceful future are showing more confidence than in the past and gaining the, upper hand. The objectives consistently pursued by the socialist States of Europe in their relations with the Federal Republic of Germany have thus become attainable.
101.	The treaties concluded with the Federal Republic of Germany by the USSR 3 and the Polish People's Republic,  which are based on recognition of European realities, especially on the inviolability of frontiers, meet the interests of all European States. We expect them to be ratified and to enter into force in the near future.
102.	Next on the list is the settlement of relations between the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, based on the recognition of the invalidity ab initio of the Munich agreement, and on the normalization of relations between the two countries on the basis of respect for the principles of sovereignty and equal rights in their relations among themselves and with other States.
103.	If the Federal Republic of Germany makes a final break with the disastrous legacy of its past in favor of a peaceful future, no one can cast doubt on the place it should occupy in Europe and in European policy. Another reason why this should be mentioned is the unceasing activity in the Federal Republic of Germany of those forces which look to the past instead of to the future and desire above all to turn West German foreign policy back to its former course of hostility against other countries and peoples, a course which endangers peace and holds oiit'fRT" prospects for the Federal Republic of Germany itself.
104.	We must dwell on yet another aspect of the question, one that has a direct bearing on the United Nations. The, fact that the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany are still not Members of the United Nations is a political anomaly. The reason for this does not
lie in any objective difficulty in solving this problem, but in the unrealistic, discriminatory attitude of certain Powers towards the German Democratic Republic. But the time is definitely past when some people pretended that this State did not exist and that they did not know what its correct name was.
105.	The German Democratic Republic has firmly established itself as a real and active component of the European system of States. To be more precise, it is no longer possible to imagine modern Europe without it. But since that is the case, it is time to remove the artificial obstacles which lie in the way of the admission of the German Democratic Republic to the United Nations. We are also in favor of the simultaneous admission of the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations.
106.	As we know, in the communique on the recent meeting between Leonid Dyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Mr. W. Brandt, Federal Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic declared their intention to promote that very solution of the problem.
107.	What has been and is being done in Europe is significant, but by no means exhausts all the outstanding problems. There are questions which all the European States must settle together, and that is the underlying idea of the well-known proposal of the socialist countries on the convening of an all-European conference on problems of security and co-operation, in which the United States of America and Canada could also take part.
108.	On meeting together, the participants in such a conference could achieve a great deal in the interests of consolidating peace in Europe. Renunciation of the use of force in relations between European States and the expansion of economic, trade, scientific and technical and cultural ties between all these States are requirements dictated by our times, and the solution of these problems should be within the capacity of the conference. This is now recognized by everyone, or nearly everyone, in Europe.
109.	The problem of convening an all-European conference is ripe for solution; this is now obvious, no one questions it, and the problem now is to move from the preparatory to the practical stage of the work.
110.	The problem of relaxing military tension in Europe also insistently demands solution. This is one of the most important problems. The military potential of the opposing sides in Europe has been growing for many years, and though neither the Soviet Union nor the socialist countries were responsible for this, 'they have been obliged to participate in the race. The existing political tension has been adduced as the reason, but we have always regarded this argument as dubious. Now that a certain relaxation may be observed in Europe, there is no longer any room for such assertions, if we wish to face the truth rather than try to base our policy on deception of the peoples.
111.	Reactions to the Soviet Union's proposal to begin negotiations on the reduction of armaments and armed forces in Europe show that many are in favor of this proposal. Accordingly, what we must do is set to work.
112.	The convening of an all-European conference and the progress made towards a military detente in Europe should bring us closer to the solution of the problem of eliminating military blocs in Europe. This would lead to a thorough and comprehensive improvement of the situation. Let the fervent advocates of the policy of military blocs not faint at the thought of such a proposal. While such blocs continue to exist, the danger of a military confrontation between States will also continue to exist.
113.	It may be difficult to achieve this goal at once, although the socialist countries have stated on more than one occasion that they would be prepared to agree forthwith to the elimination of military blocs, or, to begin with, of their military organizations. But even if we have to proceed step by step in this direction, the elimination of military blocs in Europe now seems to be attainable in principle, and this too is something new on the horizon of European politics.
114.	Of course, the task of improving the international situation is not limited to Europe. For all the importance of the relations between States in Europe and for all the influence of European events on the general world situation, the prevention of a new world war depends not only on them, but also on relations in general between States in all regions. When the United Nations Charter speaks of the obligation "to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples", it does not distinguish between European and Asian nations or between American and African nations. Universal peace can be based only on peaceful relations between all nations.
115.	The settlement and development of friendly relations between any countries calls for good will, mutual interest and common peaceful intentions on their part. When these conditions are present and when countries entering into closer relations with each other do so in the context of a common concern for the strengthening of international peace, it is possible to achieve results which benefit not only the countries in question, but the world as a whole.
116.	The treaties of friendship and co-operation which the Soviet Union recently concluded with the Arab Republic of Egypt  and with the Republic of India  may serve as examples. Both instruments are widely regarded as important stages in the development of friendly Soviet-Egyptian and Soviet-Indian relations, as well as significant factors in the general construction of a more stable peace. We are convinced that this is a correct appraisal.
117.	We attach great importance to the development of our relations with Italy, Canada, with which we have concluded a Protocol on Consultations, Algeria, Iran, Afghanistan and Finland, with such an important Asian Power as Japan and with other countries of Europe, Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania. We make no exceptions for anyone and our attitude towards the development of contacts and ties between other countries is the same: the closer these are, the more purposefully they are integrated in the general system of efforts to strengthen peace, the more the forces of aggression will be held in check and the greater will be the benefit to the peoples.
118.	Much has been said recently about the intended normalization of relations between the United States of America and the People's Republic of China. In principle we regard this as a natural development. Normal relations should exist between all States. So far as the position of the Soviet Union is concerned, we have always consistently opposed any unlawful action in respect of the Chinese island of Taiwan, any deprivation of the People's Republic of China of its legitimate rights in the United Nations, the concept of "two Chinas" and any notion of a "dual representation of China". This is our position of principle, and we shall uphold it at this session of the General Assembly.
119.	But the Soviet Union opposes now as before any policy which is directed against the legitimate interests and security ,of other States, including the Soviet Union, however such a policy may be camouflaged. In the past, States combined into many antagonistic groups, which led to international complications and sometimes even to wars. Yet in the end such actions always backfired against those States which had initiated and participated in them, whether they were large States or small. The generation of people who saw such combinations has not yet died out.
120.	The Soviet Union's approach to its relations with the United States of America is also based on the strengthening of peace. We attach due importance to these relations, being aware that they affect international affairs as a whole. The Soviet Union is willing to develop its political contacts and economic, trade, scientific and technical and cultural ties with the United States of America, just as it is with any other State. We are prepared to seek mutually acceptable solutions. But in doing so we are not prepared to adapt our principles in international matters, our firm policy of peace, to any considerations of the moment. The steps we take in our relations with the United States of America are always in keeping with our general line of action in the interests of peace. Speaking at the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev laid special emphasis on the following:
"We proceed from the premise that it is possible to improve relations between the USSR and the United States. Our position of principle with regard to the capitalist countries, including the United States of America, lies in the consistent and comprehensive practical implementation of the principles of peaceful coexistence, the development of mutually advantageous relations and, in the case of States which are prepared for this, co-operation towards the strengthening of peace, by making our relations with them as stable as possible. But we have to consider whether we are confronted by a sincere wish to solve problems at the negotiating table or by attempts to pursue a policy from a 'position of strength'."
121.	However great the power of the Soviet Union may be, we have never used it and never will use it to place our country above others. Nor do we generally accept the division of States into categories according to their sign or military might. The Charter of the United Nations is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of its Members and we fully subscribe to this principle.
122.	Violation of the principles of equal rights, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs and attempts by more powerful States to impose their will on those which they consider to be weaker inevitably lead to critical situations and conflicts. This is the course which is always followed by aggressors.
123.	Is this not essentially what is going on in Indo-China and the Middle East, which have been hotbeds of war for many years?
124.	Statements have been made recently in Washington concerning the intention to withdraw American troops from Indo-China. Information is published practically every week about the number of thousands by which the American forces have been reduced. But the war in Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia is continuing, and the scope of military operations even expands from time to time. The United States of America and its hirelings are continuing the war.
125.	The point is not the percentage of American soldiers in the area, but the number of local troops, and whether they are being trained, armed and sent into battle under orders from Washington. The point is that the United States of America should cease its military and political interference in the affairs of Indo-China and its efforts to impose an order of its own choosing in that area Ly force of arms.
126.	The world now understands full well that from the very outset, right was on the side of the patriots of Viet-Nam, Laos and Cambodia. Now that information which was formerly carefully concealed has become known, there is simply no more room for discussion about who unleashed the war in Indo-China and with what ends in view. It is also obvious whose fault it is that the Paris negotiations were brought to a deadlock.
127.	In these circumstances, the new proposals for the establishment of peace which have been advanced by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and have been supported by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam acquire even greater importance. These proposals are imbued with a constructive spirit and are directed towards finding a rational solution for the practical problems which arise.
128.	Not only the friends of the Viet-Namese people, but all those who can assess the situation objectively see these proposals as a realistic way out of the prevailing situation. But what is it about them that the United States of America does not like? Why does the United States of America continue the war when all the conditions for peace are there? Why is the bombing of the territory of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam continuing and being intensified of late, although as we know the cessation of this bombing in 1968 was a prerequisite for the beginning
of the Paris negotiations for. a political settlement? These are questions which arise from the logic of events, and they require an answer.
129.	Where the Soviet Union is concerned, our country, resolutely supporting the proposals for a peaceful settlement and pursuing its international duty, will continue to provide all the necessary support to the fraternal VietNamese people and to the peoples of and Cambodia in their legitimate struggle for their rights.
130.	Events in the Middle East centre round the same problem: will the legitimate rights of the Arab States which have suffered aggression be respected, will the territories annexed by force be returned, or will the policy of aggression be allowed to triumph?
131.	Israel and its protectors are obviously counting on the latter alternative. That is why they have paralyzed the mission of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General of the United Nations, who was entrusted with the task of promoting a political settlement in accordance with the well-known decision of the Security Council. That is why the consultations between the four Powers which are permanent members of the Security Council are just marking time, since to be effective they require the co-operation of all the participants.
132.	But Israel has miscalculated. The policy-makers of that country have made their expansionist schemes too evident to receive any support on the international scene. Now no one can believe the claim that Israel is defending its "existence". One by one, the false arguments with which Israel's rulers have tried to cover up the real objective of their policy have fallen to the ground.
133.	Israel has refused to relinquish the occupied territories until the Arab countries agree to put an end to the state of war, yet the Arabs are prepared to agree to this.
134.	Israel has insisted that a treaty of peace should be concluded and the Arab States do not object to this either, provided, of course, that all the occupied territories are returned to them.
135.	Israel has expressed anxiety about its security. It is now clear that, as part of a political settlement in the Middle East, the appropriate guarantees, including those of the Security Council, can be given. These are the firmest guarantees that can be imagined in the modern world.
136.	No one can now have any doubts: Israel does not want peace, or if it does, then it must be an annexationist peace. But this is contrary to the United Nations Charter and to the most elementary principles of international law, and must therefore be rejected.
137.	Israel's rulers apparently believe that since they have been able to hold on to the occupied territories for four years, that situation can be maintained indefinitely. But they must be aware of the alternative to a political settlement in the Middle East!
138.	Is the United Nations capable of contributing to the solution of the problem of a Middle Eastern settlement?
Yes, it will be capable of this if it does not limit itself to adopting yet another resolution expressing pious hopes unsupported by practical measures and if it makes use of all the possibilities afforded it by the United Nations Charter.
139.	The Soviet Union wants to see peace in the Middle East. It will continue to support the Arab States which have suffered aggression and their efforts to liberate their territories. The just cause of the Arab peoples, including the people of Palestine, must prevail.
140.	Indo-China and the Middle East are not the only sources of military danger. In some other parts of Asia tension is not only not declining, but is even increasing. The situation in the area of the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent is becoming increasingly complex. It must be admitted that India has cause for concern at the turn which events have taken in East Pakistan. The flow of refugees into India has given rise to serious difficulties and problems which are not only economic. We are convinced that a political settlement of the problems which have arisen in East Pakistan is the only means of achieving a general relaxation of tension in that region. Moreover, all the States of the region must be associated with such a settlement. The refugees must be returned to East Pakistan, and this will become possible only when their safety there is ensured. The present situation in the area is acute, and this is not merely a domestic problem. The Soviet Government would like to express the hope that this situation will not lead to a military conflict between the States of the region an.: that restraint and reason will prevail.
141.	The peoples of Asia need lasting peace and a situation in which their resources and efforts are not dissipated in conflict, but are directed towards the solution of social and economic problems on which the raising of their standard of living, of their economy and culture, primarily depends.
142.	It will be recalled that the Soviet Union put forward the idea of establishing a system of collective security in Asia which would ensure a state of stability on that continent. Time and effort may be needed to put that idea into practice, but the situation which has arisen in Asia requires that such efforts should be made and should be pursued consistently.
143.	Another essential condition for normalizing the situation in Asia is to put an end to interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people. The United Nations, for its part, should stop serving as a screen concealing the foreign occupation of South Korea. That is the purpose of the proposals submitted to the General Assembly by a number of socialist and non-aligned States concerning the withdrawal of United States and all other foreign troops from South Korea and the dissolution of the so-called United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea. We can only regret that the consideration of these questions, which require immediate solution, has been deferred until the next session of the General Assembly. Such an approach in no way helps to reduce tension in the Korean area. On the other hand, we note with satisfaction that during the discussion of the question whether the items concerning Korea should be included in the agenda of the current session of the General
Assembly, some 30 countries spoke against the clumsy maneuvers of those who are afraid of a broad consideration at this session of the topical questions of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and of the dissolution of the so-called United Nations Commission.
144.	If we are to choose an area of international relations in which the interests of all States coincide and in which an impulse by the United Nations is particularly necessary to speed up progress, such an area is that of questions relating to the cessation of the arms race and to disarmament.
145.	The arms race is fraught with new and unknown dangers and its adverse effects on the life of our society are now more profound and more dangerous than ever before. During the post-war years, the money spent on armaments has been several times greater than the total annual national income of all the developing countries in the world. This waste of material and intellectual resources is taking place at a time when many millions of people have no bread to satisfy their hunger and no roofs over their heads to shelter them from rain and cold and when over one third of the population of our planet are illiterate.
146.	It would be wrong to say that nothing has been done to check the arms race. Nuclear weapons tests in the air, in outer space and under water have been prohibited, the proliferation of these weapons among States has been stopped, and the siting of weapons of mass destruction in outer space, on celestial bodies and on the sea-bed and the ocean floor has been prevented. The conviction is growing that the solution of the problem of banning underground nuclear tests can no longer be postponed. The ideas of the creation of nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world and of the elimination of foreign military bases in the territories of others are gaining increasing support.
147.	Efforts for the prohibition and destruction of bacteriological weapons are proceeding in the right direction. Negotiations for an appropriate convention are nearing conclusion. This should be an important practical step not only in limiting the arms race, but also in actual disarmament. We are dealing here with the elimination of one specific type of weapon and, moreover, a weapon of mass" destruction. The task of also prohibiting and eliminating chemical weapons lies ahead.
148.	There has been growing awareness recently of the need to take measures to prevent the accidental occurrence or deliberate provocation of incidents involving the use of nuclear weapons. This purpose is served by the agreement reached recently between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America.
149.	The talks between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the limitation of strategic arms are continuing and are now concentrated on the preparation of an agreement on anti-missile systems. Unless the expansion of anti-missile defense is halted now, a chain reaction Of competition between offensive and defensive weapons will inevitably take place, as it did in the past between naval armor and the artillery shell, the difference being that this competition would be immeasurably more dangerous and more costly.
150.	The successful outcome of these talks would serve the interests of the peoples of both the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America, as well as the cause of strengthening universal peace. In view of the increasing importance of the talks, the Soviet side is intensifying its efforts to reach agreement, which must of course be based on the principle of equal security. But the success of the talks also depends to the same extent on the other side.
151.	Achievements in limiting the arms race are only the first steps towards disarmament. However important they may be, to stop there would be to shirk the solution of the basic problem. And we are convinced that, from the point of view of what is possible, it can be solved. The whole question is whether there Is a desire for such a solution.
152.	The Soviet Union recently advanced a proposal to convene a conference of the five Powers possessing nuclear weapons-the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United States of America, the People's Republic of China, France and the United Kingdom-with a view to examining questions of nuclear disarmament. One of the nuclear Powers we approached, France, supported this Soviet initiative. But then another announced its opposition, whereupon the remaining two hastened to declare that in the existing circumstances the convening of a conference of the five nuclear Powers had become an "academic'' question.
153.	The Soviet Union does not consider that the other nuclear Powers have said the last word. All those who view matters realistically understand that nuclear disarmament can be achkved only with the participation and agreement of all five iiuclear Powers and that they cannot absolve themselves of this responsibility.
154.	A radical solution of disarmament problems will, of course, call for the united efforts of all States, irrespective of the size of their territories and populations, the level of their military might and their economic potential. The Soviet Government believes that further intensification of efforts to achieve disarmament would be promoted by the convening of a world disarmament conference in which all the States in the world would participate, and that this question should be examined at the current session of the General Assembly. The relevant item has been included in the Assembly's agenda at our proposal fA18491J.
155.	In the not-too-distant past, States have already approached the question of convening a world disarmament conference, but for various reasons it has so far proved impossible to hold such a conference. The general political situation is now more conducive to this.
156.	It is essential to make the most of these developments, bearing in mind the fact that, although during the post-war years disarmament talks have been conducted in the widest variety of places, all States have never yet gathered together to discuss disarmament questions. Yet +his problem affects them all without exception.
157.	The universality of the world conference and the participation of all States might contribute to its success.
158.	The tasks before the world disarmament conference would of course be enormous. That Is why it should perhaps become a permanent forum, or rather one operating over a long period. Its sessions might be convened periodically, say, once every two or three years. In view of the fact that the nuclear arms race arouses the greatest concern among the peoples, first priority should be given, if the majority of the participants in the conference express this wiJh, to questions of the prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons, the use of which cannot be tolerated by the conscience of mankind.
159.	The world conference should be convened outside the United Nations, so that it can be attended by all States, irrespective of whether or not they are Members of the United Nations. It is self-evident that Its convening should in no way detract from the significance of those forms of, and channels for, disarmament talks which are now being used, Including the Committee on Disarmament. On the contrary, the Committee on Disarmament should intensify its work.
160.	Both the existing channels for negotiations and any which may be created in the future would contribute to preparations for the convening of the world disarmament conference, and later to the actual drafting of specific agreements on disarmament in pursuance of the decisions of the world confoiencc.
161.	States must obviously be given some time to conduct the necessary consultations on questions relating to the convening of the world disarmament conference. In this connexion, we consider that the General Assembly might address an appeal to States to agree not later than 1972 on the date of the conference and on its agenda.
162.	In view of the above considerations, the Soviet delegation hereby submits the following draft resolution for the consideration of the General Assembly:
(The speaker then rear? out the text of a draft resolution which was subsequently circulated as document A/L.631. For the text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth session, Annexes, agenda item 97.]
163.	We believe that this draft speaks for itself. We call upon all delegations to give it due attention.
164.	In considering all these questions, within the United Nations or outside it, no one should forget that disarmament negotiations are being conducted in circumstances where the arms race is not only continuing, but is being accelerated. This may appear to be a vicious circle, but it can and must be broken. This is demanded by the most vital interests of mankind.
165.	Disarmament is the most reliable means of strengthening international security and ensuring peace, this is clearly expressed in the United Nations Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security which was adopted at the twenty-fifth, anniversary session of the General Assembly [resolution 2734 (XXV)], at the initiative of the Soviet Union.
166.	The Declaration has been correctly assessed as a program of specific measures which, taken together, can
radically change the international situation for the better. Some of its particularly significant features are that it reaffirms the principle of the inadmissibility of acquiring territories through the use of force and strongly emphasizes the obligation of all States Members of the United Nations to carry out the decisions of the Security Council and to do everything in their power to enhance the authority and effectiveness of this organ, on which the Charter confers the main responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
167.	In this connexion, we should like to state frankly that the Security Council is by no means carrying out its functions as it should under the Charter of our Organization. The founders of the United Nations envisaged the situation rather differently. They envisaged it in such a way that no one should paralyse the Council's activities and that all the States which have been trusted to become members of that organ, especially its permanent members, should carry out their obligations with a sense of responsibility, so that no violator of peace should go unpunished and so that the activities of the Security Council should be based on the agreement reached during the Second World War, when the foundations of the United Nations were laid and its structure was elaborated. We believe, however, that this situation can be remedied, if the policies of States particularly of the great Powers, are directed to the pursuit of genuinely peaceful goals.
168.	The twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly will have to consider the question of how the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security is being implemented [item 34]. It is not enough to adopt even the best possible declaration: every effort should be made to ensure that it does not become a dead letter.
169.	Yet such a danger exists, because not all States Members of the United Nations are in practice acting in accordance with the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security for which they voted. Many of the considerations I expressed earlier can serve as examples of this.
170.	There are yet other facts of the same kind. For example, let us take the clause of the Declaration which calls upon all States to desist from any forcible or other actions against peoples still under colonial rule and to render them assistance in their just struggle. This requirement is not being fulfilled by those very States to which it is primarily addressed.
171.	There are different forms of colonialism and racism, but none of them is better than any other, be it the Portuguese kind, supported and sustained by the NATO military bloc, the South African kind, with its policy of hatred-apartheid, or any other kind.
172.	And now, when the great torrent of national liberation movements has destroyed nearly all the strongholds of colonial empires, there are still people and even governments which vaunt the pseudo-civilizing action of the colonialists and are trying-in one form or another and on some pretext or other-to maintain their rule over the last colonial territories. If they think that the peoples have forgotten how much blood and sweat the policy of certain
States has cost the peoples of Africa, Asia and other parts of the world and if they think that they will be allowed further to oppress and exploit those who still remain under their domination, they are mistaken, and history does not forgive such mistakes. The United Nations has done a good deal to help peoples in their struggle for freedom and independence. It must do even more. Colonialism must be finally eradicated.
173.	The Soviet Union is in favor of the full and unconditional implementation of United Nations decisions on the elimination of remaining colonial and racist regimes. We shall continue to provide material and political assistance and support to all the peoples striving towards that goal.
174.	The United Nations must of course take vigorous action in all the areas provided for in its Charter. We can only welcome the fact that a number of questions arising from developments in the scientific and technical revolution will be considered during this session of the General Assembly. The Soviet Union introduced one such item into the agenda of the session, the question of the preparation of a treaty concerning the moon [A/832* J.
175.	The time has come to reach agreement on universally mandatory rules which would be binding on all States and which would ensure the study and utilization of the moon in the interests of the present and future generations for peaceful purposes only. We hope that our proposal on the conclusion of a treaty concerning the moon will receive the support of all States Members of the United Nations.
176.	Preparations are being made for two important international conferences, one on problems of the human environment and the other on the law of the sea. The United Nations must make its contribution to these conferences, since they will be discussing questions which in modem times are closely linked with conditions of human life and the further progress of civilization.
177.	These are new problems, arising from life itself. The United Nations is also faced with not a few old problems, which have not, however, lost their urgency for its Members, especially for the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America. The problems of international economic co-operation have been discussed in the United Nations for many years, but this has not led to any improvement in the economic situation of most developing countries. That situation remains serious.
178.	The struggle of the developing countries against one-sided, agreements and other forms of neo-colonialist oppression and lawlessness is constantly expanding. It is being conducted both by the young States which have recently gained political independence and by developing countries which ceased to be colonies long ago. The United Nations cannot stand aside from this struggle. It is in duty bound to support those who are defending their legitimate rights to liberation from economic oppression, to free national development and to labor for the well-being of their peoples, not for the profit of foreign monopolies.
179.	More than a quarter of a century has passed since the United Nations was founded. This is a considerable period.
During this time the Organization has experienced some failures. It has not always acted with sufficient resolution in cases where it should have shown firmness and energy. But on the whole it has proved that it can serve as a useful instrument of peace and development of international co-operation if it follows the right course and strictly observes the United Nations Charter.
180.	Nevertheless, even now the question sometimes arises of the priority that should be given to certain United Nations activities. The answer was given in the days when the foundations of this Organization were established, when the Charter of the United Nations was signed. The principal task of the United Nations', the basis of all its activities, is the maintenance and strengthening of peace and the prevention of a new war. The United Nations was established for that purpose and that is its very first priority in its work. The peoples of the world evaluate the results of every session of the General Assembly and of every meeting of the Security Council by considering whether effective steps were taken towards the attainment of that essential goal. The Soviet Union, for its part, will do everything in its power to ensure the success of this session of the United Nations General Assembly.


 Mr. President, I should like first of all to associate myself with the previous speakers who have congratulated you on your election to the high office of President of the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly. The United States is confident that you will pursue the ideals of the Charter with the same dedication as your distinguished predecessors.

2.	The United Nations is an important instrument of peace. It is also the repository of many of the world's hopes. We must ensure that it is true to those hopes; that we here assembled-the representatives of 130 nations- meet our high responsibilities not only to our own world but to the world of the future.
3.	Building a structure of peace-a structure that will stand-requires patience, dedication and realism. Working at peace working at it seriously means more than long hours of careful deliberation. It means putting aside preconceptions; it means weighing carefully what our real interests are, not only as citizens of our own countries, but also as citizens of the world. It means proceeding with urgency, but without impatience; steadfastly, but not stubbornly. And it means recognizing that differences exist, and will continue to exist-differences of view, differences of interests, different systems and different values-and that one of the functions of a structure of peace is to protect and accommodate those differences, not to destroy them.
4.	It is appropriate, I think, to take note of the fact that, by any objective standard, the world is a more peaceful place than it was just a few years ago.
5.	In Africa;, the conflict in Nigeria is now long over. Because of recent developments, prospects in the Far East seem more hopeful. Fighting in Indo-China, though it continues, has been substantially reduced. The cease-fire still holds in the Middle East. The division of Europe is less


threatening because the first stage of agreement has been reached on Berlin. Concrete agreements have been achieved on the periphery of the arms race, and encouraging progress is being made at its center.
6.	Yet there are areas-above all, in South Asia where political instability has tipped the balance toward greater tension. There, man's ancient, enemies-poverty, hunger and disease-gain headway, nurturing within themselves seeds of further unrest. And even in areas where recent progress has been made, tensions remain, and the threat of renewed or increased hostilities continues.
7.	That is why we must accelerate our efforts for peace. The achievement of a peaceful world will depend, not just, on the efforts of a handful of powers, but on the efforts of all Governments.
8.	In recent years we have seen a new diversification of power and influence among the nations of the world. Most colonial States have won their independence and now exert a marked impact on world affairs. Japan has found remarkable new strength. The movement towards cohesion in Western Europe has quickened. This diversified and interdependent world is clearly preferable to the bipolar world which emerged from the Second World War. Nevertheless, relations between the Soviet Union and the United States-both large, continental States, both nuclear States and both dynamic States-are of fundamental importance.
9.	Nothing could better serve the cause of peace than a further relaxation of tension between our two countries and the elimination of its by-product-the arms race.
10.	The foreseeable future cannot, of course, be expected to bring an end to the differences between the Soviet and United States political systems or to the competition between us. But it can bring important and beneficial changes in our relations. Many agreements have been achieved in recent years between us. The success of those agreements has stimulated the effort to negotiate still others. Collectively they could promote not just "coexistence" but-if we proceed to build on durable foundations "co-operation" as well.
11.	Our desire to lay the foundations for such cooperation is in no way lessened by our policy of seeking to improve relations with the People's Republic of China. And we have taken due note of the Soviet Foreign Minister's statement that the Soviet Union regards the normalization or our relations with the People's Republic of China as a "natural development".
12.	Though efforts at improvement in Soviet-United States and in Soviet-European relations have assumed many 
forms, the two most important have been the negotiations on strategic arms and on Berlin.
13.	A Berlin agreement will be a milestone along the road to a more peaceful and co-operative Europe. Pivotal in the portion already agreed to is the firm commitment to unrestricted transit traffic of civilian persons and goods between the Federal Republic of Germany and West Berlin. Particularly significant is the obligation the Soviet Union has undertaken to ensure that this traffic will be unimpeded, that it will be facilitated and that it will receive preferential treatment.
14.	The value of this agreement will depend, not on how the obligations have been formulated on paper, but on how they will be carried out on the ground. Truly unhindered movement to and from Berlin would greatly reduce tensions and remove one of Europe's most dangerous flash-points. Half-hearted or grudging implementation of the agreement would only perpetuate fears and suspicions, The willingness of the German Democratic Republic, in its discussions with the Federal Republic of Germany, to translate general obligations into specific commitments and subsequently to put those commitments into actual practice will be the crucial test.
15.	The achievement of a final Berlin agreement and its effective implementation could lead to broader progress. It would, for example, make more realistic the prospects of a European conference with United States and Canadian participation. It would accelerate the movement desired by the people of Eastern as well as of Western Europe-- towards the reduction of tensions on the continent.
16.	It is to this end that the United States is pursuing the possibilities of negotiation on a mutual and balanced reduction of military forces in Europe.
17.	Two years ago President Nixon pledged to the General Assembly that the United States was determined to limit, and then reverse, the build-up of strategic arms. He said we intended to conduct our negotiations with the Soviet Union "soberly and seriously... seeking to reach agreements rather than to make propaganda" [1755th meeting, para. 69J.
18.	In May of this year the United States and the Soviet Union announced their intention to achieve agreement on both defensive and offensive strategic arms, initiating a new stage of intensive work. As a result, although no agreement has yet been reached, we have come closer together on the concepts and details of an agreement to limit anti-ballistic missile systems. On 20 May we made an announcement that contemplates that agreements to limit defensive and offensive weapons will be reached "together". When talks resume in Vienna next month it is therefore agreed that discussions in greater detail will be undertaken on the limitation of offensive weapons.
19.	Meanwhile, these negotiations have already produced two valuable agreements, one on preventing nuclear accidents from leading to war and the other on improving "hot line" communications between Washington and Moscow by use of satellites,
20.	There has also been encouraging movement in multi-lateral negotiations. Here, too, the United States intends to work constructively for further concrete results. In particular, we urge this session of the General Assembly to seek broad ratification of the draft convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and their destruction [A/8457-DC/234, annex A],
21.	The Soviet Union has suggested the creation of a periodic world disarmament conference to be established outside the United Nations [1942nd meeting, paras. 158' 159J. Frankly, we are skeptical that such a generalized approach would produce specific accomplishments. All post-war experience indicates that a concrete, step-by-step approach offers better prospects for success than more grandiose schemes, which tend to generate many words but few results.
22.	At a time when the prospects are promising for participation in the United Nations by the People's Republic of China, and perhaps others as well, there would seem to be no reason for establishing still more world disarmament machinery outside the United Nations framework.
23.	Accommodations among the stronger nations of the World are vital elements of a lasting peace. But the road to enduring peace is no short cut, passing only through the capitals of the strong. The road to peace must traverse every region where there are human beings who aspire to a better condition of life.
24.	In Africa, where the right to a freer existence is still denied to many, we are constant in our support of practical and peaceful means to achieve self-determination and end racial discrimination. That is the policy which President Nixon and I were pleased to confirm to the President of Mauritania and the distinguished delegation from the Organization of African Unity in Washington last week. Consistent with that objective ve have decided to accept the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences for States of South Africa's continuing occupation of Namibia. .
25.	In South-East Asia, as we proceed with an orderly military withdrawal from Viet-Nam, we will continue to make substantial efforts to aid the region's economic progress.
26.	In this hemisphere, we are moving towards a relation-ship of equal partnership in which rights and responsibilities are shared. We are conscious that such a relationship requires economic growth, greater opportunities for trade, and closer economic co-operation among us.
27.	I especially wish to emphasize our undiminished concern for the economic health of the nations of Latin America and other nations of the developing world at a time when the new economic policy of the United States may have raised certain questions,
28.	Our objectives have not changed. We are not adopting a policy of economic nationalism. We have not abandoned our efforts to assist developing countries-through trade, through aid and through investment. Our faith in a free and open system of economic relations among States has not diminished.
29.	We seek a stronger economy at home. We seek also a more equitable international economic system which meets present-day conditions and thus gives even greater encouragement to the flow of goods and capital across borders. Such a system would contribute to the prosperity of all the world's people, in developing and developed countries alike.
30.	This Organization, during this session, faces a decision on the China question-a decision with major consequences for the United Nations.
31.	In our interdependent world, no significant segment of the world's population and of the world's power should be isolated. It was this consideration which led President Nixon to alter the China policy of the United States. To pursue a policy which did not respond to present realities would risk the future for the sake of the past . On the other hand, to seek to improve relations with the People's Republic of China, and to contribute to its greater contact with the international community, could foster prospects for a stable peace in years to come.
32.	Thus, President Nixon began over two years ago, unilaterally and at first without response, to improve bilateral relations. Recently, he resolved to move decisively into a new era of relations by accepting an invitation to visit Peking before 1 May 1972. And he decided to support the seating of the People's Republic of China in the General Assembly and as a permanent member of the Security Council.
33.	The United States wants to see the People's Republic of China come to the Assembly, take its seat, and participate. We want to see it assume, as a permanent member of the Security Council, the rights and responsibilities which go with that status. On the seating of the People's Republic of China there is widespread agreement in this body.
34.	This Assembly does, however, face a related and momentous issue. It could become the first Assembly in United Nations history to take action to expel a Member -an action which would have the effect of expelling 14 million people from its councils. The path of expulsion is perilous. To open it for one would be to open it for many.
35.	So the United States and 16 other countries have introduced a draft resolution [A/L.633] which would seat the People's Republic of China as a permanent member of the Security Council, while providing representation both for it and for the Republic of China in the General Assembly. That resolution is based on political reality and on basic equity.
36.	It is only realistic to recognize a factual situation which has persisted for more than 20 years: that two Governments now exercise authority over territory and over people who were given representation in the United Nations when China ratified the Charter in 1945 as an original Member.
37.	It is only realistic that all the Chinese people who were once represented there should again be represented and represented by those who actually govern them.
38.	It is only realistic that the Security Council seat should be filled by the People's Republic of China, which exercises control over the largest number of people of all the world's Governments.
39.	It would be unrealistic to expel from this body the Republic of China, which governs a population of Taiwan larger than the populations of two 'thirds of the 130 United Nations Members.
40.	Further, it would be unjust to expel a Member which has participated for over 25 years in the world of this Organization with unfailing devotion to the principles set forth in the Charter.
41.	The proposal that both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China should be represented in the United Nations should commend itself to Member States of varying national policies.
42.	It would assure that the long-prevailing de facto situation in China is reflected in United Nations representation; but it does not ask Member States to alter their recognition policies or their bilateral relations.
43.	It would provide representation for the people concerned by those who actually govern them; but it does not divide China into two separate States; after all, we all know that Byelorussia and the Ukraine are not separate States.
44.	The dual representation draft resolution is founded on the reality of the current situation; but it does not seek to freeze that situation for the future, as it expressly provides that the present decision is without prejudice to a future settlement.
45.	In short, the dual representation draft resolution asks simply, and only, that the United Nations take account of the situation as it exists today, and give all the people of China representation in this Organization. As the Charter has accommodated practical solutions of other unusual situations in the past,, so it is flexible enough to accommodate the realities of this one.
46.	The other proposal before this Assembly the draft resolution advanced by A'bania and others [AjL.630 and Add. 1 ] -is punitive in substance and in intent. It does not seek to deal with facts, but to excoriate and condemn. Its essence is not to admit the People's Republic of China, but to expel the Republic of China and to expel it "forthwith". That draft resolution would exacerbate, not harmonize, relations in Asia. And it would weaken, not strengthen, the moral and political fiber of this Organization.
47.	The issue, then, before this body is the issue of expulsion. That is why we have proposed a draft resolution, which we refer to as the "important question draft resolution" but which more properly should be referred to as the "non-expulsion draft resolution" [AjL.632]. This draft resolution requires a two-thirds vote to expel a present Member of the United Nations. It is consistent with the letter and the spirit of the Charter,
48.	Some Members have argued that, whatever the equities and realism of our proposal to maintain the representation of the Republic of China, it should not be supported because they feel that the People's Republic of China would refuse to take its seat. Such predictions are hazardous. Certainly the People's Republic of China may be expected to oppose the proposal so long as there is any possibility for a draft resolution that meets its maximum demands. But just as certainly, after a General Assembly decision providing the People's Republic of China with the status of a permanent member of, and with a seat on, the Security Council but not expelling the Republic of China, a new situation would exist. In any event, I submit, in deciding how to vote we should look more to what the United Nations should do.
49.	It is ironic that, just as the sentiment for universality in the Assembly is growing, many of those who have long extolled it now seek to violate it. If the United Nations is to. embrace universality-as some have suggested then surely the admission of one Member should not be accompanied by the expulsion of another.
50.	Our task here, it seems to me, must be to make a decision that is reasonable, that accepts the realities of the existing situation, that does not prejudice the ultimate outcome and that provides for representation of all the people concerned. Thereafter, our efforts should be to convince those directly involved to take advantage of the decision we have made. The cause of peace has been greatly benefited in recent years by greater pragmatism in many capitals. It would be served by the same pragmatism on this issue.
51.	As the United Nations becomes a more universal body it will be better able to deal with the lengthening list of global issues confronting it: in conciliating political differences, in reducing the world's armaments, in curbing the epidemic spread of narcotics addiction, in protecting the environment, in assuring the exploitation of the oceans for the benefit of mankind.
52.	In meeting those responsibilities the United Nations must during this session deal with two important matters.
53.	It must choose an outstanding successor to our most able and distinguished Secretary-General, UThant, to whose dedication and idealism we all pay a tribute. And, as I pay respects to the Secretary-General, I am sure my colleagues will understand if I also single out for special attention two United States citizens who are now retiring -Paul Hoffman, the Administrator of the United Nations Development Program, who has devoted himself so effectively to the economic welfare of the developing countries, and Ralph Bunche, Under-Secretary-General for Special Political Affairs, and a Nobel Prize winner, who has contributed so markedly to the cause of peace.
54.	The Assembly must also arrest the continuing deterioration of the United Nations financial position, which, as the Secretary-General has pointed out [A/8401/Add.lJ, has eroded its fiscal credit and undermined confidence in its potential. Responsibility for halting that decline rests primarily on those who fail to pay their share. Given assurances of adequate contributions by others, the United States will be prepared to assist towards an over-all solution. Meanwhile we find it hard to understand why the membership should continue to recommend and approve budget increases beyond those necessary to meet inescapable cost increases.
55.	In two parts of the world in which the United Nations has been particularly active-South Asia and the Middle East urgent progress is needed.
56.	In South Asia, renewed and more widespread violence is an ever-present possibility. The events in East Pakistan are internal events with which the Government and people of Pakistan must deal. But their consequences the flight of refugees into India, the danger of famine, the threat to peace in South Asia-are of grave concern to all nations.
57.	To restore peaceful conditions and to save human lives it is clear that restraint must be exercised in the subcontinent; that the international assistance Program must be expanded to avert famine and to create conditions to encourage the return of refugees; and that efforts towards an effective political settlement in East Pakistan must be actively pursued. We are working to those ends.
58.	The United States strongly supports the efforts of the United Nations to organize an effective international relief Program. We have made available over $200 million for relief in bast Pakistan and for emergency assistance for the refugees in India-well over 50 per cent of the total contributions from all foreign contributors, public and private. Last week, President Nixon asked Congress to appropriate an additional $250 million to sustain a high level of relief assistance. A much wider response from other countries is clearly required. We urge the major powers and others with substantial financial resources to contribute generously.
59.	The other place where progress is urgently required is the Middle East. Over several years the United Nations has made determined and persistent efforts to achieve a lasting peace in that critical area. None the less the opportunities for success and the risks of failure remain in precarious balance.
60.	Security Council resolution 242 (1967), establishing the principles for a durable peace, was the first major step towards reason after 18 years of belligerency and a fragile, often violated, armistice.
61.	The cease-fire along the Suez Canal, now nearing its fifteenth month, was the second major step away from war.
62.	It is time for a third major step towards peace.
63.	For four years Ambassador Jarring has worked diligently to secure the agreement called for in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). We support his efforts. We believe his mission remains the best path to an over-all settlement and to lasting peace. Our views on such a final peace settlement remain those expressed in President Nixon's foreign policy report earlier this year and in my statement of 9 December 1969,
64.	Both sides to the conflict are committed to the fundamental and reciprocal principles to which the Jarring mission is dedicated: living in peace with each other and withdrawal from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict as set forth in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). Despite those commitments a deep gulf ot suspicion and distrust remains.
65.	Each side is convinced of the justice of its cause. Each is concerned about its future security. A political settlement based on mutual accommodation could assure both. An attempt to achieve these ends by force will destroy all possibilities for either.
66.	That is why we believe a third major step towards peace is essential -a step that can be taken now; a step that is practical; a step that could help create the confidence and trust which are now lacking; a step towards full and complete implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
67.	That step is an interim Suez Canal agreement. That is why the United States has welcomed the interest of both Egypt and Israel in such an agreement. That is why, at the request of the parties, the United States has undertaken to play a constructive role in the process of arriving at an agreement.
68.	In order to explore the positions of each side, we have discussed concrete and specific ideas designed to meet the legitimate needs and concerns of both sides. Those ideas, given willingness and good intentions on both sides, could become the basis for a breakthrough. They require further quiet discussions with the parties, an undertaking we now hope can be expedited along the following lines.
69.	A first point is the relationship between an interim agreement and an over-all settlement. A fair approach should be founded on two basic principles:
-That a Suez Canal agreement is merely a step towards complete and full implementation of resolution 242 (1967) within a reasonable period of time, and not an end in itself-that has to be clearly established in any agreement; also
-That neither side can realistically expect \to achieve, as part of an interim agreement, complete agreement on the terms and conditions of an over-all settlement -if it could, there would be no necessity for an interim agreement.
Those final terms and conditions will have to be worked out through negotiations under Ambassador Jarring's auspices. And we would hope that if an interim agreement was reached, active negotiations under Ambassador Jarring's auspices could be renewed.
70.	A second point is the matter of the cease-fire. Its maintenance is in the interest of all of us, of everyone concerned, of everyone in this room, in fact in the interest of the whole world. The ultimate objective, of course, is a permanent end to belligerency, as part of a final, binding peace agreement. But such a commitment is not realizable in the context of an interim agreement. Neither would a cease-fire of short duration be realistic. With goodwill on both sides, it should be possible to find common under-standing between the parties on this issue.
71.	Third is the zone of withdrawal. There are, of course, very important strategic considerations involved in this key point. However, based on our discussions, we believe it should be possible to meet the principal concerns of both sides. Without going into the details, I would merely say that I believe that in the long run the most significant aspect of an interim agreement might prove to be that it established the principle of withdrawal looking to an over-all settlement as a fact rather than as a theory.
72.	Fourth is the nature of the supervisory arrangements. Both sides must have confidence that the agreement will not be violated and that adequate machinery will be provided for prompt detection of any infractions. We are confident that ways reassuring to both Israel and Egypt can be found for altering and strengthening the supervisory mechanisms that have existed in the area for the past two decades.
73.	Fifth is the question of an Egyptian presence east of the Suez Canal. The reopening and operation of the Suez Canal would require Egyptian personnel east of the Canal. It is understandable, too, that normal activities should be pursued in as much of the zone evacuated as possible. The question of an Egyptian military presence east of the Canal is one on which the parties hold opposite views. But here too, based on our discussion, we believe that there are possibilities for compromise on this issue.
74.	Sixth is the use of the Suez Canal. The United States has long held that the Canal should be open to passage for all nations, without discrimination. This principle is clear in Security Council resolution 242 (1967). What is at present at issue in considering an interim agreement is principally the timing at which this right could be exercised. We believe an accommodation on this point is quite possible.
75.	With those six points in mind, let me say this: because the parties have asked us, we intend to continue our determined effort to assist them in arriving at an interim agreement. This effort, we believe, is imperative because  and I think it is important to keep this in mind there is no more realistic and hopeful alternative to pursue.
76.	There are risks to peace: but the greater risk is inaction, unwillingness to face up to the hard decisions. A practical step now-an interim agreement-would make the next step toward peace less difficult for all the parties to take. It would restore the use of the Suez Canal as a waterway for international shipping. It would re-establish Egypt's authority over a major national asset. It would separate the combatants. It would produce the first Israeli withdrawal. It would extend the cease-fire. It would diminish the risk of major-power involvement. It would be an important step toward the complete implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
77.	I submit that the logic for such an agreement is overwhelming. If the leaders of the area would grasp this opportunity, they would give new hope to their peoples for tranquility, for progress and for peace.
78.	In all of our efforts, both in the United Nations and elsewhere, we should recall that nothing we do matters so much as the legacy we leave to those who follow, the bridge that we build between the past and the future. There is a tendency, especially when tensions are high and tempers short, to regard the present as the focal point of all of man's history. But ours is only the latest generation, not the last generation; and nothing we leave to future generations will matter so much as a structure of enduring peace.
79.	Peace must be achieved and maintained, not by the decree of a few, but by accommodation among many. Each Government, in upholding its people's particular interests, must also advance the world interest in a peace which will endure.
80.	To that interest the United Nations, from its creation, has been dedicated.
81.	To that interest the United States pledges anew its best efforts.



1.	 Mr. President, I am glad to have the opportunity today of congratulating you on your election to the office of President of the General Assembly, one which my delegation is sure you will fill with great distinction.
2.	I should like at the same time to pay a tribute to your predecessor, who guided our deliberations so successfully during the twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly and the special commemorative session,
3.	When I addressed the General Assembly last year [1857th meeting], I referred in some detail to the progress made by the South African Government in implementing and promoting the ideal of self-determination for all the different nations which comprise the population of South Africa. Since then I have been encouraged by the display of interest in these developments in many quarters, including countries in Africa. I have, therefore, decided to expand on my remarks of a year ago.
4.	Last year I outlined to this Assembly our program in the political field. I stressed that for a number of years my Government had been develop*- j, the political institutions of the various nations in South Africa. As early as in 1951 and again in 1959, legislation was passed to provide for various types of Bantu authorities on the regional and territorial level. A number of such authorities was established, and provided valuable experience in the art of government. In the Transkei, self-government was conferred as far back as 1963. Since then the Transkei has held two general elections. During 1969 and 1970 eight additional territorial governments were established. I said, therefore, that each of the nations living in South Africa had acquired some form of self-government.
5.	During the past year we continued on this road, seeking to accelerate the progress towards self-determination, moving forward step by step in consultation with the nations concerned. Ministers and officials were constantly engaged in discussion with the Bantu, the Colored and the Indian peoples.
6.	Arising from these consultations, legislation was passed enabling the Government to proceed with the constitutional development of the various homelands in the light of prevailing circumstances.
7.	Legislative assembly status was granted to the Tswana, Lebowa, Ciskei, Venda, Machangana and Basotho homelands. Some of these territories will shortly advance to the stage of full self-government. They will attain the same political status as the Transkei and will be that much closer to the eventual goal of full and sovereign independence.
8.	The South African Prime Minister himself very recently held discussions with the members of the Colored People's Representative Council, representing the Colored population group, and the governing bodies of the Ciskei, the Tswanas, the Basothos, the Zulus and the Tsongas. In company, inter alia, with the Minister of Finance, he also recently visited the Venda, Lebowa, Tswana and Machangana homelands, with a population of some 4.5 million, in order to confer with their representatives and to gauge at fust-hand the extent of their progress towards self- determination.
9.	These visits are an integral part of our policy of consultation with the different population groups and have been warmly welcomed as such by all concerned. Indeed, as the Sunday Times, a South African newspaper, which opposes my Government's policies, wrote on 1 August of this year;
"From all accounts* Mr. Vorster's tour has been a great success in the sense of fostering dialog with homeland leaders and making personal contact with the various populations which turned out in their thousands at each function...".
10.	The Rand Daily Mail, another South African paper, which is also opposed to our policies, commented in similar vein. It reported that the Prime Minister's visits had improved the relationship between black and white in. South Africa.
A/PV.1946
11.	The road to self-determination is not always an easy one. However, the South African Government is doing all it can to assist the peoples on this road. It is still too early to say exactly when the Bantu peoples will attain their full independence, when they will become sovereign and be able to play their part in the world at large and also in this Organization. It depends in large measure upon themselves 
and the progress that they make. But they have the right to negotiate at any time with us for the attainment of independence. We do not impose conditions on their right to approach us. We shall listen to them at any time that they feel the moment has arrived to ask for independence.
12.	In this way we shall achieve our ultimate aim of making it possible for the various nations to be associated with one another in mutual harmony and acceptance of each other in a South African constellation of independent nations where no nation would be governed by another.
13.	Consultation fosters co-operation, and without co-operation there can be no real progress on either the internal or the international level. Internally it is necessary for the smooth realization of self-determination and for the material as well as the moral well-being of the various nations. Internationally it is necessary for the greater prosperity and peace of nations, especially for those of us on the African continent.
14.	I have have already outlined how this co-operation is being achieved through consultations within South Africa itself. The political development of the various homelands to which I have referred is not something imposed arbitrarily upon those nations. Each one plays an active part in this development.
15- I have emphasized the importance of consultation in our efforts to co-operate smoothly within the borders of South Africa because there are those who condemn our policy of dialog and contact with other African States on the alleged ground that my Government should rather first conduct a dialog with its own peoples. As I have indicated, that is precisely what we are doing.
16.	It is our firm policy to co-operate to the fullest extent possible also with all other countries, including those of Africa. For South Africa is as much a part of Africa as any other African State and we have a vital interest in our continent's peace and prosperity.
17.	During recent years the emphasis in Africa has been placed more and more on the need for development. The developing States have had to contend with various problems in the economic, health, educational, technical and agricultural fields. And where South Africa has in some instances been able to co-operate in the solution of those problems, it has been happy to do so.
18.	We have, for example, assisted various other African States by way of famine relief, we co-operate with them in respect of the supply of electricity, health and welfare services, the marketing of agricultural produce, the provision of low-interest loans and the planning and construction of various long-term development projects.- The private sector in South Africa has also played its part by assisting African countries in the field of tourism, for instance, with the opening of hotels and, in the field of industrial development and transport, with the establishment of factories, plants and works and the construction of railways.
19.	There are no strings attached to our co-operation; we have tried to help others to help themselves. We believe that progress and economic, growth lead to greater stability at home and hence throughout the continent.
20.	We welcome discussions with any State in Africa which desires to talk to us. We have much to discuss and discussion could well be the first step towards co-operation in many fields of mutual interest. My Prime Minister has' said that he is prepared even to discuss our internal policies with those genuinely interested in conducting a dialog with us.
21.	Throughout our history we have firmly believed in living in friendship and harmony with our neighbors and with those further afield. We do not interfere in their internal affairs. We pose no threat to anyone. We are willing at any time to conclude solemn treaties for the preservation of peace with any African country. We believe in communication with our own peoples and with the peoples of Africa. Without communication we cannot hope to solve our problems. Proof of our sincerity in this respect is to be found in our action in the past year. Thus we have continued to make contact with other African States. My Prime Minister, for instance, last year visited Malawi at the invitation of its President, Dr. Banda.
22.	In November last I led a delegation to another neighboring State to discuss with the Government concerned matters of mutual economic and technical interest and to conclude agreements in connexion with development projects. During this year an official delegation from the same country in turn visited South Africa. In addition, discussions were held .with heads of government and ministers of other neighboring States.
23.	Less than two months ago we were proud to welcome to South Africa the Life President of the Republic of Malawi, H.E. H. Kamuzu Banda. The occasion was a historic and significant one, for it marked the first official visit of an African Head of State to my country.
24.	President Banda has made it clear that there are aspects of our domestic policies which he cannot support. Nevertheless, he came to talk to us. As he said:
"I came here because I sincerely believe in co-operation not only in material things but also in spiritual things ... co-operation of the spirit, co-operation of ideas.... The main reason why we should meet is because if we do not agree and we do not meet, how are we going to resolve our problems? "
25.	The visit of President Banda was an unqualified success. He received a most enthusiastic-indeed, tumultuous-reception from all the South African peoples. President Banda himself remarked on the warmth of the welcome accorded him by the entire population. That, he saiJ, contrasted sharply with what he had been told in certain circles, namely that the black peoples of southern Africa disliked the idea of an African statesman cooperating with the South African Government. In other words the policy of contact and communication between the South African Government and other African Governments is welcome also to the black peoples of South Africa, contrary to what has been alleged.
26.	President Banda saw his visit as a mission to build a bridge between the peoples of our respective countries. His mission captured the imagination of black, Indian, Colored and white alike. In welcoming him we were honored to receive a great and far-sighted son of Africa.
27.	Our domestic and foreign policies are founded on the principles of mutual respect and tolerance for the other man's point of view. We believe that South Africa has a considerable contribution to make to Africa's development and prosperity. By the same token, we realize that we have much to learn from other States of Africa. Although our social, political and economic systems may differ, experience has proved that there need be no barriers to co-operation between parties with a common interest in Africa's welfare. Lack of knowledge and policies of isolation inevitably magnify difference. And we are glad to hear more and more of the voices of Africa calling for a departure from the sterile pattern of the past and for a new approach to the issues which seemingly divide us.
28.	In the words of the South African Prime Minister:
"I know of nothing ... that stands in the way of better understanding between South Africa and other nations who seek peace and prosperity for the peoples of the world and especially for Africa."
29.	Surely, policies of communication, co-operation and accommodation such as I have outlined are appropriate to the spirit of detente and reconciliation which is meeting with increasing acceptance by the international community. Surely, those policies are essential for Africa, if Africa as a whole is to prosper and inherit the greatness which should be its destiny. Surely, those policies are the policies of peace which inspired the Charter, which are the essence of the Charter and which should continue to inspire us all.




