A number of important changes have taken place in the world situation since the twenty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly. A series of new victories has been achieved by the Asian, African and Latin American peoples in their struggle to win and safeguard national independence. Countries of the third world are getting united on a wider scale to oppose the super-Power policies of aggression, expansion and war; they are playing an ever greater role in international affairs. Meanwhile, some important events have taken place in international relations. In the East, the leaders of China and the United States have held talks after more than 20 years' suspension of relations between the two countries. They have made clear the differences of principle between the two sides and agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should handle their relations on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, non- aggression against other States, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence, and that international disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. Recently, Prime Minister Tanaka of Japan paid a visit to China, and the two sides have reached an important agreement on the normalization of the relations between China and Japan, thus realizing the long-standing aspirations of the two peoples and opening up a new chapter in the relations between the two countries. In the West, the Soviet Union and the United States held summit talks and signed a number of bilateral agreements on co-operation in the fields of science and technology, culture, education and health. The European Economic Community has grown and expanded. In the Middle East, far-reaching progress has been made in the Arab nation's struggle to free itself from super-Power control. The struggle of the people of various countries and the changes in international relations have helped in varying degrees to promote the relaxation of international tension.
141.	However, it cannot but be noted that there is no essential change in the situation in which a super-Power is pushing expansionism by all means in contending for world hegemony. The acute and complicated contradictions and struggles between imperialism on the one hand and the oppressed nations and peoples on the other have not abated.
142.	To this day, the United States war of aggression against Indochina is still going on. Because of the meddling by the Soviet Union, the turmoil on the South Asian subcontinent has failed to subside. The stalemate of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East remains. In Europe, with the two military blocs confronting each other, there is no genuine security and cannot be any. Colonialism of different forms persists in many parts of the world. The sovereignty and independence of many small and medium- sized countries are still being infringed and their national resources plundered. Twenty-seven years have elapsed since the end of the Second World War. There are still foreign military bases of various kinds and large numbers of foreign troops on the territories of many countries. The arms race between the two super-Powers is being stepped up unceasingly, seriously menacing the independence and security of the peoples of the world. The whole Western world is in the grip of financial and monetary crises, which have aggravated its various contradictions. In these circumstances, how can the world not be in turmoil? The world is still in the process of great turbulence, great division and great realignment. The struggle between aggression and anti-aggression, interference and anti-interference, subversion and anti-subversion, control and anti- control is bound to continue for a long time.
143.	The Chinese delegation holds that the people of all countries must not be deluded by certain temporary and superficial phenomena of detente at the present time and develop a false sense of security. While striving for world peace and the progress of mankind, we must maintain sufficient vigilance and make necessary preparations against the danger of new wars of aggression any imperialism may launch.
144.	To end the war in Indochina as soon as possible is the most urgent matter for easing the tension in the Far East. At present, the people of the whole world, including the American people, strongly condemn the United States Government for its wanton bombing, mining and blockading of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and resolutely demand that it immediately stop all its acts of aggression against Viet-Nam and the whole of Indochina and withdraw all the armed forces of the United States and its followers, so that the peoples of the three Indochinese countries may solve their own problems independently, free from any foreign interference. Fair and reasonable ways for the peaceful settlement of the Viet-Nam and Indochina question have been put forward in the seven- point proposal of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the elaboration on its two key points and in the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the IndoChinese peoples in April 1970. Of late, the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam issued a statement on 11 September demanding that the United States cease its policy of "VietNamizing" the war and supporting the Saigon puppet regime, and pointing out that a solution to the problem of South Viet-Nam must proceed from the actual situation in South Viet-Nam, in which there exist two administrations and two armies as well as other political forces, and stating that a provisional government of national concord composed of three equal segments must be formed to take charge of affairs in the period of transition. This proposal is fair and reasonable. It shows that the VietNamese side has no intention of imposing a Communist regime on South VietNam. Rejection of this proposal precisely bespeaks the attempt to continue to impose the Nguyen Van Thieu puppet regime on the South VietNamese people. The Chinese Government fully sup-ports the just stand of the VietNamese people and of the three IndoChinese peoples.
145.	The three IndoChinese countries are close neighbors of China, and the three Indochinese peoples are the Chinese people's brothers. We are duty bound to support them in their just struggle against foreign aggression, and we will never interfere in their internal affairs. On behalf of the Chinese Government, I once again solemnly declare from this rostrum: so long as the war in IndoChina goes on in whatever form, the Chinese Government and people, not flinching from the greatest national sacrifice, will firmly support the three IndoChinese peoples in fighting to the end.
146.	It is necessary to point out here that the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia, under the leadership of Samdech Norodom Sihanouk, Head of State of Cambodia, is the sole legal representative of the Khmer people and effectively controls nearly 90 per cent of Cambodian territory. The Lon Nol regime is imposed on the Khmer people by foreign forces, and it is illegal from the very beginning. The representatives of the Lon Nol clique have no right to occupy Cambodia's seat in the United Nations. More and more countries in the world have recognized this reality and truth. The Chinese delegation holds that the United Nations should rectify the present unreasonable and illegal state of affairs and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia its lawful rights.
147.	On 4 July this year, initiated and promoted by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, North and South Korea reached agreement on the principles and steps for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, thus strengthening the confidence of the 40 million and more Korean people, who have been divided for 27 years, in the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland. The Chinese Government and people warmly welcome this agreement. Nineteen years have elapsed since the armistice in Korea. The Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew from Korea as early as 1958. But in South Korea there still remain a so-called "United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea" and a so-called "United Nations Command". This is an anachronism. The combination of the two implies a threat to North Korea. This is an underlying factor making for the continuation of tension on the Korean peninsula. Now, North and South Korea have agreed to achieve gradually the reunification of Korea independently and by peaceful means without reliance upon foreign forces or interference by them. Why should the United Nations keep these two stumbling blocks in front of the Korean people? The General Assembly should discuss the proposed item "Creation of favorable conditions to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea" [A/8752 and Add.1-10] and adopt a pertinent resolution to remove these two stumbling blocks. It is regrettable, however, that the discussion of this fair and reasonable proposal has been deferred to next year. To dodge a problem is no solution. It is argued that the discussion should be postponed to next year because North and South Korea are now in contact. This argument is untenable. One may ask, will there be no more contacts between North and South Korea next year? This is obviously a pretext. A postponement is neither in the interests of the Korean people nor conducive to relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula. We hope that the countries concerned will reconsider their stand.
148.	Now I wish to speak on the question of the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent. We all remember that last December, in this very hall, the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session [2003rd meeting] adopted by the overwhelming majority of 104 votes a resolution calling for cease-fire and troop withdrawal by India and Pakistan [resolution 2793 (XXVI)]. Subsequently, the Security Council also adopted, by 13 votes in favor and 2 abstentions, resolution 307 (1971) which demands a ceasefire, troop withdrawal and release of prisoners of war by all those concerned. However, while the relevant resolutions of the United Nations were not yet implemented, the Soviet Government and its followers raised at the Security Council last August the question of the admission of "Bangladesh" into the United Nations.  In disregard of the reasonable demand of many countries to postpone the consideration of the question, they insisted on a vote to compel China to use the veto. China's stand for postponing the consideration of this question does not mean that we are fundamentally opposed to the admission of "Bangladesh" into the United Nations. China cherishes friendly sentiments for the people of East Bengal and has no prejudice against Mr. Mujibur Rahman. We stand for postponing the consideration of this question, in order to promote a reconciliation among the parties concerned and the implementation of the United Nations resolutions, which are the very immediate concern. However, the Soviet Government has hurriedly pressed for the admission of "Bangladesh" to the United Nations. This is definitely not aimed at helping "Bangladesh", but at forcing China to use the veto, maintaining and aggravating the tensions among the parties concerned on the subcontinent and whitewashing its foul act of supporting the Indian Government in dismembering Pakistan last year. But its attempt will not succeed. If it had been national self-determination, it should have been the people of East Bengal solving their problems by themselves. Why should Indian troops have invaded East Pakistan? And why should the 90,000 and more Pakistani war prisoners and civilians have been taken to India?
149.	After the admission of "Bangladesh" has been vetoed, certain people are trying to bypass the Security Council and refer the question to the General Assembly for discussion. This is clearly done with ulterior motives. This will in no way help promote a reconciliation among the parties concerned on the subcontinent, nor will it reflect honor on the country inciting such a move. China stands firm on principles. China considers that the question of whether or not reasonable United Nations resolutions supported by the overwhelming majority of its Members are implemented is a matter of principle affecting what direction the United Nations is heading for. And on matters of principle China will never retreat.
150.	The present situation of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East is solely created by the two super-Powers for their respective interests. Taking advantage of this situation, these two super-Powers are using Arab countries' territories and sovereignty and the Palestinian people's right to existence as so many stakes with which to strike political deals. The United States is openly supporting the aggression by Israeli Zionism. The other super-Power claims to "support and assist" the Arab people in their struggle against aggression. Has it supported and assisted them? It has indeed sold them no small amount of weapons. But strangely, the weapons supplied are not allowed to be used. Is this not asking people to buy scrap iron? Moreover, it demands privileges and bases, and even attempts to subvert their Government. What kind of "friend" is this? It is more dangerous than an open enemy.
151.	However, recent developments show that the heroic Arab people will not allow others to ride on their backs and lord it over them for long. They have taken determined actions to shake off super-Power domination. This commands admiration. Do not believe the sensational nonsense deliberately spread by a super-Power that no counter-attack should be made against Israel's armed aggression for that would spark a world war. That is meant to scare people. It has been borne out repeatedly by the history of the 20 years and more since the Second World War. We believe that, so long as they strengthen their unity and persevere in their struggle, the Arab countries subjected to aggression are fully capable of recovering their sacred territories and the injured Palestinian people of regaining their national rights.
152.	The Chinese Government has always opposed assassination and the hijacking of individuals as a means of waging political struggles and is also opposed to adventurist acts of terrorism by individuals or by a handful of people divorced from the masses, because they are harmful to the development of the cause of national liberation and people's revolution. But we strongly condemn Israel for the recent barbarous aggression and massacres it has committed against Lebanon, Syria and other Arab countries on the pretext of the "Munich incident". The Chinese people will always stand together with the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their just struggle against aggression.
153.	The situation in the Mediterranean is closely related to that in the Middle East and Europe. In contending for hegemony, the two super-Powers have dispatched large numbers of war vessels to the Mediterranean and set up many military bases there, posing a threat to the security of the countries around the sea. Now more and more Mediterranean countries have raised their voices for "a Mediterranean of the Mediterranean countries", and demanded the withdrawal of foreign fleets from the Mediterranean. Their demand is entirely just and the Chinese Government and people firmly support it.
154.	It is fully understandable that the peoples of the European countries, who have gone through two world wars, are all concerned for the peace and security of Europe. Twenty-seven years have passed since the end of the Second World War, and yet many European countries are still under the military control of one super-Power or the other, with large numbers of foreign troops stationed on their territories. Making use of the confrontation of the two military blocs, each of the two super-Powers is trying hard to keep its allies under control and undermine the opposite side. In these circumstances, how can one speak of genuine peace and security for the people of the European countries? What calls for attention is the fact that there are now some people who, capitalizing on the European people's eager desire for peace, are trying hard by various tactics to cover up the reality that European peace and security are still under threat, and to create the false impression of a European detente and "all quiet on the western front", so as to attain their ulterior purposes. The fact that a super-Power could, when it considered it necessary, launch a surprise attack in order to occupy an ally with massive troops shows that such a "military alliance" is no guarantee of peace at all. Security is out of the question for any country when it is under virtual occupation.
155.	We hold that, in order truly to ensure peace and security for Europe, it is necessary to oppose firmly aggression, interference, subversion and control by the super-Powers, to disband military blocs, to withdraw foreign armed forces and to bring about peaceful coexistence between the European countries on the basis of respect for independence and sovereignty, mutual non- aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and equality and mutual benefit. Otherwise, the so-called; European security conference can only be another name for the division of spheres of influence between the two super-Powers by making use of military blocs. Such a conference would better be called "the European insecurity conference" rather than "the European security conference". An increasing number of countries are demanding that all the European countries should take part as equals in the European security conference and its preparations with equal powers and opposing the holding of the conference as between two blocs. They especially oppose the two big Powers monopolizing everything behind the backs of the other countries and manipulating the destiny of their people. This is an expression of the profound aspirations of the European people. The Chinese Government and people resolutely support the people of the European countries in all their efforts to oppose the power politics and hegemony practiced by the super-Powers.
156.	In Africa, particularly in southern Africa, the mass movements against white colonialist rule, racial discrimination and apartheid and for national liberation have made great new progress, marking a further enhancement of the political consciousness of the African people. The people in southern Africa and other regions which have not yet achieved independence are increasingly aware that the only way to overthrow white colonialist rule and win national liberation is to rely mainly on their own efforts, fully arousing and organizing the masses and waging an unyielding and valiant struggle. It is necessary to seek external assistance, but more and more facts have proved that it is impossible to put an end to colonialist rule by relying on other people. The Chinese Government and people resolutely support the heroic people of Mozambique, Angola, Guinea (Bissau), Azania, Zimbabwe, Namibia and Spanish Sahara. Their struggles are just, and so long as they carry on perseveringly, fear neither hardship nor sacrifice and advance wave upon wave, they will surely, with the sympathy and support of the peoples of Africa and the whole world, win final victory.
157.	As a developing country, China, from its own experience, fully sympathizes with the deep aspirations of the Asian, African and Latin American countries for the defense of their national independence, the protection of their resources and the development of their national economy. We resolutely support the Latin American countries in their struggle to defend their 200-nautical-mile maritime rights. We resolutely support the petroleum and other raw material exporting countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America in their struggle against plunder by foreign forces. We resolutely support the developing countries in their struggle to prevent imperialist countries shifting their economic crisis on to them. We resolutely support the small and medium-sized countries in their struggle against big Powers plundering their fishery resources.
158.	We hold that, in order to change the backward state of their economy, the developing countries should first of all rely on themselves; that is, they should rely mainly on their own efforts and take foreign aid as an auxiliary. The just struggles of the people of all countries support each other. Those countries which have already won liberation are all the more duty-bound to support and assist those countries subjected to oppression and aggression. But now some people are using aid as a means for controlling other countries and expanding their own spheres of influence.
When they give something to other countries, they assume the airs of a benefactor and demand all sorts of privileges. They send to the recipient countries experts and advisers who behave as tyrants, ordering people about and lording it over them. How could this be called aid?
159.	We hold that all countries which are sincere in providing aid to others, including multilateral aid through the United Nations, should help the recipient countries and not exploit them. Their loans should be interest-free or, at least, low in interest. They must not press for repayment but should allow its postponement. When providing a loan or other forms of aid, they should strictly respect the sovereignty of the recipient countries, attach no conditions and ask for no privileges. The purpose of providing aid to other countries should be to help the recipient countries stand on their own feet and to develop an independent national economy. They must not reduce the recipient countries to dependence and subordination in the name of "economic aid" or "the international division of labor", still less place them under their control on the pretext of "aid". China, too, received some foreign aid in the past and had direct experience in this regard. Therefore, today when we provide aid to other countries, we endeavor to act on the above-mentioned principles. Of course, our capabilities in this respect are limited and the aid we can give is not much. But we hold that the above-mentioned principles should be propagated and applied universally.
160.	Now I wish to speak on the question of disarmament. Not long ago some agreements on the limitation of strategic armaments were reached by the Soviet Union and the United States in high-level talks. There is no need for us to comment on these agreements if they are regarded merely as bilateral affairs between the Soviet Union and the United States. But if they are being blown up as tremendous achievements on the road of reducing the threat of nuclear war, we cannot agree. These agreements only stipulate some limitation on the quantity of certain categories of nuclear weapons in the possession of the Soviet Union and the United States, but impose no limitation at all on their quality, nor do they mention a single word about the destruction of nuclear weapons. This can by no means be regarded as a step towards nuclear disarmament. On the contrary, this marks the beginning of a new stage in the Soviet-United States nuclear arms race. Before the ink on the agreement had dried, the one hastened to test new-type nuclear weapons and the other expressed its intention to make a big increase immediately in its military expenditure. How can this be described as reducing the threat of a nuclear war? We hold that no fond illusion should be cherished about these agreements. In 1921, the major naval Powers of the time prescribed a limitation on their respective total tonnages of capital ships, and the limitation was reaffirmed in 1930. Everybody knows what happened in the end. It is not without meaning to recall this historical case today.
161.	Moreover, the Soviet Union and the United States have stated in the document on the basic principles of relations between them  that they have a special responsibility to avert conflicts which would serve to increase international tensions, and they have recognized each other's security interests based on the principle of equality. What special responsibility and what equal security interests? According to Khruschev's "theory", do they not stand for Soviet-United States collaboration for world domination? Of course, one can talk like that, but it would not be so easy to have it realized.
162.	As everyone knows, war is the continuation of politics. The invention and the development of nuclear weapons have not changed, nor can they change, this truth. Although no new world war has occurred since the Second World War, local wars of various types have never ceased. Why? Because imperialism resorts to armed force in carrying out aggression and expansion. Where there is oppression there is resistance, and where there is aggression there is struggle against aggression. This is inevitable so long as imperialism exists. But now the Soviet Government asserts that in a nuclear age there is no other way than that of peaceful coexistence among States, which presupposes, above all, the renunciation' of the use of force in international relations, that is, the non-use of both conventional and nuclear weapons. It has even spread the alarmist theory that the destructive power of even conventional warfare has by now increased so greatly that the large-scale use of conventional weapons can lead to the annihilation of entire nations. But the world will be safe once there is a resolution on the non-use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. This is a sheer hoax. As a matter of fact, the Soviet Government does not believe in its own theory. Its practice in the Middle East, where it gave weapons to Arab countries but forbade the use of them, does smack a little of this "theory". Yet, in the Indo-Pakistan war last year, it gave undisguised support to the Indian Government in its armed aggression against Pakistan. What kind of non-use of force is this?
163.	People condemn war and consider it a barbarous way of settling disputes among mankind. But we are soberly aware that war is inevitable so long as society is divided into classes and the exploitation of man by man still exists. There are two categories of wars, just and unjust. We support just wars and oppose unjust wars. If a socialist still wants to be a socialist, he should not oppose all wars indiscriminately. The non-use of force in international relations can only be conditional, and not unconditional. The condition is to realize peaceful coexistence through mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, and equality and mutual benefit. And in order to realize this, it is imperative to oppose the policies of aggression and expansion of any imperialism. When imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism of various descriptions are still using force to enslave, commit aggression against, control and threaten a majority of the countries of the world, it is betrayal to the people of the world to advocate non-use of force in international relations indiscriminatingly, without regard to conditions and in an absolute way. If one still has a grain of socialism in him, why does he not produce something presentable for instance, opposition to aggression in international relations, and especially aggression backed by nuclear weapons? Why should he, on the contrary, choose to produce such shabby stuff as renunciation of the use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons? In that way, does he not allow himself to be seen through right away?
164.	Permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons this sounds so nice and looks so much like China's proposition, but in fact it is completely different. We say that, as the first step towards the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, agreement should first be reached on the non-use of nuclear weapons. And we have publicly declared that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons. This fully shows that China is developing nuclear weapons for defensive purposes and with the aim of breaking the nuclear monopoly and proceeding from there to eliminate nuclear weapons. If the Soviet Union entertains the same defensive purposes as it has claimed, why does the Soviet representative not dare to come up to this rostrum and make a similar declaration? How can it make people believe its big talk in favor of the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons to be sincere when it, while mouthing the word "prohibition", is constantly brandishing its nuclear weapons, obdurately opposing the possession and development of nuclear weapons by countries with few or no nuclear weapons, feverishly improving and developing its own nuclear weapons and deploying them at the gates of other countries? It asserts that the renunciation of the use of force and prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would be effective only when the two are linked together. In actuality, this is demanding that the people of the world give up their armed struggle against aggression; otherwise, nuclear weapons will be used against them. Is this not its plain logic? Big talk is useless. The proposal of the Soviet Government, no matter how much it is couched in diplomatic language, has the real intent of making all oppressed nations and peoples tamely submit to the nuclear threat of the one or two super-Powers. But they have grossly underestimated the political consciousness of the people of the world.
165.	In order truly to do away with nuclear threats, it is necessary to completely prohibit and thoroughly destroy nuclear weapons. Yet the Soviet. Government dares neither to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons nor to touch on the question of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, but advocates the cessation of all nuclear tests. Why? As everyone knows, the Soviet Union has made hundreds of nuclear tests. When it had made enough tests in the atmosphere, it proposed the partial ban on nuclear tests. Now when it has made enough underground tests, it calls for a ban on all nuclear tests. Actually this means that the Soviet Union could make any kind of tests when it had the need, and that when it no longer has the need the others are not permitted to make any test. This is another trap blatantly designed to maintain its nuclear monopoly, following the partial nuclear test-ban treaty and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)]. As a Chinese saying goes, "The magistrates are allowed to burn down houses, while the common people are forbidden even to light lamps." China absolutely will not fall into this trap. At no time and in no circumstances will China recognize such a right for the Soviet Union or any other nuclear Power. No one but those Powers alone are permitted to develop nuclear weapons; they may threaten others but others are not allowed to exercise the right of self-defense. Can there be such reason on earth? At present, a mere cessation of all nuclear tests without complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons can only hinder countries with few or no nuclear weapons from developing their nuclear capabilities for self-defense but will not affect in the least the nuclear hegemony of the super-Powers. The real purpose of the proposal of the Soviet Government is to maintain its nuclear monopoly and nuclear superiority by capitalizing on many countries' legitimate desire for peace, so that it can have a free hand to carry out its nuclear threat and nuclear blackmail against countries with few or no nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapons are something which people can neither eat nor wear. China is a developing country and certainly does not want to spend one penny more than necessary on such stuff. China is making nuclear tests under compulsion. Its nuclear tests are taking place in its deep interior, and their number is limited. China is ready at any time to stop all its nuclear tests, but only on the day the nuclear weapons of the nuclear super-Powers and all nuclear countries are completely prohibited and thoroughly destroyed, and not before.
166.	On the question of convening a world disarmament conference, we have explained the position and views of the Chinese Government at the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly [1983rd and 2022nd meetings]. We cannot agree to the Soviet position on the "world disarmament conference" as set forth in the Soviet Foreign Minister's letter of 14 August this year [A/8757] to the United Nations Secretary-General. The "world disarmament conference" as proposed by the Soviet Union has neither the necessary requisites nor a clear aim. It would in fact be an "empty-talk club" which would indulge in far-ranging rambling discourse without solving any practical problem. To hold such a conference would only serve to hoodwink and lull the people of the world. It is better not to hold it.
167.	The actual situation in the world today is this. The two super-Powers are maintaining military bases of various kinds, including nuclear bases, and stationing large numbers of their armed forces, including nuclear-missile forces, in many countries; their airplanes, warships and submarines, including those carrying nuclear weapons, are flying and plying everywhere; and they have up to now refused to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly not to use them against non-nuclear countries. To varying degrees, all the countries in the world with no nuclear weapons and those with few nuclear weapons are exposed to their threat. The most urgent question today is the withdrawal of foreign armed forces, rather than the reduction of armaments. Let the two super-Powers withdraw all their armed forces, both conventional and nuclear, back to their own countries. If they do not even want to effect a withdrawal, how can one believe that they are willing to make an arms reduction?
168.	The cry for general and complete disarmament has been going on for more than a dozen years. But the result is general and complete arms expansion by the two superPowers, while all the small and medium-sized countries of the world are in a position of defense inadequacy. This hoax should not be allowed to continue. In order that a world disarmament conference will make a true start and carry on fruitfully instead of becoming a bout of deceptive empty talk, it is imperative to create the necessary conditions for the convening of such a conference, namely, all nuclear countries, particularly the Soviet Union and the United States which possess the greatest amount of nuclear weapons, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, and that they not only will not use nuclear weapons against each other, but, more importantly, will not use them against the non-nuclear countries, and they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible to create the necessary conditions for all the countries, irrespective of their size; to discuss and solve on an equal footing the important questions of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and the reduction of conventional weapons.
169.	Since the beginning of this year, the United Nations and its Security Council have done much work thanks to the joint efforts made by the overwhelming majority of the Member States. What merits special mention is that the Security Council held special meetings in Africa on African questions. This was an unprecedented action taken at the demand of many African countries. The meetings adopted a number of useful resolutions on some African questions. At the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in the capital of Chile, many developing countries forcefully exposed the situation in which certain developed countries, by trade, tariff, monetary and other means, are monopolizing international markets, shifting their economic crisis onto, and stepping up the plunder and exploitation of, other countries, thus aggravating the irrational international phenomenon of "the rich becoming richer and the poor poorer". The developing countries strongly demanded that this state of affairs must be changed. At the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment held in the capital of Sweden, many countries of the third world strongly condemned imperialism for carrying out policies of aggression and war and put forward a number of sound views and reasonable opinions on the question of conserving and improving the human environment. At the sessions of the sea-bed Committee, many countries of the third world carried out resolute struggles to safeguard their own natural resources and upheld the just position that each country has the right to determine the scope of its own territorial sea and jurisdiction. At all these meetings and conferences, many countries of the third world showed their firm determination to oppose imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism and played important roles.
170.	However, we cannot but point out with regret that owing to obstructions by the one or two super-Powers the United Nations has remained weak and ineffective in dealing with many major international issues. Some correct resolutions adopted by the United Nations remain unimplemented due to hindrance by one or two big Powers. Many organs and agencies of the United Nations are still dominated by a small number of countries and fail to reflect the demands and opinions of the great number of countries of the third world. In the United Nations there still prevails the very serious phenomenon of discussions without a decision and decisions without implementation. All this should be corrected speedily.
171.	Here I wish to deal with the Chinese Government's views on the review of the United Nations Charter. As is known to all, the United Nations Charter was drawn up near the end of the Second World War and it was a product of the historical conditions prevailing at the time. However, history is making advances and things are developing. In some respects the Charter formulated 27 years ago obviously cannot meet the tremendous change that has occurred in the international situation and in the United Nations. There were 51 original Members at the founding of the United Nations. Since then more than 80 countries have joined the United Nations, most of which are newly independent countries. It is understandable that there is a demand for the United Nations Charter to reflect fully the present state of affairs in the world. We maintain that on the basis of upholding the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter careful consideration should be given to the views of various countries for necessary revisions of the Charter so as truly to give effect to the principle that all Member States, big or small, are equal. Of course, we likewise consider that the revision of the Charter is a serious and important question, and we are ready to join you all in serious explorations.
172.	The world is at the cross-roads, and so is the United Nations. If the United Nations is to regain its prestige and play its due role, it must conform to the trend of the world, truly express the just demands of large numbers of its Members and the people of the world, act strictly in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and free itself from manipulation and control by the big Powers. It must be trustworthy in word and resolute in deed. Otherwise, it would be very difficult for the United Nations to avoid eventually taking the old path of the League of Nations. The Chinese delegation is ready to work together with the delegations of all countries which love peace and uphold justice to make the United Nations truly capable of playing a role in safeguarding international peace and promoting the cause of the progress of mankind.
The first word I should like to mention as I mount this rostrum for the fifth time is hope, a difficult virtue. I am encouraged to do so, Mr. President, by your accession to this high office, which was distinguished last year by the prestige of Mr. Adam Malik. I am thinking of the ties which have linked my country to yours for almost six centuries, ties which, if such a thing is possible, will be strengthened still further by Mr., Gierek's forthcoming visit to France. I also have in mind the important lesson of perseverance that Poland has continually lavished on Europe and the world. But the virtue of hope has also been called to mind by the praises earned in a matter of months by our new Secretary- General-a worthy successor to the man who, for the sake of the United Nations, pushed himself to the very limit of his strength. We all knew that Kurt Waldheim excelled in every intellectual quality. Today we all know that he is no less distinguished by his strength of character. He is not a man to shun the new duties which loom in his path, and so it is to him that I would first address myself.
61.	France immediately and unconditionally condemned "the acts of terrorism and reprisals which are increasing the numbers of innocent victims", to quote the exact terms of the communique that my friend Mr. Schmelzer, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, read on 12 September on behalf of the Conference of the 10 European Ministers of Foreign Affairs who were meeting near Rome. My country therefore shares the anguish of the Secretary- General and endorses his initiative, which we feel sets an example in two respects: first of all, because it aims at breaking the merciless chain of indiscriminate violence, and secondly, because the man who took this initiative intends to grapple not only with the most tragic consequences but also with the deep-seated causes of the problem, as the most authoritative voice in France again requested him to do some days ago in connexion with the Palestinian problem; that "human and therefore political problem". I am in particular happy that the Assembly has decided to include on its agenda the examination of the problem of international terrorism as a whole and that it has entrusted this task to its Sixth Committee, which will, I am sure, approach this urgent and painful issue with all the attention and to recall the word used a few moments ago by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon from this same rostrum-objectivity that it requires. Mr. Waldheim has, moreover, already proved this. No obstacle deters him when it is a question of implementing Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
62.	Why should the spokesman for an old European country feel today despite all the preoccupations he and every one of us has  that hope prevails over his distress of mind? It is because this year has seen two events which are grounds for certainty: first of all, Europe is moving ahead; secondly, such a forward movement brings us nearer our common goal, namely, closer co-operation and better understanding with all peoples. If I ask your permission to link this central idea, like a conducting wire, to certain major issues which require our reflection, it is because I am speaking on behalf of a country which, as I say again deliberately, has allies but neither has nor wants enemies.
63.	So let us turn our attention to Europe, towards the whole of Europe, where we shall find grounds for reassurance.
64.	It was on 3 June 1972 that the Treaties of Moscow^ and Warsaw  were ratified. It was on 3 June 1972, at the same moment, that the final protocol of the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin was signed by Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Mr. Gromyko, Mr. Rogers and myself. This protocol implemented an agreement which has been supplemented by arrangements concluded by all the German authorities. The negotiations were difficult, but none of the parties imposed its point of view on the others. On the contrary, the balance achieved between the reciprocal concessions was an example worth following and could only serve to strengthen equilibrium in Europe.
65.	May the same spirit inspire the negotiators who are now striving to define relations between the two German States. The success of their efforts matters all the more for this Assembly because one of their objectives is to permit these two States to present themselves together before our Organization. When the time comes-and the sooner the better-the four Powers which will continue to have special duties vis-a-vis Germany and Berlin will undoubtedly be the first to want to support these two candidates for admission to the United Nations. We have become even more aware since China has joined us that the United Nations has a universal mission.
66.	One year ago [1942nd meeting] I said of the European Economic Community that it was in the process of being enlarged. On 1 January the Community will group together some 250 million Europeans. Meanwhile, owing to the success of the negotiations with countries which are members of the European Free Trade Association and are not applying for membership, a vast network of agreements will link the Community to the whole of Western Europe. In a month's time in Paris the Heads of State or Government of member countries of the Community will meet, as was said recently in the course of a Franco-Italian meeting by my colleague and friend, Mr. Medici, not so much to congratulate themselves on such a success, but rather to take stock of the responsibilities incumbent upon them, responsibilities first of all towards their own people who do not want European economic integration to lose in depth what it is gaining in breadth. On the contrary, they want to expand into new fields, beginning with those of currency and the battle against inflation,
67.	With regard to the other industrialized countries, the Community should also be prepared, without ever abdicating its autonomy of decision, to encourage extensive and balanced development of trade on the basis of reciprocal advantage.
68.	But the French Government feels that it is particularly essential for the enlarged Community to define vis-a-vis the developing countries and, in the first instance, vis-a-vis the former associates of the Common Market, a policy no less generous than that practiced by the six members, a policy worthy of being called European. Lastly, there can be no development restricted to Western Europe. Consequently, while Western Europe is being built, the countries which comprise it are striving to strengthen their ties or to forge new ties with the nations which inhabit the eastern part of our continent.
69.	And here is the third reason for Europeans to regard 1972 as memorable despite certain inevitable disappointments: the conference on security and co-operation in Europe no longer looks like just a grand design. In two months, multilateral preparations for the conference will at last begin in Helsinki. We shall do everything possible to ensure that next year the conference itself will attain its true objective, an objective that is of interest and concern to all the countries represented here: to replace-for this is indeed the issue the confrontation of blocs with dialog between peoples.
70.	It took a thousand years of harsh and turbulent history for Europe to thus arrive at the beginnings of wisdom. The memory of the horrors of two world wars which began there help Europe today better to understand the price of peace and better to uphold the chances for it. The dangers through which democracy has passed in so many European countries, and to which it often succumbed, have put Europe in a better position today to weigh the price of freedom. The grandeur, but also the shadows, of its colonial past enable Europe the better to shun many forms of imperialism. Never has Europe, in its relative equilibrium, seemed better able to defend a certain ideal, which is none other than that of the United Nations: respect for international order and for the independence of each nation, the safeguard of human rights, and the rejection of everything that divides the world into rival hegemonies.
71.	Already many people are turning towards this Europe, which is rediscovering its universal mission, believing in it and expecting a great deal from it. It is time for Europe to realize this; by asserting itself, it is gradually creating its own responsibilities towards the international community. Europe must understand these new duties and not shirk them.
72.	Whatever the economic, political and social problems that face the members of the international community and which are echoed here, Europe must be prepared to make its own response.
73.	We felt this especially strongly at the last UNCTAD meeting in April and May in Santiago, Chile. This meeting was, on the economic level, one of the most keenly awaited events of 1972, and it was held, significantly, in one of the Latin American countries which are so dear to France and which are both strongly marked by European influence and confronted with all the difficulties of profound transformation. Can we not then say that if the Santiago meeting has had positive results it was to the extent that the developing countries found understanding and support from some European nations? But also, that if the results were disappointing it was because this great movement of solidarity is as yet only in its early stages?
74.	Some progress was made at the third session of UNCTAD and it is only fair to mention this. In particular, the significance of the joint conclusions which were reached on the need for complete and whole-hearted participation by the developing countries in trade and monetary negotiations in 1973 was widely appreciated. 
75.	In addition, I welcome, for example, the agreement on special measures in favor of the least developed among the developing countries.  The fact remains, however, that on two essential points primary commodities and aid the balance-sheet of UNCTAD did not meet our hopes.
76.	In the first case this lack of success and the meeting could have ended in total failure had the African-sponsored draft resolution on the financing of buffer stocks not been adopted was due to the overly abstract search for new formulas on the subject of outlets and prices. Rather than lingering over this debate on theory, would it not be wiser to examine, case by case, the situation of each commodity which is of particular concern to the developing countries in order to take specific measures to remedy the inadequate revenue which these countries receive from their exports?
77.	In this respect the current United Nations Cocoa Conference will put to the test our determination to arrive at a satisfactory solution. The same is true for aid. Must we really reopen discussion on the objectives decided on by common agreement? Would it not be preferable to concentrate our efforts on the means of attaining them? The real problem is whether we shall follow up our resolutions; in other words, whether our political determination matches our intentions. Underdevelopment is not of concern only to international experts; it is primarily our concern, but statesmen need to have the support of public opinion. UNCTAD, at least, has understood this. It is proposing that we have a world development information day. That resolution  will, I am sure, attract the attention of our Assembly.
78.	The need to make Europe's own voice heard; the difficulty in attaining this; progress-depending on the case-towards political co-operation among our Governments since it, as one of the prerequisites of world equilibrium, works in the interest of all peoples and for peace these are the three conclusions that we are compelled to draw when we look at the strife and disruption going on in the world.
79.	In the Middle East can we discern any reason to hope? I, for my part, see two reasons. The first is related to my dominant theme. We have seen emerging and then growing among members of the European Community a similarity of intentions, which has several times led to concerted action. The second shows to what extent the efforts of the European Community, when it affirms its own identity, coincide with those of the international community. The Secretary-General and his special representative do not allow themselves to be discouraged by stagnation, or by delays, or by apparently unchanging attitudes. Indeed, how could they give in to fatalism? How could we ourselves renounce our responsibilities? Has not the past year shown the futility of efforts undertaken outside the United Nations?
80.	We were guided by two clear and simple ideas from 22 November 1967 until 13 December 1971, two ideas on which a peace agreement may simultaneously be based: the occupied territories must be evacuated subject to minor rectifications; and all the States concerned must undertake to conform, under United Nations guarantees, to the rules which regulate peaceful relations among sovereign States. I should like today to give a new form to the appeal which, for the fourth time, I express from this rostrum with all the moral force that continuity gives my country's policy: does any people or country of the Middle East not understand that for its independence to be definitively ensured it must be sheltered from the interplay of outside scheming or rivalries? To this fundamental question there can only be a definitive and sure answer here, not elsewhere.
81.	Africa, too, needs the United Nations. Last year gave us proof of this. In southern Africa why did a sense of hope, still frail, follow a heightened sense of concern? Because the Africans themselves, gathered in the capital of Ethiopia, induced the Security Council to entrust the Secretary-General with a mission, which was to make contact. May this symbolic opportunity be seized. The stakes are far greater than the question of Namibia alone. If international ethics regains its proper place, and the spirit of the Charter along with it, we will no longer have to condemn, year after year, violations of human rights and of the principle of racial non-discrimination, stressing that they are all equally reprehensible, no matter who is the perpetrator and who the victim.
82.	If international morality and the spirit of the Charter regain their proper place, we will no longer have to deplore the fact that Africa's march towards development and unity is hindered by racial antagonisms, which at times cause much bloodshed without evoking sufficient reproach or horror. This ascent towards unity must continue. France regards it with an active goodwill, which extends to associations that are usefully balanced. But no vision of the future can exempt us from the duties inherited from the past. We intend to assume those duties in two ways: as Europeans and as-Frenchmen. As Europeans, true to the spirit and letter of the two Yaounde Conventions, we regard favorably ties of association between the English- speaking African States and our Community, on the sole but essential condition that the rights gained to date by the African countries, which already have ties of association, are preserved. As Frenchmen we are resolved to continue our efforts at co-operation, even if some aspects have to be changed, on the sole condition that our partners and friends continue to want it themselves.
83.	But Asia? Can it be said that the United Nations does not have a voice it can make heard there, or a specific role to play there? That idea might conceivably have been defended before China was seated here. At our last session we were awaiting its delegation with impatience. I have never better understood to what extent that haste was justified than when I had the privilege in the capital of a great people "older than history", in the words of General de Gaulle of greeting and listening to Chairman Mao Tsetung after long talks with the Head of the Chinese Government and the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I had never better understood how essential it was for China to be in our midst, since we want truly to make a patient and sincere effort to establish in Asia a peaceful order based on the reconciliation and coexistence of independent peoples.
84.	For that matter, we are already seeing some necessary dialogs taking place. For its part, Japan, which I have visited since our last session, is contributing to that, and we must thank it. The Koreans are now providing a good example for all of us who believe that, as we have long said, ideological differences can be overcome by peaceful means. That conviction explains why we felt a harsh anomaly in the sudden eruption of the Indian subcontinent. Today we have a twofold duty: to welcome the new State which has just been born and help it to bind up its wounds; then to encourage the warring parties of yesterday to follow to the end the path of reason and reconciliation on which there must be no turning back.
85.	But, above all, will the moment never come when our Organization can put into operation a vast effort of solidarity on behalf of peoples that are victims of the war in Indochina and that are all the more dear to us because they suffer so unjustly? These people of the four States of Indochina want to live in independence in a neutral and peaceful South-East Asia. France knows, of course, from experience how difficult it is to put an end to some conflicts; but I do not hesitate to say that the opportunity to bring to Indochina a peace whose political and military terms can be equally perceived is now at hand. I cannot believe that this opportunity will again be lost. No, I cannot believe that, six years after a certain address delivered in Phnom Penh which history has already proved right-a history which would have been less painful and less bloody if the voice of General de Gaulle had been better heeded.
86.	The survey I have just made leads me to a very natural conclusion: on the one hand, Europe is gradually becoming aware of itself and of the role it must play in serving world equilibrium, and thus peace; on the other hand, the more France realizes that truth, the more she believes that the mission of the United Nations is not only useful but irreplaceable.
87.	Why? We must ask ourselves that question very clearly, for the world has changed to such a degree since the birth of the Organization that it would be a mistake to be satisfied with the old justifications applicable to a time gone by, which preceded the entry into this Organization of most of the States represented here. I shall give my answer immediately: the respective tasks of the European Community and of the United Nations are indeed very different. The Community is an economic power par excellence whose political goals are based on its service to a certain type of civilization. The United Nations is essentially a moral force which cannot have a secular arm because its raison d'etre is to assemble, for the purpose of maintaining or restoring peace, governments representative of all systems, all doctrines, all regimes. But both have one essential thing in common: they tend to prevent the division of the world between two decision-making centers. Understand me well: the rejection of hegemonies, far from creating distrust or hostility towards the very great Powers, is the very prerequisite for a genuine and fruitful dialog. The same President of the French Republic who in a few weeks' time hopes to receive nine Heads of Government received Mr. Leonid Brezhnev in Paris and met with Mr. Nixon in the Azores. With Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Pompidou signed the declaration of 13 principles which makes Franco-Soviet co-operation exemplary and, as the President of the Republic has just said again, gives it capital importance. With Mr. Nixon he discussed the continuance of a friendship as old as the United States itself and ever strengthened by mutual frankness.
88.	The more relations improve between two very great Powers with which we maintain ties of co-operation or alliance, the more we gain, if peace gains therefrom. But, surely, no country among us, even the least powerful, intends to give up the right to choose and to guide its destiny itself.
89.	For that right to be preserved it must be kept from slipping almost from sight, as would happen if left to a natural course of events. That is why so many Mediterranean countries and I am thinking especially of Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia, which are so close to us are showing such concern to have continuous dialog with Europe, in a form still to be determined. The motives that prompt them to look towards Europe are, on the whole, the same as those which justify their attachment to the principles of the Charter.
90.	Such is the spirit in which we propose to participate in the major debates here, in particular those which concern the problems of over-armament and underdevelopment which, for that matter, are connected. But I intend to conclude on the essential thing, which is also the most threatened and challenged. I am aware that I speak on behalf of a country which has certainly not been irreproachable in the course of its lengthy history but which, nearly two centuries ago, proclaimed not the rights of Frenchmen but the rights of man.
91.	I mentioned a moment ago that one of the essential tasks of our Organization was to condemn racial discrimination in all its forms and to combat it by the most effective means, that is to say, means consistent with the principles of our Charter. In the same spirit, the French Government last year deposited the instruments of accession to the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX), annex] and this year submitted to parliament a law, which was unanimously adopted, on the elimination of all expressions of racism.
92.	France is participating actively, as members know, in the convention work of the United Nations on human rights. We have, in addition, been initiators in the work in which our Organization is currently engaged to draft an international instrument for the protection of journalists on perilous missions. We cannot be indifferent to the fate of those who, in their search for objectivity, sometimes knowingly placing their lives in danger and make an essential contribution to the knowledge of the modern world and to the emancipation of peoples. Often we feel, as I have said, the need for an appeal to public opinion, which alone can jolt people out of their apathy and hasten a solution to the most serious political crises. Is it impossible to hope that increased protection will be given to those who serve the public and serve truth? We hope that this year the Assembly will be sympathetic to our efforts.
93.	At its last session the General Assembly unanimously decided, in resolution 2860 (XXVI), that a Human Rights Day should be celebrated on 10 December 1973 to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
94.	It was in Paris that the Declaration was proclaimed on 10 December 1948, and France, true to its long tradition, intends solemnly to celebrate this anniversary.
95.	Assuredly, before the immensity of the problems that face the world and the urgency of certain decisions, this celebration will have mainly symbolic value, but the world of today has more need than ever of symbols-symbols strong enough to avenge justice and to comfort brotherhood.
Mr. President, I should like to start by echoing the congratulations which my colleagues have extended to you on your assumption of office as President of the twenty- seventh session of the General Assembly. It is a tribute to you and to your country.
99.	As this is the first time that I have addressed the Assembly since the election of the Secretary-General, I should like to take this opportunity also to salute him. He has proved in the last nine months our wisdom in electing him and he has brought to this Organization the same dedication and the same talents he gave to his own country as diplomat and Foreign Minister.
100.	There is an arresting phrase in the Preamble to the United Nations Charter. It bids us all "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". The United Nations was born from the death and destruction of two world wars in this century in which it was proved beyond any doubt that there is no longer any gain, economic or political, to be won from aggression. Those wars started in Europe. It is not therefore surprising that we have concluded in Western Europe that there is no future for any country in trying to achieve its economic or political aims by the use of force, and we are combining to remove the past rivalries in Europe and the causes of them. It is only when that lesson, which we have painfully learned, gains universal support that we shall have fulfilled the precept of this Charter which requires us to live as good neighbors. We long ago decided that collective action was necessary to meet any potential aggressor. We organized accordingly and, although at great cost, Western Europe has enjoyed physical security. As long as there is a threat we will sustain the necessary effort.
101.	But, in addition to defense, national leaders have two responsibilities which must run in harness. The first is to achieve for their people a continuing improvement in the standards of education and living and the second is to guide their country's policies so as to contribute to harmony in international society. Civilization for man can thrive only in a climate of peace.
102.	At this point of history, therefore, the public experiment in partnership being conducted by the enlarged European Community is of prime importance. Western Europe, late in the day but better late than never is putting into practice for the common good a philosophy which embraces full economic and political partnership. We are doing so for two overriding reasons: to outlaw the wars which have twice brought the continent to its knees and to enhance by a customs union the prosperity of the member States. We do not intend to lose our national identities but to merge our complementary personalities for the greater good of all. These developments must be of profound significance in the context of the wider world.
103.	Were the Community to confine its benefits to the compass of its own membership, it would be missing its opportunity in terms of the general health of the world community. An inbred and introvert community could indeed invite trade wars and stimulate selfishness. For the United Kingdom, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, any form of narrow European isolation would be totally alien to our whole philosophy. But there is no question of any such thing. No one contemplates that in the European Community. The call for the policies of the good neighbor in the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations finds an echo in the Preamble to the Treaty of Rome, where the purpose of the Community is stated thus: "Desirous of contributing by means of a common commercial policy to the progressive abolition of restrictions on international trade" and "intending to confirm the solidarity which bind Europe and overseas countries, and desiring to ensure the development of their prosperity, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations".8 So the Community has explicitly shown that it is pursuing the same objectives as the United Nations, a fact of undeniable importance when it is realized-as perhaps it seldom is that the Community conducts 41 per cent of the trade of the world and that Europe's contribution will be of great importance in the discussions of, for example, international monetary reform.
104.	In each of the last three years the total flow of resources from Britain multilateral and bilateral, private and public to developing countries to help them raise their standard of living has been over the target of 1 per cent of our gross national product. The existing members of the Community have already played a notable part in this international effort. But I believe that the European Community as a whole can make a much more effective contribution by co-ordinating the efforts of individual member States in a conscious, co-operative program for the development of the developing world. The deliberations of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development fUNCTAD/ in 1972, in which we were glad to play a leading part, serve to remind us how complete is our interdependence. We must find more satisfactory solutions to the problems to which UNCTAD has drawn such graphic attention. Europe, too, can make a telling contribution to solving the accumulating problems of the twentieth century, which may be grouped under the heading "the environment". I am glad to announce that, subject to parliamentary approval, the United Kingdom will contribute up to  2 million over a five-year period to the proposed United Nations Environment Fund, depending on the response made to the $100 million target.
105.	In all these ways, the enlarged European Community will pass the test of neighborliness which is set in the preamble to the United Nations Charter, in terms both of its own membership and of its future relationship with the rest of the world.
106.	Can we in Western Europe extend the area of confidence and hope, a theme to which Mr. Schumann, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, spoke yesterday [2041st meeting/ with eloquence and general acceptance? For that we shall need in Western Europe the active response of the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe when the conference on security and co-operation in Europe and negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions come to be staged.
107.	We must face the facts even when they are unpleasant. Since the last World War the confrontation over the years between the Warsaw Pact countries and those of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization led to an almost total loss of confidence. Western Europe had no desire for this, but the fact is that neighborliness, once confidence is broken, cannot be recreated in a day.
108.	Progress in detente has by any standard of tolerance been painfully slow. Nevertheless, there have been modest gains. The test-ban Treaty  holds; the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks have placed a limitation on anti-ballistic missiles; the treaties between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union and between the Federal Republic and Poland are a contribution to stability, as the Polish Foreign Minister has himself just declared; the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin can do much for the security and well-being of the city's inhabitants. This is a notable contrast to the days when Berlin was threatened by isolation and the need for an airlift. We should mark that contrast. Negotiations between the Federal Republic of Germany and its East German neighbor are at last making some progress. And in this improved climate, which I think most of the speakers have marked in this debate, a European security conference may be able to identify and to exploit other areas which can be used for the common benefit both of Western Europe and of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. It will not be easy. Where social and economic systems are so different and where the gulf is so wide between the Soviet interpretation of the free life and that which is practiced in the West, it is best to try for limited objectives. But we must, if life is to be tolerable, replace the negative conception of coexistence with a fabric of trust. We willingly put our hand to that task in Western Europe and look forward to this first meeting an event in itself on a common platform of countries that are members of the Warsaw Pact Organization and of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to be joined by the European neutrals. Mutual and balanced force reductions present a daunting problem because there are so many facets, military and geographical, which go to make up what is known as the balance of power in Europe, and indeed the balance of power in the world. So far it is a fact of life that it is the military balance on which the present peace rests, and that is likely to be so for some time to come. It will be our objective in all these discussions to find new approaches to neighborliness with the East, consistent with the physical security of our respective peoples.
109.	The Secretary-General, in the wise introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/'8701/ Add.l], has rightly drawn attention to the important signs of detente among the great Powers, signs which include the developments which I have just described. But the Secretary-General equally rightly pointed out the contrast between these signs and the persistence of conflict in several key areas of the world and the failure, both of the Governments concerned and of the international community, to find acceptable solutions to the underlying causes of the confrontation.
110.	Although there are signs of rapprochement in Europe and indeed in Asia, there remain historic areas of continuing hostility. The danger in these places is that deadlock will be tacitly accepted as the best for which anyone can hope. That is the last doctrine which this Assembly can accept. The Secretary-General's statements and actions since he assumed office bear witness to the fact that he has no patience with the passive acceptance of deadlock. To resolve the Middle East conflict we at the United Nations made a start by framing Security Council resolution 242 (1967). My Government continues to adhere firmly to that, resolution. It will be commonly conceded, I think, by all my colleagues who are here, that we will not arrive at any alternative framework which would command a comparable measure of consent. It is better, therefore, to stick to it. This resolution provides the essential basis of any just and durable settlement primarily because it acknowledges the essential requirements of the parties, first for withdrawal, and secondly for security.
111.	My Government has consistently supported the mission of Mr. Jarring, the Secretary-General's Special Representative appointed under the resolution. I very much hope that in the months ahead no opportunity will be missed to work towards an end of the present confrontation with the long-drawn-out misery of the refugees which it entails, and also the ever-present threat of war.
112.	In the last few months there has been a dramatic change. Egypt has dispensed with Soviet military support. It should be recognized that this step towards depolarization is an opportunity to resume the quest for a peaceful settlement. It may be fleeting, so it should be seized. Nor should we be deflected, from this aim by the cycle of violence and reprisal which has been given fresh impetus in recent weeks.
113.	Mr. Rogers, Secretary of State of the United States, drew our attention on Monday [2038th meeting] to many instances of the world-wide problem of terrorism and violence. This is a disease to which many of us in this Assembly have fallen victim. We have our own special problem of indiscriminate terrorism in Northern Ireland. In 1971 in this Assembly I drew urgent attention to our responsibilities for the climate in which the terrorist operated his beastly practice. I said: "Sooner or later, uncompromising confrontation leads to violence [1944th meeting, para. 86.] I also said, ". .. time works for the anarchist". [Ibid.] I then drew the attention of this Assembly of nations to the situation which seemed certain to develop, and here you will forgive me if I quote once more: "... anarchy superseding the law of nations and with it the inherent challenge to all governmental authority." [Ibid., para. 87.] This is exactly what is happening now. I continued with a quotation from my statement at the 1838th meeting: '"We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down ... even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice.' " [Ibid.]
114.	Now we are up against many situations in which terrorists are meting out destruction to the innocent in the name of some hideously distorted interpretation of justice. We have wasted time in these last two or three years. Terrorism must be stopped so that law and order in the world society will not be totally undermined-and we all know this in this Assembly.
115.	The Secretary-General was right to recommend this subject for inclusion in our agenda [A/8791 and Add.l], and I am glad that the Assembly has so included it [item 92]. This question must be vigorously pursued. We in Britain will support drastic measures to stop this rot, and we welcome the initiative of Mr. Rogers! I think we must recognize that the essence of the success of any action lies in the collective application of the remedies. It is only through the international community that effective measures can be taken to end the hideous cycle of terror and violence. That is the lesson all of us in this Assembly have to accept and to apply.
116.	There are certain practical steps we can all take. First, on the question of hijacking, States which have not yet become parties to the Conventions of The Hague  and Montreal  should move with all possible speed to do so. We should also do all we can to bring into effect further measures to close every haven to the hijacker and the saboteur. The United Kingdom, at the recent meeting of the Legal Committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization, has worked actively to that end. Secondly, there are three main areas in which we should make urgent progress in dealing with the problem of international terrorism. We must agree on further obligations which States should assume in regard to the prosecution and surrender of perpetrators of terrorist acts. We should decide on further controls which could be imposed to prevent the movement of terrorists from one country to another. We should do everything possible to increase co-operation among national police and security forces by encouraging the exchange of information and by taking other measures to prevent these acts and to apprehend their perpetrators. These and other measures should be considered without delay, but I repeat that action, to be effective, must be collective. We shall make our full contribution in the discussion that has already begun at this session of the General Assembly.
117.	The good-neighborliness to which we are summoned by the Preamble to our Charter applies to" us all without exception. It is not limited by geography or race. The Ugandan Government's action in expelling Ugandan Asians and confiscating their assets, without clear and unequivocal assurances of full and prompt compensation, illustrates the degradation to which intolerance can bring its disciples. This is an outrage against standards of human decency, in the face of which this Assembly cannot remain silent. These Asians have had their homes in Uganda, some of them for generations. They are now being ejected and stripped of most of their belongings and of their savings accumulated over many years. My Government, in spite of the fact that Britain is a small, overcrowded island, had made arrangements whereby Asians from East Africa holding British passports were coming into Britain in an orderly flow over the years. As far as Uganda is concerned, this agreed program has been thrown out of the window, and the Asians have been given a time limit of 90 days in which to leave. There are now only 42 days left. President Amin has said that if the Asians have not left before that deadline he will put them into "camps". We do not accept that that deadline has any justification in law or in morality. The Government of Uganda is responsible for the proper treatment of those who have lived in that country for many years, and putting them into "camps" is contrary to all accepted standards of civilized behavior. We have an obligation to take into Britain those who are British nationals and have nowhere else to go. We will keep our word, and we will keep the law. But the law is not everything. There are human problems, rights and feelings which should have equal consideration. The Ugandan Government should be called upon to change its policy and treat these people with humanity and not with contempt. Injustice must be condemned wherever it rears its ugly head, whether it is perpetrated by Europeans or Africans or Asians or whoever. Every country in the Assembly, therefore, should use its influence to insist that this injustice should end.
118.	I am making two direct and simple requests to you as members of the world community assembled here. The first is to show your good-neighborliness by sharing some of the practical problems of resettling these unhappy people. I am exceedingly grateful and pay a tribute to all those who have come forward with offers of help. The second is that you should all join in calling upon General Amin to extend his arbitrary and inhumane deadline of 90 days and to allow the Asians expelled to take their belongings with them. These are two simple, humane concepts. My delegation will today request that this question should be added to our agenda as an urgent and important item.  We ask that the Assembly debate this matter without delay and we are ready to submit a draft resolution-for this inhumanity which creates refugees is of international concern. I trust that it will be overwhelmingly accepted, because, should this Organization fail to do so, there is no one to whom any person, whatever the color of his skin, can turn for common justice. This is the basis of my appeal to all of you today.
119.	In conclusion, therefore, I believe that when we speak or write we should constantly remind ourselves of those words in the Preamble to this Charter: "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". Our minds admit the sense of this precept, but our acts fall far short of it. We must be vigilant and careful for our fellow men and act with urgency if we are to gain that peace with justice which all our people so intensely and insistently demand.
Mr. President, I offer you on behalf of India our most cordial congratulations on your election as the President of the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly. By electing you, the Member States have recognized your own skill and wisdom and have also honored the struggles and achievements of the Polish people. India has had close and friendly relations with Poland, and I wish to assure you of our fullest co-operation as you discharge your responsibilities.
47.	I should also like to pay a tribute to our outgoing President, Adam Malik, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for the patience and devotion with which he guided our work during the last session.
48.	We recall the long years of dedicated service which U Thant gave to the United Nations arid for which he will always be remembered with affection and admiration. At the same time, we greet our Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim. His dynamism and his high sense of purpose had been recognized even before his election at the end of our last session. Since then his tireless efforts in the exercise of his duties have earned him high respect. We wish him continued success.
49.	In India, we are celebrating this year the twenty-fifth anniversary of our independence. As a result of the long struggle of our people, we became independent in the year 1947. In the years that followed, the freedom of most countries from colonial domination was achieved and a community of interest in justice and progress began to grown among the newly independent countries. In the quarter of a century that has since passed, we have had our share of difficulties and successes. Today we are more united and determined than we have ever been before in the last 25 years. Our faith in our democracy has become deeper, our goals for the betterment of our people are clearer, and our resolution to achieve them has become firmer. We realize that basically we must rely on our own values and resources in order to strengthen our economy and to accelerate the pace of our development. The bulk of the burden must fall on us as indeed it has fallen on us in the past. At the same time we believe that international co-operation is vitally necessary if humanity as a whole is to be freed from poverty and want. Our unfinished revolution in India will not be completed until full economic and social justice is assured for all our people. In this spirit, we seek nothing but co-operation and friendship with all, on a basis of equality.
50.	India adheres firmly to the policy of non-alignment and peaceful coexistence. This does not, and cannot, mean an exact middle position between any two extreme views on matters of international concern. India's policy of non-alignment is based on the need in the modern world to maximize the area of peace, reduce tension and ensure stability with justice. We believe in the sovereign parity of all nations; we accept the supremacy of none. Our friendship is open to all countries on the same terms. We trust in co-operation among equals, not in co-operation on the basis of domination by one country over another. This policy determines our attitude to all countries, and will continue to govern our relationship with our neighbors.
51.	The last year has been marked by significant detente among nations, big and small. The meetings of leaders in Moscow and Peking, the agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States, especially on the limitation of strategic arms, are helpful changes from the earlier and sterile, and at times dangerous, confrontations. In Europe many prospects for the reduction of tensions have opened up. Some of the recent events in Asia encourage the hope that our part of the world might also soon be moving towards greater understanding and co-operation. Our purpose in this improving situation will be to ensure that the momentum towards an ever-expanding area of understanding and accommodation is maintained.
52.	The world at large is rejecting more and more the concepts of spheres of influence, under the guise of balance of power and of domination of smaller Powers by the mightier ones. In this context the Secretary-General has noted in his thoughtful introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [Af8701jAdd. 1], that the idea of keeping peace and security through a concert of great Powers is outdated, if not outmoded. The current processes of detente can produce healthy and abiding results only when they do not ignore the interests of countries that are yet to participate in them. Non-aligned countries have long striven for such contacts and consultations as are now in fact taking place. At the same time they have repeatedly emphasized the risks to true independence if agreements are not concluded by broad-based consultations.
53.	A recent encouraging development has been the greater and more determined pursuit of bilateralism in the search for solutions to many international problems. In the past there were many instances when the interests of outside Powers prevented the settlement of problems which could have been achieved by mutual consultations among the parties directly concerned. Examples of this kind are not altogether absent in our time. Nevertheless, in areas as widely separated as Central Europe, North Africa, West Africa and Asia, agreements have been reached for solving a number of problems through the efforts of the countries directly concerned. The settlement of problems mutually and bilaterally can, we think, strengthen peace, security and independence.
54.	Looked at from this point of view, the recent developments in the relations between India and Pakistan mark a significant departure from past years, when hostility and suspicion were unfortunately the dominant features. Direct negotiations have provided a more dependable means by which we can settle and solve our problems to the benefit of the vast population of the region. In a sincere search for a durable peace and good-neighbourly relations, we opened negotiations with Pakistan last February which culminated in the Simla Agreement of 3 July 1972. The two Governments have agreed that all problems between them should be settled by peaceful means through mutual consultations.
55.	The President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India have pledged full support and expressed their complete determination for the faithful implementation of the Simla Agreement. For this purpose, further accords are to be arrived at by mutual consultation and discussion. The use of force has been totally abjured. They have also agreed that in Jammu and Kashmir the entire line of control as it existed at the time of ceasefire on 17 December 1971 will be respected by both sides. The two Governments have been taking steps to carry out this agreement and when some doubts and difficulties arose a few weeks ago, these too were resolved by direct negotiations. The military commanders have been meeting from time to time to work out the delineation of the line of control. Agreement on delineation has been arrived at practically everywhere except for a few small pockets where the total area involved is only a few square miles. We have offered to the Pakistan side to have joint inspection and survey, wherever necessary, in order to complete the delineation. We hope that the military commanders of the two sides will meet without any further delay to finalize delineation in the remaining small pockets by holding joint meetings, joint inspections and surveys whenever necessary. We hope that very shortly the entire line will be delineated. The completion of this task will, as already agreed, be followed by mutual withdrawal of troops. In the meantime, exchanges have been taking place of sick and wounded prisoners of war and of those civilians who came to be under the custody of India or Pakistan at the outbreak of hostilities on the western sector.
56.	There are naturally several problems arising out of the armed conflict, and the two Governments have agreed that these problems, as also other basic unresolved matters between the two countries, would be settled by mutual agreement. A series of meetings at various levels is envisaged to achieve this objective. The welcome accorded to the Simla Agreement by the international community will sustain the efforts of the two Governments and their leaders to work patiently towards a durable peace.
57.	The Simla Agreement is the first major fruitful step in the search for mutual understanding and co-operation between India and Pakistan. Its full and effective application should bring about conditions in both countries which will enable their peoples to utilize their resources and energies for the pressing task of advancing their welfare. The peoples of India and Pakistan have many common interests and aspirations and they would wish to live as good neighbors. The Simla Agreement has therefore been widely supported by the people of both the countries.
58.	The emergence of Bangladesh as a sovereign country is destined to be of vital importance in strengthening peace, stability, security and progress in the subcontinent. We welcome Bangladesh as an equal partner in this common task of the countries of the region. The heroism and fortitude of the people of Bangladesh will be an invaluable asset in the reconstruction of their country.
59.	We deeply regret that Bangladesh was not enabled to take its place at the opening of this session of the General Assembly. A country with 75 million people, it has been recognized by over 90 other sovereign States and has already found its rightful place in many international forums. The earliest admission of Bangladesh to the United Nations will further strengthen the United Nations system, will reinforce the principle of universality of our Organization, and will contribute to the more expeditious normalization of relations among the countries of the subcontinent and the achievement of peace and harmony in the area. We are convinced that this General Assembly can do much to bring this about, through reconsideration of Bangladesh's application by the Security Council.
60.	We sincerely hope that, in the shortest possible time, Pakistan and Bangladesh will be able to solve all the problems between them with understanding and as equal sovereign States.
61.	We view with deep satisfaction the fact that India's relations with other neighboring countries continue to grow in depth and so serve to help strengthen the forces of peace and progress in South Asia. The relations between China and India have not shown the necessary and expected improvement. On our part, we continue to be ready, as indeed we have indicated in the past, to resume normal relations with China and to improve them in our mutual interest and with mutual respect. Against the background of the normalization and detente that have taken place in Asia and in other parts of the world such an improvement in Sino-Indian relations is, in our opinion, all the more desirable.
62.	Naturally, I have taken a few minutes to explain at some length the significant developments on the Indian subcontinent, the state of our relations with some of our immediate neighbors, and the hopes for peace and progress they inspire. These issues are nearest to us. I must now deal briefly with some other vital international problems.
63.	The presence in this hall of 132 States should make us doubly conscious of the absence of representatives of many large areas of the world which are still under colonial rule. Nor can we ignore the fact that in several countries rampant racism is being preached and practiced. The solution of these problems will require a degree of awareness and co-operation which are unfortunately still lacking. The Indian delegation will do its utmost to work out, together with the others, all such practical means as the United Nations can pursue. We shall continue to support the struggle for independence being carried out by the people of all colonial Territories, including Namibia, Zimbabwe, Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). We will not relax our efforts to eliminate racial discrimination, whenever and wherever it appears. The meetings of the Security Council last winter at Addis Ababa provided an opportunity for focusing attention on these problems. We look forward with interest to the outcome of the Secretary-General's efforts with regard to Namibia and to the more effective use of the Commissioner and the Council for Namibia.
64.	The situation that has now arisen in Uganda cannot but cause concern to all of us. The problems facing the Asians affected by the expulsion order are essentially humanitarian in character and can be solved only in a spirit of compassion and understanding. The people facing deportation should be afforded reasonable time to be able to wind up their affairs in an orderly manner and depart in safety. A vast majority of them have lived there for generations and they should be allowed to take with them their personal belongings and a reasonable amount of assets to enable them to restart their lives in other lands with some measure of hope and confidence. We hope that the Government of Uganda will respect these human considerations and do everything possible to discharge its responsibility towards the person and property of these unfortunate people and so lessen their hardship. Any help other countries can give in overcoming this problem will, of course, be most welcome; India, for its part, is doing all it can.
65.	We must ensure that our solidarity in the common struggle against racial discrimination and colonial domination is not undermined. Since we all agree that racial discrimination is an evil to be fought, we, all of us, cannot but oppose it, whatever form it may take.
66.	Tensions and frustrations continue to mount in the Middle East and indeed, as recent incidents have shown, are rising to unprecedented heights of senseless and savage reprisals and terror. The efforts of Ambassador Jarring and of our Secretary-General have not yet borne fruit and meanwhile Israel is persistently consolidating its position to the total detriment of Arab and Palestinian rights and interests. Israel has consistently obstructed all attempts at progress towards a peaceful solution of this problem as laid down in Security Council resolution 242(1967) and has created the situation, where threats to international peace and security are increasing daily and at times ominously. We would also ask why the permanent members of the Security Council have for months failed to meet in the face of this deteriorating situation and this grave problem.
67.	India stands firmly against interference by outside Powers aimed at preventing any people from determining its destiny or choosing its form of government in accordance with its own wishes. The tragedy in Viet-Nam is the prolonged denial, in the most brutal manner, of this basic right of the people. We cannot but strongly deplore and express dismay at the continued and ever-increasing bombardment and aerial bombing of innocent men, women and children, their cities, villages and homes, and the indiscriminate destruction of ports, industries, crops, forests and all other means of existence. We have consistently held and expressed the view for a long time that force and foreign military intervention cannot bring this problem to an end. This view is shared by a large and ever-increasing number of countries. Recent indications are that the United States of America has also come to accept this view. We believe that the seven-point proposal put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South VietNam provides a reasonable basis for peaceful negotiations. The continuance of bombing with savage intensity in Indochina in these circumstances must command our utmost opposition.
68.	We regret the attitude of non-cooperation by Saigon, which holds out little hope of progress towards a peaceful settlement of this problem. The independence, integrity and non-alignment of the three States of Indochina are vital to the peace and progress of Asia. The Geneva accords  provided the framework within which these objectives could be achieved. The decision of the Saigon Government to refuse a visa to the Chairman of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in VietNam is in clear violation of its obligations.
69.	We are disappointed that the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament has not been able to finalize even limited measures during the past year's deliberations. Bearing in mind the link between the strengthening of international security, disarmament and economic development, we expect that the objectives of cessation and reversal of the arms race, especially in nuclear armaments, the elimination of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and the achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control will be vigorously pursued. Our general views supporting the convening of a world disarmament conference, after adequate preparation and with the participation of all States, have been made known and we look forward to a constructive debate during this session.
70.	On the question of the strengthening of international security and related subjects, we are confident that our discussions will enable us to give effect, in a more practical and fruitful manner, to the ideas embodied in the Declaration itself [resolution 2734 (XXV)], with such further elaboration as may be necessary.
71.	The adoption of General Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), declaring the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace, is a welcome follow-up of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security. The creation of zones of peace and co-operation, free from great-Power military rivalries and interventions, and the removal of bases conceived in that context, must be seen as part of legitimate regional efforts towards strengthening international security. My delegation would support the taking of further steps to give fuller meaning and substance to the Declaration and would co-operate with other delegations for this purpose.
72.	The United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm last June, has awakened hopes and fears at the same time. The prevention of pollution is a matter of common concern to the entire human race. But the developing countries cannot accept any line of reasoning which makes the prevention of pollution an excuse for slowing down growth in the poorer countries.
73.	Addressing the Conference, the Prime Minister of India pointed out that "Environment cannot be improved in conditions of poverty. Nor can poverty be eradicated without use of science and technology."
74.	To the bulk of the human population poverty continues to be a much bigger menace than pollution. The true lesson of the Stockholm Conference is that we must start the quest for a world without poverty and without pollution. We consider that the program should be formulated on a world-wide basis in order to assist countries to meet effectively the requirements of the growth of human settlements and to improve the quality of life in existing settlements by creating a human settlement development fund.
75.	The peaceful uses of the sea-bed and the utilization of " the vast and as yet untapped resources of the sea-bed in the interests of mankind remain a matter of importance to us. We cautiously hope that the preparatory work entrusted to the United Nations Committee on the sea-bed  will result in the early convening of a conference on the law of the sea.
76.	Recent developments in the world economy and in the monetary field have caused grave concern to us all and have pointed to the need for the establishing of a more durable and equitable world monetary system. Let us not forget that the world economy will not be restored to health by focusing only on the payments problems of the prosperous countries. Monetary, trade and development problems are all closely interrelated and the developing countries have a vital stake in all of them. The developing countries must therefore participate fully in any decision-making process affecting the future of the international monetary system, so that their legitimate interests may be fully safeguarded.
77.	Last week the International Monetary Fund at its annual meeting  showed some awareness of the problem by setting up a committee of Governors in which the developing countries have increased representation. We consider that the link between the special drawing rights and additional development finance, which we have always advocated and the need for which has now been widely realized, should be established soon.
78.	India participated, with great expectations, in the third session of UNCTAD, held in Santiago earlier this year.
The need for taking speedy follow-up action on the decisions taken at that conference cannot be over-emphasized. It may be too early to attempt a final evaluation of the results of the conference, but clearly many trade and allied issues of great concern to the developing countries have remained unresolved. Continued efforts from all sides are therefore necessary if the high hopes that were entertained in respect of that conference are to be realized.
79.	Two years ago my delegation had occasion to emphasize the great importance of the adoption by the General Assembly of an International Development Strategy for the 1970s. It cannot, however, be said with any degree of confidence that the commitments voluntarily assumed by the international community only a short time ago are being implemented with any vigor and vitality. If anything, there has been a slide-back in the fulfillment of the goals and objectives of the Decade, and the interests of the developing countries have been given only residual consideration. During the remaining years of this decade, therefore, it will be necessary for all of us to catch up with the time loss and to evolve effective and concrete pro-grammes of international co-operation in the economic field.
80.	At the same time, the continuous and well-coordinated review and appraisal of the implementation of the Development Strategy will need to be equally emphasized. We hope that the two newly established committees of the Economic and Social Council, the Committee on Review and Appraisal and the Committee on Science and Technology for Development, will be able to make an effective contribution in this field, in close co-ordination with the useful work already being done by UNCTAD and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization [UNIDOJ.
81.	Our agenda has nearly a hundred items on it, and I have commented on only a limited number of issues. However, we are conscious that many other problems, whether or not they are included in our agenda, create anxieties and difficulties in many parts of the world. The Secretary-General, in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/8701lAdd.l], has given his views on salient aspects of the international scene as it is today, and on the perspective for the future.
82.	In order to complete my presentation I should like to touch upon the Indian experience over the last year or so.
83.	As I said here 12 months ago [1940th meeting], the year 1971 opened for us with great hopes and yet throughout the year we faced endless, and at times nearly insurmountable, difficulties. Confronted with the most appalling difficulties and human tragedies, the Indian people showed remarkable unity and determination. Within three months of the cease-fire nearly ail of the 10 million refugees had gone back to their homes in newly independent Bangladesh. Despite our limited resources we have co-operated fully with Bangladesh in the Herculean task of relief and reconstruction.
84.	The Indian people are now engaged in increasing their agricultural and industrial production. The Government of India has introduced programs in order to achieve greater social justice and more satisfying human values for the Indian people as a whole. In that great experiment the Government and people of India look to the United Nations as a continuous source of inspiration and a vast field of co-operation.
85.	Yet our Organization is constantly being enfeebled, if not undermined, in a number of ways. Some seek in it partisan support; others make an issue of money and finance; still others try to use it to underwrite their domestic policies. All of these may appear to some to be legitimate, but developing countries such as India look upon this Organization as a bastion where international peace and justice can be protected and where progress can be assured. For that purpose the great principles of the Charter cannot be pursued selectively: they should be taken in their totality, and applied realistically in a given situation. U Thant has already drawn attention to this problem, and we are anxious that in the coming years it should be possible to work out a viable system in which the seeming contradiction in Charter principles would no longer prove to be a hindrance to solving several international problems of our time.
86.	Such a step, taken together with the more massive and co-operative utilization of modern science and technology, may well fulfill the dream for which this Organization was established. There is a need for vigilance and study to decide how we can make our Organization more representative, more effective and more responsive to the multitude of needs of people all over the world.
87.	Finally, I would simply say that in spite of many setbacks and disappointments the millions and millions of people of India look to this Organization with faith and hope, and wish that this session of the Assembly may take yet another step, however modest, towards achieving the goal of peace, justice and progress.
Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly for this session, and 1 wish Secretary-General Waldheim well as he embarks on his heavy responsibilities.
65.	There is much violence in the international air, and the atmosphere of it can be felt in this very hall. But we should not forget that the past year has been fruitful for international conciliation. The main theme has been the victory of dialog. Complexes and taboos which had prevented contact between adversaries have almost everywhere been overcome. We read of meetings and agreements between the United States and the People's Republic of China; between West and East Germany; between the Federal Republic of Germany and Poland; between North and South Korea; between the United States and the Soviet Union; between the United States and North Viet-Nam; between the rivals of yesterday who are the partners of today in the European community; and even between India and Pakistan on the very morrow of their armed clash.
66.	How improbable all this would have seemed a short time ago! There is a new spirit in international relations. The polemical and rhetorical mood which dominated the past two decades has given way to a strong instinct for conciliation. Hie question that preoccupies nations today is not how they fell into conflict in the past, but how they can live side by side, together, in the future.
67.	If we look more deeply into the successes of diplomacy in the past year, we find a strong similarity in the conditions under which they were achieved. These successes have all been secured by direct settlement. They have all been the result of laborious and reticent preparation. They have all been the product of agreement, not of external adjudication. In every single case the pursuit of agreement has had to take place outside the United Nations frame-work.
68.	This is of course a significant reflection on the institutional condition of this Organization. It justifies a long hard look at its techniques, its procedures and its atmosphere, which have clearly not been congenial to the craftsmanship of peace. The plain fact is that strident public debate is not a good method of peacemaking but a poor substitute for it. An annual exercise in polemics with preordained voting results either paralyzes conciliation or delays its commencement.
69.	I said here last year [1946th meeting] that the Middle East was the only area in which the parties to a conflict were not engaged in a dialog to bring it to an end. That is still the situation. Those who will have to live together side by side in our region have still not come face to face at a table of negotiation. This is a primary source of deadlock. In all other international disputes the breakthrough has come on the level of communication, and not through substantive commitments ahead of negotiation. The very decision of governments to make contact with each other creates a dynamic of its own. It transforms the context of their relationships and leads to mutual adjustment of their positions and thereafter towards binding agreements.
70.	Despite this central disappointment, the Middle Eastern scene has not become darker in the past year. The cease-fire has been maintained. There seems to be less feasibility for full-scale hostilities. Despite deplorable slogans about "inevitable struggle", it is clear that resumed fighting would serve no interest and advance no settlement. The retirement of Soviet forces and equipment from Egypt has stripped the conflict of its dangerous global dimension. Powers outside the Middle East cannot solve our region's problems; they have not fought its wars and they will not build its peace. The idea of a settlement imposed from outside has become visibly weaker. It is explicitly rejected by some of the Powers; and the summit meeting between the leaders of the United States of America and the Soviet Union in May 1972 revealed what an illusory prospect it is. Once it becomes generally understood that a military solution is not feasible and that an imposed solution is excluded by the international realities of our times, a negotiated peace will emerge as the only valid alternative. The central aim of our policy is to create this consciousness: we aspire to break out of deadlock into a new vision and a new hope.
71.	The developments in Egypt during July 1972 made it natural for the Israeli Government to restate its positions on a negotiated peace. Our ambition is to see an end of belligerency and conflict and to advance towards a peaceful future. Negotiation is not an act of "humiliation" or "surrender" for anybody, as some Arab leaders have said. It is a supreme assertion of national sovereignty and of international responsibility. Courage in leadership does not belong to the battlefield alone; it can be put to the service of conciliation and peace.
72.	In maintaining the cease-fire positions until peace is obtained, we do not seek to perpetuate the cease-fire lines or to freeze the existing situation for ever. Our proposals for permanent boundaries to be established for the first time between Israel and its Arab neighbors will be determined by the need to ensure security and to prevent new wars such as that which arose from the fragile and vulnerable armistice lines of 1967. The construction of a stable peace and security between Israel and Egypt requires a precise, detailed negotiation on territorial delimitation.
73.	The deadlock on the over-all settlement in this sector arises from the fact that Egypt has so far refused to begin negotiation unless its position on the final outcome is conceded in advance. There is no valid precedent for such an approach. Negotiation creates the final result; the final result does not create negotiation. We seek no binding commitments from Egypt in advance on matters that are subject to negotiation. We have not sought to determine the final peace boundary, and we have drawn no alternative maps.
74.	It is unlikely that a transition from complete deadlock to complete peace can be made in one stage. Accordingly, the Israeli Government through its Prime Minister reiterated on 27 July this year its readiness to negotiate a special Suez Canal agreement. Such an accord would be a contribution and a stimulus to an over-all peace. We would consider such an arrangement as a temporary solution and as a step towards peace. In the atmosphere of confidence created by such an agreement, a momentum for further accords would be generated.
75.	It is far-fetched to assert that the positions which I have briefly outlined today offer Arab Governments no possibility of honorable and meaningful negotiation. These principles correspond to the norms of international conciliation. What is required is the application to the
Middle East of the spirit and method that have had successful results elsewhere.
76.	The lack of Egyptian response so far to Israel's willingness to negotiate a temporary Suez agreement has long been an obstacle to progress. So, too, is the deadlock created by Cairo's insistence on determining the boundary and withdrawal issues before and without negotiation. In addition, a new massive barrier to peace has arisen through the resurgence of the Arab terrorist outrages which have sent a shock of revulsion through the civilized world.
77.	The story seems unending. Only a few hours ago, the heroes of the Arab liberation movement handed a transistor radio to a woman passenger about to embark on an airliner from Paris to Israel, with hundreds of passengers. It contained a heavy explosive charge. The passenger showed the vigilance necessary to transmit it to the security authorities. The moral qualities of this terrorism come to expression here.
78.	When the Secretary-General decided to request the inclusion in the agenda of an item on international terrorism [A/8791 and Add.l], he was giving a correct and perceptive interpretation of his rights and duties under the Charter. Organized groups of terrorists, for whom violence is both a means and an end, are threatening the texture of international life. Innocent civilians live in fear of attack by murder squads from abroad. The airlines work in an atmosphere of vulnerability. The international mails are violated by the assaults of cowardly men whose malice knows no compassion and no restraint.
79.	There are many forms and varieties of terrorist violence. They spread like a contagious germ. They respond to destructive and nihilist impulses that have taken root in contemporary culture. And the ultimate arrogance of the terrorists is not that they perform their outrages, but that they then ask for understanding and endorsement. They base their assault on the proposition that all restraints, civilities, immunities and human solidarities must be sacrificed to what they unilaterally proclaim to be their "rights". When they endanger the principles of international order, such as the sovereignty of States, the legal systems of free societies, the universal freedom of the air, the physical safety of men and women who handle the international mail, then the United Nations would lose all credit and repute if its Secretary-General were not to focus its attention and conscience on the approaching abyss.
80.	It is disquieting that the inclusion of the item in the agenda was so strongly opposed that it was nearly lost. Civilized mankind should take a keen look at the Governments which opposed the inclusion of the item or advocated its long postponement. The truth is that their Organization came within a few votes of moral death last week. And the Foreign Minister of Brazil was perfectly right in deploring the General Assembly's failure to endorse the wording of the item as recommended by the General Committee [2038th meeting]. Once the deliberate and unprovoked murder of unarmed civilians is justified by reference to the murderers' "motives" or "frustrations", we might as well include murder amongst the legitimate indulgences of a permissive society and wipe the sixth commandment off the tablet of man's ethical history.
81.	The Israeli delegation will support the draft resolution presented by the United States [A/C.6/L.851] and will give careful study in an affirmative spirit to the text proposed for an international convention against terrorism [A/C.6/ L.850].
82.	But while the problem has its international aspects, especially in aviation and in police security, much depends on the willingness of individual Governments to take measures of prevention on their own soil. The terrorists are particularly active on the territory of free democratic States in which tolerance and hospitality are cherished values. It thus becomes painfully necessary for such States to develop habits of sharp detection and action which are, in a sense, contrary to their easy temperament. But a free society cannot long survive if it fails to defend itself against those who would destroy its freedom and menace its survival by illicit violence. Similarly, many a government must face a moment of agonizing truth when it is called upon to judge the results of giving the terrorists what they want under the threat of dreadful blackmail. To withstand hijackers and kidnappers requires very strong nerves. A compromise convenient for the short term will usually have the effect of giving terrorism a new lease of strength, thereby endangering more victims than are immediately at stake.
83.	In addition to the need for international and national action there is an important area for regional co-operation. The terrorists have made the liberal societies of Western Europe the main arena of their activities. It is here that the majority of outrages against vulnerable aircraft and civilian establishments have taken place. We attach importance and interest to the discussion initiated by the Federal Republic of Germany at the Council of the European Community a few weeks ago regarding measures to combat international terrorism.
84.	My Government has considered certain specific concrete proposals for international, regional and national measures to combat terrorism and we shall bring them forward at the appropriate Committee stage.
85.	It is of course right and inevitable that the item on our agenda [item 92] should be drafted in universal terms. It would, however, be mere pretense to lose sight of the fact that the most rampant terrorism today is that which has its root in Arab hostility to Israel. It was after all the ghastly crime at Munich that gave the incentive for the debate which the General Assembly has decided to hold.
86.	In this context I come to discuss the methods used by Arab terrorist organizations; their political aims; and, above all, the crucial role of Arab Governments in creating and maintaining them.
87.	The original targets of Arab terrorism in the early 1950s were the lives and homes of Israelis on their own soil. The toll was heavy and constant. A bus load of passengers at Scorpion Pass; a group of farmers celebrating a wedding at Patish; a party of scholars on an archaeological expedition at Ramat Rachel; farmers in the collective villages of the Jordan Valley; fishermen on Lake Tiberias. These are random extracts from our nation's memory of bereavement. No other people has had to live all its days with a mark of interrogation hanging over its collective and individual security. A United Nations representative, General E. L. M. Burns of Canada, wrote then of these fedayeen activities that they were worthy of the Nazis. In those days murder was not regarded anywhere as a symptom of revolutionary "progress".
88.	The terrorist bands called the "fedayeen", which, thereafter, became the "Palestine Liberation Organization", developed their main activity in the 1950s and the early 1960s. In other words, they have absolutely nothing to do with the situation created by the 1967 war. Their object has been and is to destroy security of life for Israel, irrespective of what the armistice or cease-fire configuration is at any given time. After 1967 they transferred their violence from frontier areas to Israel's urban centers; shoppers in Mahne Yehuda Market in Jerusalem; housewives in a supermarket; students in a college cafeteria; passers-by in a crowded bus station-and on one horrifying morning a clearly marked school bus at Avivim in Northern Israel. As the mangled bodies of our children, still clutching toys and copybooks, were flown by helicopter to hospitals and morgues, there came across the frontier the gloating voice of Mr. George Habash, Commander of the so-called Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, announcing that it was wise to kill Israelis while they were still young. It is difficult to speak or hear of this morbid monster without a cold chill of revulsion. The essential point for these "liberators" is that their victims should be defenseless, vulnerable and unarmed. This is their chivalry.
89.	The rest is part of the recent experience and memory of everyone in this hall. Before the squalid butchery at Munich, the worst horror was at Lod Airport, where a group of depraved mercenaries from a distant land methodically slaughtered 26 civilian passengers-one of them was an eminent Israeli physicist, others were humble Puerto Rican pilgrims coming from the United States. Condemnation was world-wide; but alas it was not universal. Those who take their weekly instruction from the cultivated prose of Hassanein Heykal should ponder his commentary on the massacre at Lod. I quote from an article by him dated 9 June 1972:
"If there had been three Palestinians there instead of three Japanese I should have been enthusiastic about it, in spite of the fact that at the bottom of my heart I'm for the three Japanese."
90.	The Egyptian Prime Minister's reaction was less sophisticated and more simple, although it had a note of blasphemy. He invoked divine blessing on the murderous example:
"I want to say that what happened at Lod Airport proves that we can, with Allah's help, achieve victory in our battle with Israel. This is the only reaction I have to this matter."
91.	In the history of revolutionary violence there is a constant clash between ends and means. But in the Arab terrorist movement, dedicated to enslavement and genocide, there is no such ambivalence. The aims which Arab terrorism serves are even worse than the means it employs. The means are murder and kidnapping. The aim is not to win freedom for the Arab nation, whose freedom is so
amply and lavishly assured, but to liquidate the national? liberation which the most ancient of nations has already achieved.
92.	There is no need of interpretation here. Quotation is enough. The Palestine terrorist organizations are not at all concerned with finding a solution for the problems of Palestinian Arabs within the framework of a Middle East of which Israel forms a part. This, in fact, is what they are fighting to prevent. The aim is much more radical. Let their leader, Yasser Arafat, speak for himself:
"Al Fatah started its activities in 1956 and its armed struggle in 1965. Its aim is the liquidation of the Zionist Israeli existence."
President El-Sadat is often very frank on this theme. On 2 June 1971 he told the Egyptian National Council:
"The Zionist conquest to which we are being subjected will not be terminated by the return of the occupied territories. This is a new Crusader war which will persist during our generation and through the coming one."
93.	A document called the Palestine Covenant was adopted by all the Palestine liberation groups at the sixth congress of the Palestinian National Council, which met in Cairo in September 1968. The Covenant lays down that the Palestine State is to be an Arab State, that it is to comprise the whole area west of the Jordan not part of it, and that only Jews who were living in Palestine before the "Zionist invasion" could be citizens. The rest -the vast majority- would be pressed to depart. So the aim of this terrorist movement is the liquidation of the solitary Israeli State for the purpose of establishing the nineteenth Arab State. A compact expression of this policy came from former Egyptian Foreign Minister Mahmoud Riad in a press conference in Paris on 1 October 1971, when he said: "I give complete support to the organizations and their program of wiping out the Jewish State."
94.	The concept of "politicide"-the extinction of the identity and personality of a State-is so unfamiliar, indeed unique, that it may be difficult for other Governments to grasp its significance. Israelis study this notion against the background of another unique experience, the memory of which no other people has ever shared. In the Hitler decade we learned that some things are too terrible to believe but that nothing in our people's history is too terrible to have happened.
95.	In questioning Israel's axiomatic right to security and independence, the terrorist organizations commit a disruptive heresy in the life of our age. They rise up in revolt against history, law, justice, humanity and peace. There are now 18 Arab States, with a population of 100 million, an area of 4-1/2 million square miles and unlimited wealth and opportunity. Facing them alone on the scales of equity is the small State of Israel. There is, therefore, only one nation which stands or falls in history by the way in which this conflict is resolved. By-its solitude and uniqueness, Israel's secure existence is the overriding moral imperative in this dispute. The moral quality of the Arab terrorist organizations is determined not only by their brutal acts but by the destructive vision which inspires them. Their
close links with neo-Nazi and anti-Semitic organizations are in full harmony with their inner nature.
96.	I have said that the resurgence of Arab terrorism is a massive obstacle or the road to peace. This is not only a reflection on the psychological atmosphere. *t is true that a condition of hate, fear, bloodshed and bereavement works against the prospect of a conciliatory effort, which would be difficult enough in any case. What is no less grave is tha we find it impossible to accept the distinction between these organizations and the Arab Governments which are our destined partners in the peace effort. The support given by those Governments to the organizations undermines the credibility of their peaceful professions and even the professions are few and far between.
97.	Egyptian support for the terrorists finds expression in the press, radio and television. The terrorist leaders see Cairo as the center at which they co-ordinate matters of common concern with the League of Arab States. Egypt serves as the center where the heads of the terrorist movements meet the representatives of the various Arab countries passing through Cairo. Not a week passes without a central Egyptian personality meeting with a terrorist leader for co-ordination and co-operation. Cairo Radio gives a special program on Palestine in which terrorist activities are constantly praised. The special radio station broadcasting from Cairo, called "Saut Falastin", belongs entirely to the terrorists, who are free to broadcast what they like. The station broadcasts constant agitation and incitement against Israel and justifies every terrorist action.
98.	Egyptian support on the military level is very broad. On many occasions delegations of the organizations with Arafat at their head pay visits to Egyptian army camps in the rear and at the front. Arafat wears an Egyptian army decoration for valor.
99.	The terrorist organizations are permitted to carry on activity everywhere in the country to mobilize volunteers. Apart from their own independent mobilization machinery, they receive active support in this respect from the Libyan Embassy in Cairo, which openly signs up volunteers, pays them and sends them to Libya for training.
100.	Delegations from the various terrorist organizations receive information and instruction in Egyptian military bases. The Fatah stands apart from the rest and has special privileges in Egypt. Its members actually go through training together with Egyptian soldiers in the ranks of the Egyptian army. The "Ein Jalud" unit of the Palestine Liberation Army is commanded by an Egyptian officer. Egypt also helps the organizations with supplies of arms, ammunition and other military material.
101.	The crisis that broke out between Lebanon and the terrorists in June 1972 brought to the fore Egypt's role as guardian and protector of the organizations. Realizing that the terrorist movement might find itself obliged to quit Lebanese territory, the Egyptian President took action to forestall any Lebanese attempt to harm the terrorists. Mahmoud Riad, Secretary of the League of Arab States, was sent as a special mediator. President El-Sadat was not content with that. He sent his personal representative to Beirut in order to exert pressure on the Lebanese Government not to cancel the Cairo agreement of November 1969, which provided for the terrorists' presence in Lebanon.
102.	Egypt's leaders address the terrorist bodies at all their conferences. In any clash between the terrorists and their victims, the Government sponsors the terrorists' cause. In September 1970 a Pan American aircraft landed in Cairo, where the hijackers calmly blew it up in the sight of the authorities. When the Jordanian Defense Minister was murdered as a guest on Egyptian soil, his hosts allowed the murderers to go free.
103.	In Lebanon there are 5,000 terrorists, whose constant activity is undisturbed by the authorities. Under the Cairo agreement between Lebanon and the terrorist organizations, the Lebanese Government granted the terrorists legal recognition, freedom to organize and a base for activity against Israel. Beirut is the seat and center of terrorist planning and propaganda. It is from Beirut that groups set out with detailed plans to commit murder and hijackings and set off explosions in Europe and elsewhere. It was in Beirut and Baalbek that Kozo Okamoto received shelter and training for his assault on the airport at Lod.
104.	Syria was the first Arab State which supported terrorist activities from the outset. President Al-Assad said on 2 September 1971 in the weekly journal Al Mussawar that:
"... the fedayeen are to be found in more than one area of Syria, and they have absolute freedom of movement on the Syrian front. Moreover,"-said President Al-Assad-"we encourage and stimulate them and often we complain that they are not sufficiently active . . .".
105.	Libyan support for terrorist assaults in the Middle East and Europe needs no documentation. President Qaddafi's admiration of the Munich murderers was rhapsodic and explicit.
106.	Whatever the position may be with other terrorist groups, there is no truth or value in a discussion of Arab terrorism which does not face the fact that it is a recognized arm of Arab Governments in a policy of war against Israel. These organizations could not exist, still less function, without the shelter, support, endorsement, financial aid, arms, training facilities and territorial bases supplied by certain Arab States. All the activities of these organizations without exception violate the principles which the signatories of the Charter including Arab signatories-pledged themselves to defend. It is not an accident that the Governments which sponsor Arab terrorist organizations are unable to fulfill normal international obligations. The Arab Governments have not signed the Tokyo Convention;  they have not signed the Montreal Convention;? they have not responded to the Secretary-General's proposal for drawing the attention of the twenty-seventh session of this Assembly to the problem of international terrorism [A/8791 andAdd.lJ.
107.	Now. whether or not the General Assembly can take effective action in this matter, it does at least possess the capacity of accurate judgment. Such honorable words as "liberation", "resistance", "commando" have no application and have never before been applied to attempts to liquidate a lawful sovereignty, to compound the Nazi assault on Jewish survival and to wage a campaign of indiscriminate assault against civilians in the Middle East and elsewhere.
108.	The attitude of Arab Governments towards Arab terrorists is today a graver obstacle to peace than the admittedly disparate positions of the parties to the problems of withdrawal, boundaries, navigation, peace, etc. I say in all frankness: I cannot today believe that Egypt and Syria are willing, or that Lebanon is able, to make peace with Israel; and in that profound skepticism the attitude of those movements to terrorism plays the central role.
109.	The discussion must inevitably take us back to a consideration of the word "Palestine" that appears as the title of the terrorist organizations. Now, is it true that there is a distinct people deprived of self-determination, languishing in poverty, squalor and humiliation, dependent on organized violence as its sole prospect of redemption? Nothing could be further from the truth.
110.	There are some 2-3/4 million Palestine Arabs in the world today. Three quarters of them are in the original territory of Palestine, on both sides of the Jordan that is to say, under Jordanian rule or within the area at present under Israel's jurisdiction. The other quarter are in Kuwait, Lebanon, Syria and Saudi Arabia. Moreover, 1,300,000 Palestine Arabs now hold Jordanian citizenship, which has been available to them since 1950, when Jordan annexed the territories of the west bank with the consent of the Palestinian leaders.
111.	For the entire period of the armistice regime between 1949 and 1967 all Palestine Arabs-except a few hundred thousand who are citizens of Israel were living under Arab sovereignty and Arab flags. In other words, the question of their civic and political identity was a matter for determination by Arab Governments and authorities alone.
112.	The Kingdom of Jordan was a Palestinian State, in the double sense that a majority of its citizens were Palestinians and a majority of all the Palestinians in the world were citizens of that State.
113.	In a final peace settlement a new permanent boundary will be drawn between Israel and its eastern neighbor. Some hundreds of thousands of Palestine Arabs would in all conditions be a community within the State of Israel; this is normal. There is no such thing as 100 per cent self- determination, although the Arab nation comes closer to that figure than any other in history. Those Palestinian Arabs who will be outside Israel's permanent boundary once it is drawn will be free to determine their future in conjunction with the Arab Governments and peoples concerned.
114.	As recently as 8 September 1972, the Israeli Prime Minister made it plain that in her conception of a peace agreement there would have to be important modifications of the previous armistice lines in order to preserve security and to avoid new wars. But she added that it was not her conception that under such an agreement the vast majority of all the Palestine Arabs in the administered territories would have to fall within Israeli jurisdiction.
115.	It follows, therefore, that the political status of the Palestine Arabs would find its solution within a peace settlement. Now, here is the most drastic paradox of all: the "Palestine Liberation" organizations are the implacable opponents of an Arab peace with Israel. Yet nothing but peace with Israel can clarify the political and civil destiny of the Palestine Arabs in a manner compatible with Israel's sovereignty and security, with regional peace and with their own basic interests.
116.	In the meantime, this community is not languishing in despair and poverty: there is a new freedom of movement and contact. The national product of the Samaria-Judea-Gaza areas, administered by Israel since 1967, in which a million Arabs live, has nearly doubled since 1968. The per capita income has risen from 1 670 in 1968 to 1 1,100 in 1972. The agricultural product has tripled. There were less than 4,000 private vehicles in 1969; there are nearly 7,000 today. There were 3,000 television sets there in 1967; today there are 40,000. Fifty thousand workers find labor opportunities in the Israeli market, from which they bring back  1300 million a year. There is no unemployment. Wage levels have trebled since 1967. The value of exports from these territories has risen from  1220 million to  1305 million.
117.	Perhaps more significant than the language of statistics is the spectacle of human contact, commerce and exchange that brings hundreds of thousands of Israelis and hundreds of thousands of Palestine Arabs into a normal and fruitful communion the like of which never existed before.
118.	In the latter half of 1971, 200,000 Arabs from neighboring countries freely crossed the Jordan bridges towards Israel. It is not inconceivable that, when the agreed peace boundary is drawn, the relations between Israel and its eastern Arab neighbors could evolve across open boundaries into something like the community structure in parts of Western Europe today.
119.	So while Arab terrorists in Beirut and European capitals manufacture their bombs and plot their assassinations, the majority of the Palestinian Arabs are living solid lives enriched by a widening contact with their neighbors still clouded, of course, by a lack of political definition, but nevertheless alive with the hope and prospect of a peaceful regional future.
120.	There is, of course, hardship in every sector of Middle Eastern life. But there is not one single problem of the Palestinian Arabs that can be advanced towards a solution by the action of the terrorist groups. There is not one single legitimate interest of the Palestinian Arabs that would not come to reasonable satisfaction in a negotiated peace settlement between Israel and its neighbors. The terrorist groups are not only the enemies of law and order across the Middle East and in many parts of the world: they also alienate the Palestine Arabs from their true interest and their authentic vocation.
121.	The problem of curbing the terrorists is now our most urgent preoccupation. We are resolved to resist and weaken them in our region. We believe that national, regional and international action against Arab terrorism is an indispensable prelude to the fruitful exploration of peaceful prospects for the Middle East.
122.	I have spoken of psychological and human obstacles on the road to peace. Some of these obstacles could easiK be removed. I refer, for example, to the problem of prisoners of war.
123.	There are 10 Israeli prisoners of war in Egyptian hands; they have been there for two and a half to three years. On the other hand, Israel holds 61 Egyptian prisoners of war, most of whom have been in captivity for nearly three years. Syria has been holding three Israeli prisoners of war for the last two and a half years. Israel holds 45 Syrian prisoners of war. Israel also holds 10 Lebanese prisoners of war.
124.	With the cease-fire well into its third year we propose the mutual release and repatriation of all prisoners of war. The arithmetical advantage is overwhelmingly on the Arab side; but in the broader human sense everyone would gain.
125.	The Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 12 August 1949 lays down in article 118 that: "Prisoners of war shall be released and repatriated without delay after the cessation of active hostilities." This provision of the Geneva Convention is clear and definite. In accordance with it there should have been a release of prisoners when the cease-fire entered into force on 7 August 1970.
126.	Articles 109 and 110 of the Convention provide that prisoners of war who are seriously wounded or who are seriously sick must be sent back to their own country even before the cessation of active hostilities.
127.	It is reported that Egypt considers the six pilots amongst the Israeli prisoners that it has captured as being of greater importance than the 60 Egyptian prisoners held by Israel, who are mostly ordinary soldiers. But this is certainly not a humane approach to the problem. All prisoners of war, irrespective of rank, must be released in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Geneva Convention. A gesture of goodwill by Egypt and Syria on behalf of 115 Arabs and 13 Israeli prisoners would help diminish the acute lack of confidence which now obstructs any progress towards peace. What valid argument can there possibly be against this course?
128.	At the same time our Jewish destiny and responsibility inspire our concern for the plight of the small Jewish minority in Syria where 4,500 Jews are held as helpless hostages, forbidden to depart, discriminated against, humiliated, their movement restricted, essential services denied them, their property confiscated, and their livelihood in constant jeopardy.
129.	The plight of Syrian Jewry has been brought to the United Nations General Assembly and its Committees in the past. Two years ago committees to help the Jews of the Arab countries arose in 25 different countries in four continents, and an international committee came into existence. Some of the Arab countries responded to the humanitarian pressure of world public opinion and permitted the Jews who had remained in their territories to leave. Only Syria has persisted in its present position. Public opinion should not rest or remain silent until the imprisoned are released and the Jews of Syria permitted to reach safety.
130.	Year in and year out the problem of the Jewish community in the Soviet Union comes to the General Assembly and its Committees.
131.	The history of the Jews in Russia is a continuous chain of hardship and suffering from the days of the Tsars until the present time. Recently their urgent aspiration to emigrate to their historic homeland has broken through the barrier of silence. Thousands have reached Israel, where they have been received with a deep poignancy arising from a long separation. Many people of goodwill throughout the world saw in the emigration of these Jews, however few, a sign of broader tolerance and humane understanding.
132.	But there has now been a setback; while still permitting the emigration of thousands of Jews, the Soviet authorities have placed limitations on the freedom of movement of scores of thousands in disregard of their fundamental human rights. Many have been arrested just for wishing to go to Israel and have been sentenced to imprisonment. The Soviet information media publish calumnies, slanders and incitement against them.
133.	Many of those who register in the emigration offices are dismissed from employment and thus lose their livelihood. An open anti-Semitic campaign is being conducted, and in the period 1971-1972 alone, dozens of anti-Semitic books have been published in the Soviet Union, in addition to the anti-Jewish campaign conducted by the press and official media of information.
134.	And now as part of the attempt to dissuade Jews from submitting applications for exit permits to Israel, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics decided on 3 August to impose a special tax on Jews with higher education who wish to go to Israel. This effectively deprives thousands of people of any possibility and any hope ever to join their families and to realize their national aspiration. A scale has been established for each level of education, sometimes reaching $25,000 and more per person.
135.	It seems to us that the Soviet argument on the brain drain is not relevant or applicable here. The Soviet Union is not one of the needy developing countries, and Israel is not offering Jewish members of the scientific professions who come from the Soviet Union superior financial rewards. Israel is only able to give them a home, where they will feel as Jews who are not being discriminated against.
136.	Likewise irrelevant is the argument that graduates are obliged, as it were, to repay the cost of their education.
137.	The noted Soviet demographer, Urlanis, states in an article published on 26 July 1970 in Literaturnaya Gazeta that, in the conditions obtaining in the Soviet Union, the average university graduate repays by four years' work the State's investment in his training. The majority of scientists have thus already repaid that investment many times over by their creativity, their invention, their research and their professional work. The decree is not only a harassment of thousands of Jews, it is a serious infringement of intellectual freedom and scientific liberty. It creates the enslavement of scientists and intellectuals whose only crime is that they have studied and worked and contributed to the progress of their country, and today obey the call of their historic consciousness and wish to pursue their intellectual and social vocation elsewhere.
138.	Scientific personalities and institutions across the world have reacted with astonishment and indignation to this limitation of intellectual freedom. It is precisely because we wish to see a greater harmony between East and West, between the Soviet Union and the West, in all fields, including that of science, that we raise our voice in protest against this superfluous obstacle to international understanding.
139.	The General Assembly moves towards its agenda in an atmosphere of crisis for international institutions. There was never a time when a universal framework for international relations was more objectively necessary than today. Yet the concept of international organization is still surrounded by apathy and doubt. The United Nations should act with consistent purpose within the real limits of its capacity and strength. It should reinforce its role in international development in the light of the difficulties and dislocations revealed at the third session of UNCTAD in Santiago. It should take a careful course on the problems of the environment which were impressively brought to light at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm in June. We must not allow an exaggerated ecological alarmist to act as a brake on accelerated development: for poverty and backwardness in most of the world have a more polluting effect on the life of our age than the excesses of industrialization in a small part of it. We should complete it universality by the admission of Bangladesh to membership. And we must not discredit our protest against racial discrimination in the southern parts of Africa by a craven silence about the brutal and capricious persecution of Asians undertaken by the present ruler of Uganda. The distribution of tasks and responsibilities between sovereign Governments and international institutions requires a delicate exercise in understanding. The United Nations must become an instrument for solving conflicts, not an arena for waging them. It should take a diplomatic, not a parliamentary view. Its task is to provide and promote consensus and agreement, not to take refuge in illusions of enforcement or adjudication. If we temper ambition with restraint we may yet endow this Organization with a constructive purpose and enlarge its humane role in the history of our turbulent age.
Mr. President, New Zealand joins with the previous speakers in offering you its warmest congratulations on your election to the presidency. You have already brought efficiency and vigor to the conduct of our work. Like other speakers, I would like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to my personal friend, Adam Malik, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, who presided so admirably over last year's arduous session.
174.	We meet this year oppressed by the tragic events of recent weeks. A new and horrible form of savagery has been visited upon a desperately vulnerable and unprepared world. Yet this year more than most has been marked by the promise of a new era of international peace and stability. For most of its life the United Nations has mirrored the mutual suspicions and hostilities that characterized the attitude of the super-Powers over that period. Now the easing of tension in the relationships among the great Powers is reflected in a growing pattern of reconciliation among the smaller Powers. The courageous initiative of President Nixon, the summit talks in Peking, Moscow, Warsaw and elsewhere and other vigorous moves towards detente, particularly by the two super-Powers, are in the best spirit of the Charter. As both a courtesy and a duty we should pay a tribute to all the Powers concerned for the prospect of a new peace which seems to lie ahead of us.
175.	Another development in international relationships that is welcome to New Zealand, as a country having a special interest in the European Economic Community, is the impending enlargement of that Community through the entry of the United Kingdom and other new members. We look forward to the emergence of a stronger, more outward-looking and united Western Europe. The trend towards reconciliation between the countries of Western and Eastern Europe is gathering momentum. The negotiation of non-aggression treaties between West Germany and Poland and between West Germany and the Soviet Union and the four-Power agreement on Berlin were welcome first steps in that direction. We strongly hope that the current negotiations between the two Germanys will end in an agreement that will permit us very soon to welcome both to membership in the United Nations,
176.	The changes in great-Power relationships have modified the policies of countries in the area of the world of most direct interest to New Zealand. I refer to Asia and the Pacific. We have been especially encouraged by the Simla meeting between the President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India aimed at settling peacefully the differences between their two countries. The major problems, of course, are not yet solved; but the way has been opened for a durable settlement in the subcontinent under which the three countries of the region will be able to live together in peace. I would emphasize that New Zealand earnestly feels the need for such a settlement.
177.	Last year's crisis in East Pakistan caused human suffering on a vast and frightening scale. New Zealand, small though it is, has not hesitated to draw attention to the material and political needs which had to be met in order to end that tragic situation. The new State of Bangladesh has emerged from the chaos and suffering. However, independence alone and of itself cannot put an end to human misery. The reconstruction and development of Bangladesh represents an enormous task which the new Government cannot be expected to accomplish without massive external assistance. A great deal has already been done, both by the United Nations and by individual countries. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Indian Government, specifically, have successfully tackled a refugee operation larger than any ever before undertaken in the history of the world. The United Nations and non-governmental bodies have undertaken rehabilitation operations on an unprecedented scale and have thus averted more widespread suffering in the new nation. We in New Zealand have tried to help wherever we can to reduce the suffering in Bangladesh and to promote peace and stability among fellow members of the Commonwealth of Nations on the subcontinent. However, much more needs to be done. In such a vast undertaking it is essential that all partners have the full support and co-operation of the others. For this practical reason, New Zealand believes it is important that Bangladesh should be admitted to the United Nations as soon as possible.
178.	By a happy coincidence, the agreement between India and Pakistan was followed almost immediately by one between two other Asian neighbors, North and South Korea. That agreement opens the way for the deep and bitter hostilities of the past to be worked out by the Koreans themselves. In due course the Organization will no doubt have a role to play. At this juncture, however, we believe that the Assembly took a very wise decision when last week it deferred consideration of the Korean items [2036th meeting], thereby acknowledging that the two Koreas should have the opportunity, and should be encouraged, to come to terms with each other.
179.	The movement in Asia towards reconciliation has not so far been reflected in Indochina and VietNam, in Laos and in the Khmer Republic but it is not for want of effort on the part of South Vietnam and its friends. The United States has offered to withdraw all its forces in return for an internationally supervised cease-fire and the return of the American prisoners. The United States and South Viet-Nam together have offered to hold new elections in which the national liberation front can take its full part in organizing the elections and to have the elections internationally supervised. President Thieu of South Vietnam has offered to resign before the elections take place. My Government supports these proposals, which are directed towards obtaining a just and durable peace settlement in that part of the world.
180.	The encouragement that countries have had this year to seek a peaceful resolution of their differences has also been reflected in the Pacific region. New Zealand, Australia and a number of newly independent small nations of the South Pacific have been developing a very real spirit of community and co-operation. More recently the most outstanding evidence of this spirit has been the creation of what is known as the South Pacific Forum. In that Forum the government leaders of Fiji, Tonga, Western Samoa, Nauru, the Cook Islands, Australia and New Zealand have met together to discuss issues of practical interest to our Governments and peoples. As was mentioned by my Australian colleague yesterday, Papua New Guinea has been invited to observe the next meeting. The first Forum, held in Wellington in August last year, has been followed in 1972 by two further meetings, one in Canberra, Australia, and the other in Suva, Fiji. Talks have covered a very wide range of subjects. However, it is a measure of the Forum's concern with immediate practical issues that it has already established a South Pacific Bureau for Economic Co-operation. This is a serious effort to stimulate new thinking and create greater opportunities for the development of trade and economic advancement throughout that vast area of the Pacific Ocean, particularly in the south.
181.	There is scope for a much greater involvement by the United Nations in the economic progress of the developing countries and the newly independent countries of the South Pacific. Perhaps because of their geographical remoteness, the problems of these countries too have seemed remote to other countries. Yet only a very little more attention, as measured in the total United Nations effort, would do so much more for these small and isolated communities. For that reason we are very pleased that the Asian Development Bank has accepted the independent island nations of the South Pacific as members and that loans are already being made available to them. Also, the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East is becoming increasingly involved in the development of the island nations, as are the United Nations Development Program, UNICEF and the specialized agencies concerned. However, I repeat that there is still much more to be done in that area.
182.	Over the years, New Zealand has involved the United Nations in the process of decolonization as it applied to New Zealand's island Territories. Some years ago we invited the United Nations missions to observe the act of self- determination in the former Trust Territory of Western Samoa, and also in the Cook Islands. This year the Assembly will have a report from a visiting mission of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which at New Zealand's invitation visited the Non-Self-Governing Territory of Nive [A/8723/Rev. 1, chap. XVI, annex I]. That mission was under the able leadership of Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania. In my own Government's view, the report of the Committee is a very well-balanced, fair and, we believe, helpful document. We hope it will do more than enable the Assembly to consider the political issues to which the report itself was directed. It should also lead to a greater understanding of the special problems of survival and development faced by other very small dependent Territories.
183.	A minute ago I touched upon the remoteness of the problems of the South Pacific as seen by the rest of the world, and perhaps especially by the European countries. I draw attention now to the serious apprehension which exists in that vast area about the continuance of nuclear testing in the Pacific region.
184.	There is a regional concern because this year a further series of nuclear tests was conducted in the Tuamoto archipelago, and that is the fifth such series since 1967. My Government is aware that the problem of nuclear weapons testing is a global one and that nuclear tests are at present being conducted by four different nations. We also realize that nuclear testing is a part of the wider problem of the nuclear arms race. But I want to make it quite clear here today that the continuation of atmospheric nuclear testing in French Polynesia is deeply resented by the people of the whole of the South Pacific region and, indeed, of the North Pacific as well.
185.	At its meeting in Fiji earlier this month, the South Pacific Forum that I spoke of earlier unanimously expressed its deep concern that the French Government, in conducting its latest nuclear tests, should have failed to recognize the wishes of the people of the South Pacific area, despite the views so clearly expressed by the Governments and the peoples of those countries. The Forum strongly reaffirmed its opposition to all such nuclear experiments anywhere in the world.
186.	In support of that standpoint, the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, referred to again this afternoon, has asked all States intending to carry out nuclear weapons tests to abandon those plans.  Countries in Asia, and in Latin America bordering the Pacific, have declared their total opposition. It is our intention to seek the Assembly's endorsement of these calls to cease all nuclear weapons testing.
187.	Nuclear testing is an issue on which the smaller States have had to speak bluntly to some of the larger Powers whose activities affect us.
188.	In the debate last year [1955th meeting], the New Zealand representative spoke of the great Powers taking policy decisions that profoundly affect the economic stability of smaller nations. There is still a pressing need for the great Powers to recognize that smaller economies can rock dangerously in the waves of their major-policy decisions. There is still a pressing need for a further liberalization of world trade and monetary matters. New Zealand attaches considerable importance to a successful outcome of the multilateral trade negotiations under the framework of GATT in 1973. The Kennedy Round failed to meet our hopes.
189.	New Zealand, like so many other, smaller countries, is heavily dependent on trade in primary agricultural commodities. We are vitally concerned, on that account, with the progress that will have to be made with eliminating or reducing barriers to trade in agricultural products. The developing countries quite rightly want to have their say in these talks, in these negotiations, in these kinds of decisions. Like us, they are less interested in tariff reductions on industrial products, which seem to be the pervading preoccupation of such talks, than in primary products. There are few benefits for smaller and developing nations in enhancing the economic advantages of the great industrial Powers. But I urge the need for less international charity and more true international economic reality.
190.	I suggested that the past year has seen the advent of a more favorable general political climate. Unfortunately, it will also be remembered as a year in which the resort to terrorism, individual killing of totally innocent and unsuspecting people, mass cruelty, mistreatment, and even genocide, have left a very tragic mark. Private violence as a means of influencing issues between States must be condemned as strongly as State violence against States, which of course is proscribed by our Charter.
191.	The revulsion to which violence gives rise, in the minds of all people throughout the world, renders these horrible actions politically sterile and useless, indeed counterproductive. It does not further the cause which they variously profess to espouse. Take two outstanding examples: those who claim to speak for the Palestinian and the Croatian peoples. What this violence does do is to increase the readiness of Governments to concert their actions to halt this scourge throughout the world.
192.	The New Zealand Government approves the efforts made by the Secretary-General to seek a greater awakening of the United Nations interest in these horrible actions and events.
193.	In the field of human rights, the right to life and security of person must have first place in anyone's scale of priorities. Nobody will underestimate the difficulties of grappling with the subject of international terrorism. Yet, it is surely right that this subject should be on our agenda. It will be a sad reflection on our strength of purpose and on the capacity of this Organization if no effective means can be found to eliminate the threat to innocent lives which this modern phenomenon presents.
194.	At the same time, we must not overlook other problems of human rights which may gravely affect very large numbers of people in particular areas of the world. The question of people of Asian origin expelled from Uganda is a case in point, as was already mentioned. My Government understands the wish of the Government of Uganda, or of any other Government, to ensure that the control of its economy remains largely in the hands of its own nationals. But there is more than one way of implementing such policy, and many countries have shown the way.
195.	The decision taken by the Uganda Government involves the abrupt wrenching from their own homes and the expulsion from the country of people who, for the most part, have that country as their only home and who spring from generations of people who haVe lived in that country. The New Zealand Government, which has offered a place in our own multiracial society to some of those expelled from Uganda, hopes that the Government of Uganda will even now reconsider the decision that it has taken. We would expect that, at the least, a more reasonable time limit for departure will be set and that, having regard to the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the persons concerned will be allowed to transfer from the country those assets to which they have an undoubted personal right. And so we strongly support the initiative taken by Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom. My delegation, as you can see, is in favor of his request for the inclusion in the agenda of a new item entitled "International implications of the expulsion of the Asian community from Uganda" [A/8794].
196.	Before I leave the subject of human rights I should like, only very briefly, to refer to three measures taken by the New Zealand Government which may be of interest to some countries represented in this Assembly. First, New Zealand has enacted its own Race Relations Act and should this year ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX), annex]. Secondly, our Government is this year passing legislation providing for the introduction of equal pay for women. New Zealand.was the first country in the world to give women the vote and so we are rather proud to be among the pioneers in making this further contribution to women's rights. The third measure I have in mind is a bill recently introduced in our Parliament which we hope will be passed this year and which will introduce a system whereby accident compensation amounting to 80 per cent of salary will be available to all employed persons who may suffer injury in any circumstances whatever, including accidents such as road accidents or any other kind of accident which is not related in any way to work at their jobs. We regard this as a major social advance and will be happy to provide details to any other countries which may be interested in it.
197.	A notable achievement in international co-operation of the best sort has been demonstrated in Stockholm where the Conference on the Human Environment alerted the world community to the dangers created in our environment by mankind's sometimes reckless use of the earth's resources. The fact of the Conference and its achievement is surely evidence of the vitality of this United Nations. I should like to place on record my Government's appreciation for the efforts made by Sweden as host Government to bring about the success of the Conference. We hope that the role played by Mr. Maurice Strong as Secretary-General of that Conference will be further recognized as we consider, I hope at this session, the setting up of new institutions, including a governing council for environmental programs and an environment fund. In anticipation of the Assembly's decision on the Fund, my Government will be prepared to contribute over a five-year period the sum of $320,000.
198.	The future crisis of world population, which will double by the year 2000, is inextricably linked with the problem of the world environment. Great tensions already exist in some parts of the world between populations and the space, natural resources and social structures available to them considerable stress. If these problems are not better understood now and dealt with in a pragmatic and, I hope, understanding way, we will be giving our children a legacy for which they will not thank us and in which we will take very little pride. Our Government is anxious to take its full share in international efforts which must move forward, we believe, speedily. We welcome the decision to hold the World Population Conference in 1974 [resolution 2683 (XXV)]. New Zealand will also continue, as we have in the past, to support the United Nations Fund for Population Activities which, after only two years, is already an active and worth-while agent of this Organization for this global endeavor.
199.	New Zealand has always "been a staunch supporter of the United Nations. New Zealand has always constantly supported the concept of an active role for the Secretary- General, and I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to Mr. Waldheim. We commend his firm approach to financial and administrative problems and questions at a difficult time. We commend him for the forthright action he has taken to draw the Assembly's attention to the growing question of violence and terrorism. In many more ways also the Secretary-General this year has exercised energetically the powers of initiative with which his office is properly endowed. We trust that he will continue to do so and he is certainly assured of the support and co-operation of New Zealand in that role. 
200.	Again, Mr. President, I congratulate you in your high office. I wish you every success in your heavy and demanding task.
Comrade President, allow me first of all to congratulate you on your election to the high post of President of the most important international political forum, the General Assembly of the United Nations. The unanimity displayed in your election is a reflection of the respect which States Members of the United Nations have for the peace-loving policies of the Polish People's Republic and for you personally.
39.	We should also like to congratulate the Secretary- General of the United Nations, Mr. Waldheim. Although he has occupied the post of chief administrative officer of the United Nations for less than a year, he has already shown his desire to co-operate in ensuring that the role of the United Nations in the maintenance and strengthening of peace is enhanced and its activities in the solution of this main task under the United Nations Charter expanded.
40.	It is logical and natural for sessions of the United Nations General Assembly to begin with a general political debate. Representatives of States Members of the United Nations assess the main international events, review the results of past United Nations activities in the light of the purposes and principles proclaimed in the Charter, and set definite tasks for the future. The political impetus which the United Nations receives during the general debate is helpful in the subsequent consideration of the items on the agenda.
41.	Even at last year's session of the General Assembly new trends were observed in relations among States which went some way towards meeting the desire of the peoples to secure lasting peace on the earth. Today there is reason to believe that these trends are growing stronger, although 
the forces opposed to a relaxation of tension in the world have not ceased their activities.
42.	In these circumstances the United Nations should make new efforts to promote the solution of acute international problems. As a Member of the United Nations and a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union will continue to make its contribution to the cause of the struggle for peace and the transformation of the United Nations into an even more effective instrument of peace.
43.	The Soviet State will soon celebrate its fiftieth anniversary as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The Leninist formula of the state unity of the peoples of the Soviet Union contains a powerful potential for peace- building. A profound interest in peace is organically inherent in the voluntary and equal union of socialist republic which have joined efforts in a constructive endeavor for the good of their peoples, and predatory wars and the oppression of other peoples are organically alien to such a union.
44.	For the Soviet Union the policy of peace is an adequate reflection, in the sphere of .external relations, of its internal social nature. In the decisions of the Twenty- fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our country put forward a program of peace and international co-operation which, as is universally recognized, reflects not the narrow interests of any State or group of States but the aspirations of all peoples, of all mankind. Every step taken to implement it has a constructive influence on international development as a whole.
45.	"Our policy of principle", as Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, said, "is the active defense of peace, freedom and the security of peoples. We are pursuing it together with our friends and allies, co-ordinating our steps in the international arena."
46.	If aggression is committed, the Soviet Union always sides with the victim of the aggression. If trouble threatens our allies and friends, we always come to their aid. And when we sign treaties, we implement them and fulfill our obligations.
47.	The objectives for which the Soviet Union and all the countries of the socialist community have been tirelessly fighting for many years have taken concrete form in the positive changes which have come about in the international situation. Together with our allies and friends we shall continue to fight for peace, freedom and the progress of the peoples.
48.	While consistently pursuing a policy of peace, the Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community certainly do not claim to have a monopoly in this area. In the interests of peace, we are prepared to co-operate and we do co-operate with all States which are also prepared to do likewise. Whatever their social system and in whatever part of the world they may be situated, the door is closed to no one.
49.	The broader the circle of countries pursuing a constructive foreign policy line and the larger the contribution each of them makes towards reducing tension, the more significant are the changes for the better in international affairs. Recent developments confirm this.
50.	In the past, post-war periods have always turned out to be mere respites between wars. In the present circumstances real possibilities exist for a fundamentally different development, namely, a transition to a system of stable peace, in order to ensure which the United Nations was established.
. 
51.	This transition requires the solution of problems engendered by the Second World War and the special features of development during the subsequent quarter of a century. If we tried to express in the most general form the essence of the changes that have taken place, we should say that it consists in the fact that there is now a possibility of solving some of these problems, while constructive work has begun with a view to settling others.
52.	The territorial realities that have arisen in Europe, the continent where both World Wars originated, are gaining universal recognition and being formalized under international law. The entry into force of the well-known treaties concluded by the Federal Republic of Germany with the USSR, signed at Moscow on 12 August 1970, and with the Polish People's Republic, signed at Warsaw on 7 December 1970, confirms the inviolability of European boundaries, including the boundary between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany and the western boundary of Poland.
53.	The conclusion of the agreement on West Berlin eliminates a chronic source of friction between States in the very center of Europe.
54.	The clearing of the legacy of war from European soil must be completed through the normalization of relations between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with the requirements of observing the sovereignty and independence of both those States and settling relations between Czechoslovakia and the Federal Republic of Germany on the basis of recognizing the Munich Agreement as invalid from the very beginning. As you know, negotiations are being held on this matter and I should like to express the hope that they will have a positive outcome.
55.	Negotiations will soon take place on the conclusion of- a peace treaty between the USSR and Japan which should play its part in closing the book on the Second World War in Asia and in providing a lasting basis for peace and co-operation on that continent as well. For our part, we shall make efforts to ensure the success of these negotiations, but the same desire must of course exist on the other side too.
56.	On the whole the "cold war" is being replaced by recognition of the truth that in the nuclear age there is no other basis for relations between States having different Social systems but peaceful coexistence. More and more often this is taking the form of binding international legal documents.
57.	The prerequisites for many-sided and equal cooperation among States, in the political and other fields, are multiplying.
58.	The high level of such co-operation attained in relations between the USSR and France is an especially conspicuous reflection of these new trends. Soviet-French relations are growing increasingly stronger and we note this with great satisfaction. The trends I have referred to are increasingly manifest in the Soviet Union's relations with a number of other States as well.
59.	As a result of the Soviet-United States summit talks in Moscow in May of this year, a start has been made in the process of rebuilding relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America.
60.	-	Our country attaches great importance to its relations with the United States, a great Power wife a different social system. For our part we shall do everything in our power to develop these relations and we believe that this is in the interests of the Soviet and American peoples and in the interests of maintaining and strengthening international peace. The broadening of co-operation between the two countries has already begun to become a reality, although there remain and will remain political and ideological disagreements of principle between the Soviet Union and the United States as States having different social systems.
61.	Naturally, we proceed from the assumption that no improvement in Soviet-United States relations should be achieved at the expense of other States. This is an important principle of our policy in relations with any State. It is our conviction that all States should be guided by this principle in their mutual relations and it is this criterion which we apply in assessing the significance of various developments in relations between different countries.
62.	Since the first years after the Second World War, international relations have been complicated by the division of the world into military and political groupings which set some States against others and constantly carry the risk of a military conflict. The architects of the policy of establishing military blocs, pursuing the arms race and whipping up international tensions, who for a long time determined the foreign policy of the major Western capitalist Powers, worked hard to bring the world to the dangerous brink of a military conflict. Even today we are constantly encountering the consequences of that policy in various parts of the world.
63.	We can therefore scarcely over-estimate the importance of even the first steps which are now being taken to lay the foundations of security on the basis of the collective efforts of all interested States.
64.	We are now oh the eve of an all-European conference on questions of security and co-operation. Preparations for such a conference are to enter the practical phase very shortly. The great importance of this planned meeting of States lies in making Europe genuinely peaceful and in transforming relations among States on the European continent on the basis of mutual understanding and trust; we are in favor of such a policy and such a course of action in European affairs.
65.	In the well-known Prague Declaration,  the European socialist countries have already put forward their suggestions as to how, in their view, a system of security in Europe should be built up. Many other States have also expressed their views on this score. This is a great and extremely important task and the all-European conference is expected to make an important contribution to its solution.
66.	We are convinced that, if all interested States and Governments show a proper responsibility and a readiness to seek solutions which would be in the common interest, the conference will go down in the history of our time as a great success for the cause of peace.
67.	In Asia, too, the idea of ensuring security, which is equally in the interests of all Asian States, is also beginning to gain ground. The Soviet Union considers the question of security in Asia to be an important task also. TTiose who, for some reason, are not now in sympathy with it should understand that the countries of Asia are no less interested than the Soviet Union in strengthening peace in that area.
68.	Although there has been noticeable progress towards a relaxation of international tension, it is hardly likely that anyone would dispute the fact that so far only a beginning has been made and that much more remains to be done. What is more, unless further progress is made and unless the efforts to achieve greater detente are intensified, all that has been gained could be lost. There have been such cases in history.
69.	Some of the problems awaiting solution within an international framework affect the interests of practically all States. If we consider the substance of any of the problems leading to international complications and if we focus our attention on what directly generates the danger of war and the unleashing of military conflicts, we can only come to the conclusion that it is the use of force by some States against others for the purpose of territorial annexation and for the purpose of subjugating peoples and establishing domination over them, in other words, for predatory purposes.
70 This has been true up to now and remains true today.
71.	In the past tens and hundreds of millions of people in Asia, Africa and America were reduced to slavery by colonial force. Today, when almost all of them have freed themselves, the slightest opportunity is used to restore direct or indirect colonial domination over them.
72.	Those who ventured in the past, and venture now, to use force for purposes which have nothing in common with the interests of the peoples are not greatly troubled by the fact that no dispute between States has ever been, or could ever be, settled on a lasting and just basis by means of force. The use of force for the purpose of aggression, territorial annexation and oppression of other peoples has as a rule laid the foundations for further hostility and further conflicts. For this the peoples have to pay, human beings perish and the great material treasures created by their toil are destroyed.
73.	That is why progressive political leaders for almost as long as States themselves have existed have recognized the need to eliminate the use of force from relations between States. But mere understanding of this is, of course, not sufficient. Practical efforts by States are required. This is all the more necessary now that the presence and stockpiling bf nuclear weapons in the arsenals of States have radically changed the concept of the consequences which military conflicts can have for the peoples of the world.
74.	Although varying views can be held as to the likelihood that this or that crisis or conflict will develop into a nuclear confrontation, as long as nuclear weapons exist, this possibility and this danger also exist. No State, no Government can ignore this. Our country believes that it is possible to eliminate or, at least, to reduce drastically the danger of a conflict between States provoking a nuclear catastrophe. That can be done if renunciation of the use of force in international relations is elevated to the level of international law and if at the same time-I repeat, at the same time the use of nuclear weapons js prohibited.
75.	The Soviet Government is convinced that serious consideration of these questions cannot be put off any longer. The conditions for this are already more favorable now than before and the possibilities for adopting positive decisions are broader.
76.	For those reasons, and because it is aware of its responsibility as a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union has submitted for consideration at the twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly the item entitled "Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons" [A/8793].
77.	The essence of our proposal is that it provides for the renunciation by States of any use of force to resolve international disputes; including the use both of nuclear weapons and of such types of weapons as are commonly called conventional. It is proposed that this renunciation be of such a nature that no one could avoid observing it strictly; this is possible if the United Nations shows the necessary understanding of its responsibility for the fate of the world.
78.	Such an approach is fully in accordance with the fundamental principle proclaimed in the United Nations Charter under which the Members of the United Nations "shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations" [Article 2].
79. The real state of affairs in the world makes it necessary to solve the question of the non-use of force in general and the question of the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons in conjunction with each other.
80. Ever since they first appeared, nuclear weapons have always been considered the most dangerous weapons of mass destruction. This is even truer now since the strength of these weapons is not a constant but is growing.
81.	It would be wrong to lose sight of another aspect of the question: with the development of conventional types of weapons, the danger that they might be used in military conflicts has also increased several times even by comparison with the period of the Second World War. In the last quarter of a century nuclear weapons have not been used in military conflicts, yet who can be unaware of how many tragedies have been brought about by the use of conventional weapons and how numerous have been the victims of their use?
82.	All this argues in favor of the prohibition of the use of force in violation of the United Nations Charter in conjunction with the prohibition of the use, first of all, of nuclear weapons, which are especially important.
83.	The wisdom and expediency of such a decision have also been demonstrated by the experience which the United Nations has already gained in the consideration of problems of security and disarmament. The repeated attempts of the United Nations to find a solution to both these problems are fresh in everyone's memory. Attempts have been made now from one side, now from the other, now in terms of considering the question of the non-use of force, now in terms of considering the question of the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. And what has transpired?
84.	To take only recent years, the States Members of the United Nations have unanimously adopted a resolution on strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force in international relations [resolution 2160 (XXI)], a Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolution 2625 (XXV)], and a Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)].
85.	At the real core of all these documents is the principle of the non-use of force in international relations and of the settlement of all disputes between States solely by peaceful means. All the necessary formulations have been carefully worked out and weighed on the political scales and all aspects of the problem seem to have been taken into account, but it is no secret that the goals set have still not been fully achieved; force is being used and human blood is being shed.
86.	More than 10 years ago, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a Declaration in which it proclaimed the use of nuclear weapons to be a crime against mankind and civilization [resolution 1653 (XVI)]. Since then the United Nations has repeatedly advocated the signing of an appropriate international convention by all States. However, the Declaration on the prohibition of the: use of nuclear weapons was not supported by all the nuclear Powers and it has still not been possible to initiate productive negotiations on the conclusion of an international convention on the question.
87.	Many reasons can be found for the ineffectiveness of the decisions adopted by the United Nations on these questions, but one of the most substantial is unarguably that they were considered and decided upon by the United Nations in isolation from one another.
88.	When the question of prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons was raised, several States had doubts as to the possibility of taking such a step if the use of force was not precluded in relations between States. We shall not now enter into a discussion of the question of the extent to which those doubts were justified but, whatever the case, they became an obstacle to agreement.
89.	At the same time, when the question of prohibiting the use of force was considered, the significance of any decisions adopted proved to be limited in the absence of agreement concerning nuclear weapons, that is to say, the most powerful weapons of mass destruction. The separation of one question from the other introduced a certain lack of understanding and suspicion and weakened the effectiveness of the best decisions of the United Nations. Furthermore, their effectiveness was further restricted because they were all in the form of recommendations, or, at best, declarations of intent. They were not given the force of law.
90.	The proposal of the Soviet Union [A/8793] envisages the adoption of the most realistic and effective decision possible in modern conditions. It is precisely such a decision which is in the interests of all States, regardless of their social systems, the size of their territory and population, or whether or not they possess nuclear weapons.
91.	As a result of such a decision, those States which are militarily stronger, and above all the nuclear Powers, will obtain greater mutual assurance that they are under no threat from one another. The security of each of them will be safeguarded more reliably and at the same time on an equal basis, that is to say, no one will gain a unilateral advantage at the expense of another in comparison with the situation which prevails at present, and no one would lose anything.
92.	Those States which are militarily less powerful, including all those which do not possess nuclear weapons, would also gain. Now, they are justifiably concerned at the danger that nuclear weapons might be directed against them if aggression is committed. The prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons in conjunction with the renunciation of the use of force would remove this threat and greatly strengthen the security of all States.
93.	It goes without saying that the obligation of States to renounce the use of force, including nuclear weapons, can in no way impair their right to individual and collective self-defense as laid down in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. On the contrary, that obligation would reinforce the right to self-defense against aggression and the right to struggle to eliminate the consequences of aggression in cases where it has already been committed and the aggressor seeks to benefit from it.
94.	No one can challenge the inalienable right of States and peoples subjected to aggression to repulse it by employing all possible means so long as the aggressor continues to use force, encroaches upon their freedom and sovereignty and tries to retain territories seized by force. It will suffice to refer to the examples before everyone's eyes: Indochina and the Middle East. Who would dare to contest the incontestable fact that brute force has been and still is being used against the peoples of Indochina and against the Arab States and that they are entitled to use all the necessary means to rebuff the aggressor?
95.	Renunciation of the use of force in relations between States in no way limits the right of the peoples of colonial countries to fight for their freedom and independence using any means which may be necessary in that struggle. This right is recognized by the United Nations as being a legitimate one. It is based on the fact that violence was used against those peoples, who have been the victims of colonialism and aggression, and, in resorting to force to liberate themselves, they are only restoring justice and their flouted rights.
96.	The adoption of a decision on non-use of force and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would thus be beneficial to all. But this also makes it necessary for all States, particularly all those Powers which possess nuclear weapons, to participate in its elaboration and adoption. Otherwise no decision, not even the very best one, could attain the desired objective.
97.	The Soviet Government has given thorough consideration to the question of the most appropriate form for a decision by the United Nations on the renunciation of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. We propose that consideration of this item should result in the adoption of a clear-cut decision, which, in the interests of maximum effectiveness, should bind together appropriate actions by the two main organs of the United Nations the General Assembly and the Security Council. On behalf of the Soviet Union, the Soviet delegation is submitting the following draft resolution for consideration by the General Assembly:
[The speaker then read out the text of a draft resolution which was subsequently circulated as document A/L.676. For the text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh session, Annexes, agenda item 25.]
98.	The proposed draft speaks for itself. It envisages a major step on the part of the General Assembly a decision on behalf of States Members of the United Nations on their renunciation of the use or threat of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. It contains an appeal to the Security Council to take action to make this declaration binding on all States. For this purpose, and in accordance with well-known provisions of the United Nations Charter, a meeting of the Security Council should be convened at the level of members of Governments or other specially designated representatives.
99.	The Soviet delegation is authorized to state that the Soviet Union will stand ready to participate in the convening of such a meeting of the Security Council and in its work. We shall be ready to join in this political action with all other States which are permanent members of the Council. We are convinced that there can be no higher duty for those States on which the Charter of the United Nations places a special responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
100.	We appeal to all States represented in the General Assembly to study carefully the draft we have submitted and, on the basis "of it, to adopt-unanimously a resolution which will reflect the firm will of this world Organization to put an end to any use of force in relations between States in violation of the United Nations Charter and to eliminate the threat of nuclear war.
101.	In so doing, the United Nations will be giving strong support to the cause of a further relaxation of international tension, the strengthening of peace and increased mutual understanding in relations between States. This step will be in the interests of all those to whom peace, security and peaceful coexistence are not merely words but a guide for action.
102.	The task of building a lasting peace requires the adoption of effective measures to prevent and avert military conflicts in the future. But it is no less important to put an end to the conflicts which are poisoning the international atmosphere now and to put out the military fires in areas where the right of peoples to be masters of their own destinies is being encroached upon. Lack of progress in settling these problems cannot but cause deep anxiety for the future course of world affairs.
103.	The position of the Soviet Union concerning the war against the Vietnamese people is known to all. The continuation and expansion of the United States intervention in Viet-Nam and other countries of Indochina provoke indignation and condemnation. Probably never before have so many declarations been made containing promises to leave Viet-Nam and to stop the war as have been made recently. And never before has there been such a striking contrast between words and deeds. No matter how much the United States manipulates reports on reductions in the strength of the United States infantry in Viet-Nam in order to appease the public, behind those reports there is in reality an unprecedented expansion of military activities and of their cruelty and inhumanity. No matter how many assurances it gives us that it does not wish to settle the internal affairs of the Viet-Nam people for them, it is in fact pursuing a policy that is aimed at eliminating the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the people's armed forces of liberation and at preserving the Saigon puppet administration as the sole legitimate authority in South Viet-Nam.
104.	One can only wonder why the only correct conclusion has not yet been drawn: namely, that the Vietnamese people cannot be defeated. Their resistance will not be broken either by heavier bombing, the blockading of ports or damage to hydro-technical installations. The Vietnamese people are fighting heroically against aggression and fighting for just aims, in order to be master in their own country. They cannot allow anyone from outside to prescribe a political and social system for them or to impose puppets who uphold interests that are foreign to the Vietnamese people.
105.	A way out can be found, but only through serious negotiations, for which a constructive basis has been provided by the well-known proposals contained in the statements by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam of 11 September 1972 and by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam of 14 September 1972.
106.	The essence of these proposals is clear and simple. The United States of America must respect the right of the Vietnamese people to genuine independence and the right of the people of South Viet-Nam to self-determination. It must stop the war of aggression in Viet-Nam. put an end to the bombing and mining, the blockade and all military activities in Viet-Nam, renounce the policy of the "Vietnamization" of the war, immediately withdraw all United States troops from South Viet-Nam and discontinue its military participation and support of the Saigon puppet regime. In the solution of the internal problem of South Viet-Nam, it is essential to work on the basis of the real situation: two authorities, two armies and other political forces exist there. The basis for the solution of the problem lies in the equality of the parties and a rejection of annexation. To that end it is necessary to set up in South Viet-Nam a provisional Government which has been agreed on nationally on a tripartite basis and which will handle all matters during the transitional period and organize general elections on truly free and democratic lines.
107.	All those who respect the rights of the peoples and all those who have not lost the ability to assess the state of affairs objectively cannot but recognize that these proposals are very well founded, reasonable and logical and that they express the goodwill of the Vietnamese people. They cannot but reject categorically allegations that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam is trying to impose a "Communist regime" on South Viet-Nam.
108.	If the United States of America wants the negotiations in Paris to lead to the restoration of peace, it should reply positively to the statement by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam of 11 September 1972. If, however, it is pursuing some other goal, then the talks in Paris can only lead to a deadlock, the war will continue and the full responsibility for it will rest with the United States of America.
109.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it fully supports the proposals by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam. All those who cherish the ideals of freedom and independence cannot fail to have a sense of solidarity with the Vietnamese people in their struggle.
110.	A solution to the problems of the Middle East must be found. Recent events linked with the new criminal acts of aggression by Israel against Arab countries, including Lebanon, show how serious is the danger and how far the Israeli leaders are going in their reckless policy.
111.	The responsibility which rests with the aggressors is shared by all those who protect them and whose support enables Israel to defy the United Nations and its decisions regarding the elimination of the consequences of the aggression and the restoration of peace in the Middle East. The Israeli leaders must know that an adventurist policy can lead only to apparent success and that in the final analysis it will inevitably entail retribution.
112.	The attempts to appropriate Arab lands and repeated military acts of aggression cannot be tolerated. The United
Nations has the necessary right and the possibilities to put the aggressor in his place.
113.	Only a long-term and just settlement in the Middle East in accordance with the well-known decisions of the United Nations can ensure the peace and security of all-we repeat, all-States in this region. The Israeli troops must be withdrawn from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967.
114.	For the Soviet Union, support for the legitimate demands of the Arab countries, for the United Nations decisions regarding a political settlement of the Middle East conflict, and for the mission of Ambassador Jarring is a policy of principle. We are pursuing it and we shall continue to pursue it unswervingly.
115.	We also support the just struggle of the Arab people of Palestine for the restoration of their inalienable rights, which have been recognized by the United Nations. At the same time, we cannot, of course, condone the acts of terrorism committed by certain elements among the members of the Palestinian movement which have led, among other things, to the recent tragic events in Munich. Their criminal acts also strike a blow at the national interests and aspirations of the Palestinians and are used by the Israeli criminals to cover up their own piratical policy against the Arab peoples.
116.	On the basis of positions of principle, the Soviet Union opposes acts of terrorism which disrupt the diplomatic activities of States and their representatives, transport communications between them and the normal course of international contacts and meetings, and it opposes acts of violence which serve no positive end and cause loss of human life.
117.	Peace will not be truly lasting until an end is put to the arms race, which is one of the main sources of distrust among States and of an increased danger of war. The struggle for disarmament has been going on for a long time The Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community see in the struggle for disarmament one of the main orientations for their foreign policy activities. And this policy will be continued. Some of the things that seemed almost unattainable even 10 or 15 years ago are now reflected in treaties and agreements that have entered into force. These include some which to a certain extent curb the nuclear arms race and reduce the threat of nuclear war: the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373(XXII), annex], the Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the three environments, and others. In addition, the first agreement in history on the elimination of a type of armaments which falls within the category of means of mass destruction, namely, bacteriological and toxin weapons, has now been concluded.
118.	To the sum total of obligations in the field of the limitation of the arms race and disarmament already assumed by the majority of States, one more has recently been added: it concerns those types of armaments which have the greatest destructive force. I am referring to the Soviet-United States strategic arms limitation agreements, signed at Moscow on 26 May 1972. Limiting to the minimum the deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems, the agreements eliminate one of the main motives for unleashing a competition between offensive and defensive missile weapons, the full consequences of which are difficult to predict. By establishing quantitative limits for strategic offensive arms for the first time, the agreements curb the most dangerous trend in the arms race.
119.	The conclusion of the Soviet-United States strategic arms limitation agreements is an important step which will help to reduce the threat of nuclear war and to curb the arms race and which will open up new prospects for progress towards general disarmament. Both sides have agreed to continue the talks with a view to arriving at further agreements in that direction.
120.	Each successful step in the struggle to limit the arms race is important in its own right and is, at the same time, important as a starting point for further efforts. The possibilities for further progress towards the solution of new disarmament problems will increase with each new step on which agreement is reached. Our country has always desired this and we shall spare no effort in continuing to work, together with all other States, to relieve the peoples of the burden of weapons.
121.	The Soviet Union favors the earliest possible solution of the question of the halting of the production of chemical weapons and their destruction, concerning which negotiations are being held in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. It also favors the halting everywhere and by everyone of nuclear weapon tests, including underground tests, the elimination of foreign military bases on alien territory and the establishment of nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world.
122.	States have acquired a great deal of experience in negotiations on disarmament. Various methods have been used and are being used; some of them have fully justified themselves and should be used further. At the same time it can hardly be considered proper that, since the advent of the nuclear age, there has not yet been a single occasion on which States have all gathered together to consider the question of disarmament, which affects all States, socialist and capitalist, large and small, developed and developing, nuclear, and non-nuclear. We can therefore only welcome the fact that the idea of convening a world disarmament conference has become one of the most popular ideas among the States of the world and among world public opinion.
123.	The General Assembly will be considering in a specific manner the question of convening a world disarmament conference [item 26]. Our views on this are well known. We consider that this conference should be a forum at which all countries without exception could present and compare, on an equal basis, their views on the whole range of disarmament questions and come to agreement on practical steps designed to curb the arms race and achieve disarmament. This applies both to weapons of mass destruction and to conventional weapons.
124.	The Soviet Government believes that full advantage should be taken of the opportunities that are now taking shape for the convening of a world disarmament conference. We, for our part, shall continue to do everything in our power to ensure that it is held and is successful.
125.	The question of the strengthening of international security is once again on the agenda of the General Assembly [item 35], This problem is an urgent one and will remain so as long as there are forces at work which are interested not in implementing the principles of the United Nations Charter but in aggravating international tension and suppressing the liberation struggle of the peoples.
126.	Great victories have been won by the peoples in their struggle to eliminate colonial oppression. But this problem has not yet been completely solved and millions of people are still living under the colonial and racist yoke.
127.	The Soviet Union, which was the first country in the history of the world to eradicate national oppression and to ensure genuine prosperity for dozens of nations and nationalities, is irreconcilably opposed to all manifestations of racism, apartheid, colonialism and neocolonialism. Our country opposes all attempts to exert pressure direct or indirect-on States which, after a hard struggle, have won the right to independent development and are now building their national economies, carrying out progressive social and economic reforms and defending their rights to own the natural resources that belong to them. It is the duty of the United Nations to assist those States in every way possible to strengthen their sovereignty and independence.
128.	In international politics it is necessary constantly to take account of the various questions posed by scientific and technological progress and the requirements which such progress is making on an ever-increasing scale in the field of international co-operation. This applies to economic, scientific and technological links, which are becoming ever richer in content. It applies directly to new areas in which States are active, particularly outer space.
129.	It was on the basis of those considerations that the Soviet Union submitted proposals on principles governing the activities of States in outer space, on the conclusion of a treaty concerning the moon and on a number of other matters. At the current session of the General Assembly we are proposing that consideration should be given to the item entitled "Preparation of an international convention on principles governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct television broadcasting" [item 37]. Our purpose in raising this question is to link inseparably, from the very beginning, the use of this new type of space technology to the noble purposes of strengthening peace and friendship among peoples.
130.	The United Nations must promptly acquire a genuinely universal character. Universality could lend the United Nations new strength and enable it to consider world problems with greater results. We therefore see no justification for attempts to create artificial obstacle to the admission of new States to the United Nations.
131.	We consider it necessary to ensure the earliest possible admission to the United Nations of the German Democratic Republic, which is fully entitled to be admitted, as is, of course, the Federal Republic of Germany too. This will be in the interests of the further development of co-operation among States and will be in line with the political situation taking shape in Europe.
132.	No one should cast doubt on the legitimate right to membership in the United Nations of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, which has recently gained its national independence. That State has a legitimate right to become a Member of the United Nations.
133.	In general, the United Nations should rid itself as quickly as possible of the burden of the past, which is still making itself felt in its activities in various spheres. One such sphere is that of questions relating to Korea. This year there are new possibilities before the General Assembly for a constructive approach to the discussion and solution of these questions. Such possibilities had been afforded by the proposal put forward by the non-aligned and socialist States concerning the "Creation of favorable conditions to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea" [A/8752 and Add. 1-10]. But those who in the past created a hotbed of tension in the Korean region and are now trying to maintain it have prevented the General Assembly from considering this proposal at the current session. Everyone understands that an artificial delay in this case can only be harmful and that those States which resort to such methods are showing themselves to be opposed to a just settlement in the interests of the normalization of the situation in Korea and the strengthening of peace in that area.
134.	As to the Soviet Union, our position on the question of Korea has been set out many times. We are in favor of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and support the measures and efforts of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to achieve the independent and peaceful unification of the country.
135.	During the period in which the United Nations has existed, attempts have been made on more than one occasion to destroy its Charter. Whatever the subjective intentions of those who are now raising the question of the review of the United Nations Charter, the objective reality is such that this will entail great dangers for all the activities of the United Nations.
136.	The Soviet Union considers that the interests of all States without exception require that attention should be focused not on a revision of the United Nations Charter but on its strict observance and on fuller utilization of the possibilities it affords.
137.	What is necessary for the United Nations to succeed is the readiness and determination of Member States to act together in the interests of solving the problems facing the Organization. This should make the United Nations a real center for concerted action by nations to achieve common goals, which is an obligation under the United Nations Charter.
138.	Those who seek to divide the United Nations either according to the principle of the size of the territory or
population of States or by classifying them as "rich" and "poor" are doing a disservice not only to the United Nations but also to the cause of preserving and strengthening peace as a whole.
139, That is not what inspired the founders of the United Nations. They wanted the United Nations to be strong and firm in rebuffing aggressors and to be capable of promoting co-operation among all countries irrespective of their size and level of economic development.
| 140. As to the Soviet Union, it has invariably done and will continue to do everything it can to ensure that the United Nations acts precisely in that manner. The policy of the struggle for peace and security is the general policy of the Soviet Union in the international arena. That policy was adopted half a century ago by. the socialist republics which joined together to form the Soviet Union and it is still the policy today.
141.	The twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly is a regular session. But it could become a prominent landmark in the formation of a new system of peaceful relations among States. For this purpose it should focus its attention on the main and most acute political problems brought to the fore by life itself and the whole course of international development.
During the past few years the world has made remarkable advances toward the Charter goal of practicing tolerance and living together in peace with one another as good neighbors.
45.	In 1972 alone, the United States and the Soviet Union have undertaken with each other to do their utmost to avoid military confrontations, to respect the sovereign equality of all countries and to promote conditions in which no country would be subject to outside interference in its internal affairs. The Soviet Union and the United States have also placed precise limitations on our defensive and, at least for the next five years, on our offensive strategic missile systems. The United States and the People's Republic of China have undertaken to broaden the understanding between our peoples, to improve relations between us in the conviction that this would be in the interests of all States, and to oppose any efforts to establish hegemony in Asia or toward division of the world into spheres of influence. The United Kingdom, France, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed on specific provisions to ensure unimpeded movement to and from Berlin by road, rail and waterways. The Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic have opened negotiations on a treaty to normalize their relations. And North and South Korea have intensified their talks on the plight of divided families and have agreed to establish a joint committee to examine problems of unification.
46.	There have been many other accomplishments in pursuance of the Charter's objectives in 1972. I mention these merely to illustrate how old patterns of hostility are being eroded. If continued, this process will in time find positive reflection within the United Nations itself.
47.	We are encouraged, too, by calls in both Eastern and Western capitals for a more secure and open Europe. A step toward realizing this goal would be the creation of a more stable military balance in central Europe through negotiation of mutual and balanced force reductions. We are currently in consultation with our allies, and we believe exploratory talks on this subject could begin within the next several months. We trust they will be productive.
48.	It is equally important to move toward more normal relationships in Europe relationships which have not existed since the end of the Second World War. Toward this objective, a conference on security and co-operation in Europe, if it is carefully and constructively prepared, could play a crucial role. A conference whose over-all effect was to put a stamp of approval upon the rigid divisions of Europe would only prolong the problems of today into yet another generation. On the other hand, a conference which promoted a more normal relationship among all of Europe's States and peoples would reinforce the trend toward better 
relations on other levels. That is why we believe that the conference must take practical steps to promote the freer movement of people, ideas and goods across the breadth of the continent.
49.	We are also now studying alternative approaches for the forthcoming Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. The United States will pursue the following general aims. First, our endeavor will be to negotiate on offensive weapons. In so doing we shall seek to expand the scope of strategic offensive weapons included in the limitations and to establish an equitable balance in the major delivery systems. Second, we shall wish to examine carefully qualitative limitations which could enhance stability. Third, we will aim to reduce levels of strategic arms. As President Nixon said to this General Assembly in 1969, our objective is ".. . not only to limit the build-up of strategic arms, but to reverse it."
50.	Of course we also attach importance to the work of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which has now turned its attention to preventing the accumulation of chemical weapons for use in warfare. Work in that Committee has come a long way towards resolving some of the important and complex issues related to possible significant restraints in this area. The United States is intensifying its study of all proposals and we look forward to responding to them at an early date.
51.	It is clear from what I have said that the United States believes that a practical step-by-step approach is the best way to achieve genuine progress m disarmament.
52.	Let me take note of other areas in the world in which progress needs to be accelerated.
53.	In Africa, this Assembly must continue to champion the efforts of all peoples of all races to secure human dignity, self-determination and social justice. The United States will continue to lend its full support to all practical efforts to those ends.
54.	In Latin America, while growth rates in recent years have far exceeded Alliance for Progress targets, economic development is still a primary concern and a primary need. The United States Government remains committed to a substantial program of economic assistance, particularly through regional organizations. And, in recognition of the importance of trade to development, we are actively supporting the participation of Latin American and other developing countries in the coming negotiations on a new international monetary system.
55.	In Viet-Nam the United States has reduced its armed forces from about 550,000 to 35,000. President Nixon has proposed a cease-fire in all of IndoChina under international supervision, an exchange of prisoners of war, and a total withdrawal of United States forces. Under this proposal the political future of Viet-Nam could be negotiated by the VietNamese themselves. President Nixon has also pledged a major effort to assist both VietNamese States in post-war reconstruction. In such circumstances it is hard to understand why the other side persists in believing that the war should be continued.  
 
56.	And in the Middle East, the momentum towards a peace settlement must be regained. We should take note of two positive elements. First, the cease-fire is now in its twenty-sixth month. Second, the climate for a settlement seemed to improve very much as 1972 progressed. We must, however, recognize that the Munich killings have set off deplorable patterns of action and reaction and I emphasize that the United States believes that both action and reaction are deplorable-and that these patterns have seriously clouded the prospects for early progress. Nevertheless, neither side has permanently closed the door to future diplomatic efforts. We believe that the forces favoring a peaceful settlement still have the upper hand. Our task in this Assembly, our task individually as representatives of nations, is to do everything possible to see that the forces that favor a peaceful settlement are supported.
57.	The "no war, no peace" situation which prevails now in the Middle East does not and will not serve the interest of anyone in the area. Certainly a stable, just and durable peace agreement based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967) continues to be the objective of the United States. But this, we believe, cannot be achieved without the beginning of a genuine negotiating process between the parties concerned. No settlement imposed from the outside can long endure. Negotiation is not capitulation. Negotiating activity among long-standing antagonists across the world is occurring at present. Why should the Middle East be an exception? When North Korea can talk to South Korea, when East Germans can talk to West Germans, when Indians and Pakistanis can meet in the immediate aftermath of war and prior to the withdrawal of troops, then surely the Middle East should be no exception to the general rule that differences should be reconciled through an active dialog between the parties concerned.
58.	Let me hasten to add that we do not hold that the process need necessarily begin through direct negotiations. We understand that other diplomatic avenues exist. Ambassador Jarring remains available to help the parties negotiate the terms of a peace settlement in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
59.	Another-and in our view the most promising-first step would be proximity talks leading to an interim Suez Canal agreement. What would such an agreement do? It would separate the combatants, restore to Egypt operation of and authority over the Suez Canal, involve some Israeli withdrawal, preserve the cease-fire, and provide momentum for further efforts towards an over-all settlement.
60.	It is encouraging that both sides agree that such an interim agreement would be not an end in itself but rather the first step towards an over-all peace settlement. Such a practical test of peace on the ground would be in the interests of both sides, and the United States remains prepared to assist in achieving it, if that would be helpful to the parties. Moreover, an over-all settlement in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) must meet the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Governments on both sides as well as of the Palestinian people.
61.	In considering some of the great political developments of the past few years, one cannot help but observe as the Brazilian Foreign Minister has just done- that the United Nations has not been directly involved. This fact has often been cited in attacks against it.
62.	We are all aware, of course, that the Charter does not intend the United Nations to be the center of all diplomacy. Still, as the Secretary-General puts it temperately in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization, . . in the political sphere the Organization's place is . . . uncertain" [A/8701/Add.l, p. 1]. With that thought most of us would agree.
63.	As we look to the future, it is well to keep in mind that it is not so much in institutional reforms-and we are certainly not opposed to such reforms-as in national wills that the solutions to the problems must be sought. The future of this body, the future of the United Nations, depends on national wills, on the ability of nations to work together, accommodating themselves to each other's problems, if you will. Yet to the extent that better work methods and more realistic institutional arrangements will help, we also must bring them about.
64.	For example, we believe that for the Security Council to maintain its influence and authority, ways must be found to ensure the representation of States, other than the present permanent members and I am speaking about States whose resources and influence are of major importance in world affairs. The absence of Japan, for example, is notable in a body designed to engage the responsibilities of the world's principal Powers.
65.	We believe in greater recourse to fact-finding commissions, to good offices and to quiet preventive diplomacy.
66.	We believe that the increase in bloc voting, often without independent regard for the merits of the issue, is leading increasingly to unrealistic results.
67.	The discussion of the United Nations weaknesses in dealing with political problems has reached its peak just at a time when its contribution to economic development and scientific and technological co-operation is making great strides.
68.	Long before economic development became a major matter of international concern, the United Nations initiated efforts to reduce the economic gap between developed and developing countries. From the start the United States has supported that effort. It is an encouraging fact that during each of the last three years the per capita growth in production has finally achieved a higher rate in the less developed than in the developed world. Still, as the recent World Bank report showed, there are serious problems of income distribution, high rates of infant mortality, low rates of literacy, serious malnutrition and widespread ill health.  The United States intends to continue to devote serious efforts to solving such problems through the improved United Nations Development Program, and through other channels of economic assistance. 
69.	United Nations activities related to science and technology are also having an impact.
70.	The landmark United Nations Conference on the Human Environment has proposed a world monitoring of levels of pollution in water, air, earth and living beings, measuring levels of specific chemicals, such as hydrocarbons which poison the air of the world's cities. To launch this and other important programs without delay, we urge this Assembly to establish the secretariat and the proposed $100 million fund for the environment.
71.	The United Nations can also make a substantial contribution in the fight against drug traffic, particularly heroin traffic. A revised Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs will give the International Narcotics Control Board authority to reduce poppy cultivation and opium production in countries shown to be sources of that traffic. The United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control is helping States to improve their drug administrations, to train police and customs officials, to develop other means of livelihood for opium farmers, and to prevent and treat drug addiction. As President Nixon said last week, Every Government which wants to move against narcotics should know that it can count on our country for our wholehearted support and assistance in doing so'.
72.	Just last week the Secretary-General announced that 1974 will be the World Population Year and the time, of a major United Nations population conference. It is our hope that the conference will lead to the setting of concrete goals of reduced population growth.
73.	The General Assembly at this session will review the progress of its sea-bed Committee? in preparing for a conference on the law of the sea [item 36]. It is important for us to use this opportunity to help make the oceans an example of international co-operation rather than an area of future conflict.
74.	Such activities as pollution, narcotics, the sea-bed and population control-most of them connected with new applications of science and technology will increase in importance in the future. We believe that they must acquire a greater focus and priority in the United Nations.
75.	I have spoken today about some of the United Nations weaknesses as well as some of its strengths because I believe we must look at this Organization realistically so that we may contribute to its future prospects. In that spirit, the United States will continue to support the United Nations. We remain committed to making it stronger and more effective.
76.	During this session the United Nations will have an opportunity and an obligation to take action of vital importance to the international community. The United Nations must deal effectively with criminal acts of international terrorism which have so tragically touched the lives of people everywhere, without warning, without discrimination, without regard for the sanctity of human life. 
77.	Twenty-four years ago the United Nations, in its Universal Declaration of Human Rights, affirmed that every human being has the right to 'life, liberty, and the security of person'. Yet what is happening in the world today to that security?
78.	In Sweden, 90 people boarding an international flight are held hostage and held for ransom by Croatian terrorists.
79.	In London an Israeli diplomat is killed by a bomb sent through the mail. In New York colleagues in the United Nations narrowly avert a similar fate.
80.	In Cyprus 95 persons of many nationalities narrowly escape death on a Venezuelan plane when a bomb is discovered just in time.
81.	In New York shots are fired into the apartment of a member of the Soviet mission where children are playing.
82.	In Munich 11 Olympic athletes are kidnapped and murdered in a day of horror witnessed throughout the world.
83.	In Czechoslovakia a Czechoslovak pilot is killed and his plane hijacked and diverted to West Germany.
84.	In Israel 26 tourists, 16 of them American citizens, are slaughtered in an insane attack at an international airport.
85.	In this year alone 25 airliners from 13 countries have been successfully hijacked, and 26 other attempts have been frustrated. In this year alone 140 airplane passengers and crew have been killed-140 have been killed-and 97 wounded in acts of terrorism. In five years 27 diplomats from 11 countries have been kidnapped and three assassinated. In New York, Arab and other missions have been threatened with violence.
86.	Is there anyone here in this Assembly who has not had the occasion, as he has journeyed by plane from around the globe, to be concerned about his own personal safety? Is there any one of you here who has not wondered what terrorist might strike next, or where he might strike?
87.	The issue is not an issue of war-not war between States, not civil war or revolutionary war. The issue is not the strivings of people to achieve self-determination and independence. Rather, it is whether millions of air travelers can continue to fly in safety each year. It is whether a person who opens his mail can open it without fear of being blown up. It is whether diplomats can safely carry out their duties. It is whether international meetings, like the Olympics, like this General Assembly, can proceed without the ever-present threat of violence. In short, the issue is whether the vulnerable lines of international communications the airways and the mails, diplomatic discourse and international meetings can continue, without occupation, to bring nations and peoples together. All who have a stake in this have a stake in decisive action to suppress these demented acts of terrorism.
88.	We are all aware that, aside from the psychotic and the purely felonious, many criminal acts of terrorism derive from political origins. We all recognize that issues such as self-determination must continue to be addressed seriously by the international community. But political passion, however deeply held, cannot be a justification for criminal violence against innocent persons. Certainly the terrorist acts I have cited are totally unacceptable attacks against the very fabric of international order. They must be universally condemned, whether we consider the cause the terrorists invoke noble or ignoble, legitimate or illegitimate.
89.	We must take effective steps to prevent the hijacking of international civil aircraft.
90.	We must take effective steps to prevent murderous attacks and the kidnapping of diplomats.
91.	We must take effective steps to prevent terrorists from sending bombs through the mails, or murdering innocent civilians. Just a few hours ago, I am pleased to note, the International Criminal Police Organization [INTERPOL], by a vote of 58 to none, condemned such acts and decided to gear up its machinery to help cope with this very difficult problem.
92.	The United States welcomes the initiative the Secretary-General has taken to place this matter on the agenda [A/8791 and Add.l]. Two years ago, before the problem had reached its present dimensions, the General Assembly took the first step, the step that must guide us now. In the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolution 2625 (XXV), annex], which so strongly-keep this in mind reaffirmed the right of self-determination, the General Assembly also unanimously declared that each nation has a duty to refrain from assisting or in any way participating in
"... terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in organized activities within its territory directed towards the commission of such acts..."
93.	The time has come to make that obligation, which this General Assembly solemnly undertook, more specific and more meaningful. In the past two years the international community has taken certain steps in the field of hijacking. Conventions have been concluded prescribing severe penalties for the hijacking and sabotage of aircraft and requiring States to extradite or prosecute hijackers and saboteurs. We urge all States which have not ratified these conventions to do so.
94.	We are now faced with an urgent need to deter and punish international crimes of violence not only in the air but throughout our societies. The United States urges this Assembly to act, and act at once, to meet this challenge.
95.	First, the draft treaty to prosecute or extradite those who attack or kidnap diplomats or officials of foreign governments or international organizations should be completed and opened for signature at this session of the Assembly. The draft articles on the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic agents and other internationally protected persons are already before the Assembly in the report of the International Law Commission [A/8710/Rev.l, chap. II, sect. C]. 
96.	Second, a treaty providing for suspension of all air service to countries which fail to punish or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft should be promptly completed and opened for signature. We repeat that such a treaty should provide for the suspension of all air service to countries which fail to prosecute or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft. It is our view that a nation which provides a safe haven for hijackers should be outlawed by the international community. A draft of a treaty to do this has already been considered by a sub-committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization. To achieve early action, the process of deliberation should be accelerated and a diplomatic conference to complete the treaty should be called without delay.
97.	Third, a new treaty on the export of international terrorism should be concluded and opened for signature as soon as possible. It should include universal condemnation of, and require the prosecution or extradition of, persons who kill, seriously injure or kidnap innocent civilians in a foreign State for the purpose of harming or forcing concessions from a State or from an international organization. To complete such a treaty, we believe a diplomatic conference should be convened as soon as possible. The United States Government is today circulating the first draft of such a treaty.  We urge all governments to give it their earnest consideration. We refer to this as a first draft, because we are sure that many suggestions for changes will be made. We are perfectly flexible on the form of the treaty, but we think this is a subject that deserves our earnest attention.
98.	We have also embodied these various proposals in a draft resolution which we submitted to the Secretariat this morning for distribution. 
99.	These actions would mark a major advance in the struggle against international terrorism. Surely, it is in the collective interest of every nation represented in this hall to arrest the growing assault on international order with which we are all faced. Let this General Assembly be the driving force for the specific and vigorous steps that are required. Let it prove that the United Nations can meet this test. Let it show people everywhere that this Organization, here, now, is capable of the concrete action necessary to bring us closer to a world free of violence-the kind of world which is the great goal of the United Nations Charter.
Mr. President, I am glad to have the opportunity today of extending to you, on behalf of the South African delegation, my congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly. At the same time, I should like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Malik of Indonesia, who so successfully guided our deliberations during the twenty- sixth session of the Assembly.
2.	May I also pay my respects to our new Secretary-General and wish him every success in the discharge of his heavy responsibilities?
3.	Change is inevitable, and nowhere is this more true than in the field of international relations. We contemplate today a world different from the world that existed at the time of the last session of the General Assembly, for the past year has witnessed changes of more than ordinary significance, including the evolution of what may be termed a new relationship among the major Powers. It is true that the legacy of the Second World War, the polarization of the nations of the world into different power blocs, is still with us today more than a quarter of a century later. But recently, important developments have begun to ease at least some of the tensions of the past.
4.	These developments have followed a series of initiatives on the part of several of the major Powers, leading, it would seem, to a degree of reconciliation and a lessening of animosity between some of them. We find ourselves in a new situation, and axiomatically a new situation brings with it the prospect of new opportunities. There is, in particular, the promise of better understanding and theft- fore of a more peaceful world.
5.	We in South Africa hope that this promise will be realized. We welcome any development which tends to lessen international tension and which leans in the direction of defusing, rather than accentuating, international confrontation-confrontation which in this day and age could lead to catastrophe for the world. We welcome the approach of the major Powers which, after all these years, are moving increasingly, albeit cautiously, from a posture of mutual recrimination towards one of negotiation. We are glad that the negotiations which have already taken place provide support for the concept of the peaceful settlement of disputes between nations, large and small.
6.	What conclusions are to be drawn by an onlooker from these developments? In the first place, it is striking that, although the internal political and social systems of the major Powers are often widely divergent, this has not deterred them from reaching an accommodation with one another on the issues which have hitherto divided them. None has found it necessary to change its own system or to try to impose such an adjustment on others. It has, in fact, been specifically stated in communiques and conference documentation that essential differences in ideology, social systems and even foreign policies should be no bar to the conduct of relations between States, based on such universal principles as respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, non-aggression against States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. It was also recognized that international disputes should be settled without resort to the threat or use of force.
7.	In the second place we should note that, despite the significance of the recent developments to which I have referred, the progress so far made is unfortunately only marginal in comparison with the awesome magnitude and complexity of the problems that still remain. These problems, which vitally affect not only the larger nations but every nation in the world, include such issues as economic development, the preservation of our global environment, famine and over-population, disarmament, and so on. Any advance in these spheres is encouraging and it is indeed gratifying to acknowledge in passing that a measure of progress has this year been recorded in some of them. It is regrettable, however, that even on such cardinal matters as the environment and economic development, political considerations, for reasons frequently not even remotely relevant to the central issue, are allowed to intrude into the proceedings.
A/PV.2046
8.	How are the smaller nations affected by the new fluidity in international relations? It is clear that the developments in the past year or two involving the major Powers have acted as a catalyst for the reassessment of many existing political situations. No country can wisely disregard them altogether. It seems to me, furthermore, that the smaller Powers now have an incentive to show that 
they, too, can relax tension among themselves. The lesson is that consultation and negotiation are more rewarding for all the parties concerned than confrontation leading to possible conflict, destruction and suffering; the lesson is that differences in internal social systems are no deterrent to accommodation between the parties; the lesson, furthermore, is that an essential prerequisite to a climate of mutua1 trust and confidence, leading to the settlement of diffe  ences, is acceptance and implementation of the principles of non-aggression, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States and peaceful coexistence. It is my hope that the smaller States will heed this lesson, strive for cooperation and thus lay the basis for the progress and advancement of their peoples.
9.	In the face of the great problems with which the world as a whole is confronted, and with particular reference to me immense task of development which faces the smaller developing countries, none of us can afford the luxury of international bickering and dispute, which distract our attention from the fundamental problems and detract from our ability to solve them.
10.	Let us in this regard briefly consider the record of the year which has just gone by. We find that progress has in fact been erratic. In some areas improvement has been registered; in others, however, an atmosphere of armed hostility survives in the aftermath of a regional war; elsewhere we have witnessed military coups d'etat, assassination attempts, massive loss of life in communal conflicts, hijacking and terrorism in its different manifestations. Only some of these activities have received the attention of this Organization. This is the darker side of the picture, but I mention it because these are activities which gravely undermine international order and progress, and history will harshly judge the international community and this Organization if they continue unchecked. In the economic and social fields progress has also been uneven and the world has had to live through a further period of financial crisis and instability. It is clear that progress will not come easily.
11.	Against this background of shifting international attitudes and uneven accomplishment, may I sketch some of the principles governing South Africa's approach to international intercourse. As a starting-point, let me reiterate that we fully subscribe to the principle of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. We shall continue to apply this principle in the conduct of our relations with our neighbors in southern Africa, where the principle has most relevance for us. We have given solemn undertakings in this regard. Our aim is to exist peacefully with each of them to out mutual advantage. We have no aggressive intentions or expansionist ambitions.
12.	We believe also in the peaceful settlement of disputes, which is the fundamental message of the Charter, and we reject the use of violence and force as a means to an end. Instead we favor dialog and negotiation, contact and communication. We can point in this regard to our contacts with the Secretary-General on the future of South West Africa. We remain ready to enter into dialog with anyone who reciprocates our genuine interest therein. Let me make it clear once again today that we are prepared to discuss even South Africa's internal policies in the course of such a dialog. My country practices and lives dialog and sees in it a positive approach to world problems and an effective way of promoting peaceful coexistence and world harmony.
13.	Accordingly we have on several occasions shown our readiness to seek solutions to current problems within this framework. I am convinced that the development of dialog between South Africa and African nations can lead only to improved relations to the benefit of all. There is already evidence that this is so. I may mention in this regard, for example, the historic state visit of the President- for-life of Malawi to South Africa during 1971, which was followed by an equally successful return visit by the South African State President earlier this year. We believe that reciprocal visits of this nature, conducted at all levels, are important from the point of view of breaking down prejudices and increasing understanding.
14.	Then there is the question of internal dialog. It has been asserted in some quarters that South Africa should conduct a dialog with its own people before attempting to engage in a dialog with independent States, particularly those of Africa. This assertion appears to be based, as in the case of so many attitudes towards South Africa, on a fundamental misconception of the situation. There is, in fact, a continuing dialog with the various peoples in South Africa, which has been and is being conducted at all levels, from the lowest to the highest. The self-governing nations emerging in South Africa are producing leaders and representatives who are empowered by their own people to conduct a dialog at the highest level with the South African Government and this they have been doing. Ministers and officials of my Government are in constant touch with ministers and their officials in the homelands, all of which enjoy some form of self-government. Last year the South African Prime Minister himself conferred with leaders of all the different peoples of the Republic, some of which, namely the Xhosas and the Zulus, total as many as 4 million each, and these meetings have continued this year. Moreover, these leaders travel overseas extensively and exchange views and ideas with a wide cross-section of world opinion. What is all this, if it is not dialogue in the truest sense of the word?
15.	It is a strange phenomenon that dialogue in any form should be discouraged in this Organization. The Organization, whose raison d'etre is the maintenance of peace in the world, is the largest and most universal forum of the community of nations for the exchange of points of view. Implicit in the concept of the United Nations is that disputes are better settled by words than by force. It is therefore inexplicable and unforgiveable that the membership should actively or even obliquely support in any way programmes of force, violence and terror, while at the same time disavowing dialogue. We hope that all Members will adopt a positive approach to dialogue and that dialogue itself will not become a source of discord among the nations of the world. It would be tragic if it were to be used by some for divisive purposes to split us into opposing groups or blocs.
16.	The repudiation of dialogue leads to reliance upon uglier means of settling differences, none more ugly and abhorrent than terrorism. Recent incidents of terrorism have horrified the world. But terrorism is not new. It has existed for years. During the past decade or more, indiscriminate terrorism has spread to virtually every corner of the globe, bringing in its wake suffering, destruction and death. The terrorist outrages committed at Munich and elsewhere have been widely condemned, here and elsewhere. This is very proper, but it is not enough. Terrorism is a universal evil which must be stamped out everywhere. There can be no differentiation between types of terrorism. In all its forms it is a disease which respects no frontier. None that ignores it abroad is immune to it at home.
17.	This Organization in particular must be consistent. It cannot shirk its duty and discard its Charter in regard to terrorism. We must speak with one ',oice on this scourge, without equivocation, because terrorism, no matter where it may erupt or what its current guise, cannot shed its essential characteristics: it is beyond the pale of order, of law, of decency, of society and of humanity. We cannot for selfish or regional reasons move to stamp it out in one form or in one region, while encouraging it in another. It is obvious that this merely guarantees its survival and its spread. And yet, the records of this Assembly abound in expressions serving as encouragement to those committed to violence as a means of achieving their political objectives. Furthermore, at the very time of the Munich outrage, plans were openly being laid for stepping up terrorism in Africa. Terrorism will survive so long as this and other Organizations continue not only to condone the use of force and violence as a means to an end but, in certain circumstances, to support and even to subsidize it.
18.	We deplore this attitude. South Africa cannot and will not compromise on the issue of terrorism. We have not hesitated to take drastic action against it in the past, and we shall fight it with all means at our disposal in the future. I much regret, I might add, that even while the Secretary- General and the South African Government are engaged in discussions on the future of South West Africa, with progress already registered, some individuals and organizations, and even some Governments represented here, should still openly advocate the use of force and violence in that Territory.
19.	So far as the contacts between the Secretary-General and my Government are concerned, this is obviously not the opportune moment for me to speak on them at any length. There is no denying that the gap to be bridged is wide and deep, and it cannot be expected that a solution will be found overnight.. Time, perseverance and patience will clearly be required. Nevertheless, we sincerely hope that goodwill, mutual trust and understanding will prevail on all sides and that in this atmosphere progress will be possible. I want again to reaffirm that, so far as South West Africa is concerned, the South African Government is firmly committed to the principle of self-determination and independence with all that this implies, and we shall continue to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the search for a solution.
20.	.In the meantime, South Africa is continuing to assist in the development of the Territory and the advancement of its peoples in all spheres so that they may achieve the declared goal of self-determination and independence as rapidly as possible. During the last two generations we have made a considerable contribution to the Territory's development. I may also mention that, by virtue of South African legislation, all revenue collected in South West Africa, including taxation on foreign investments, is applied there exclusively for the benefit of all the inhabitants. In addition, South Africa itself annually contributes directly and indirectly a substantial amount to the Territory's development. In 1972 this additional contribution by the south African Government, on current account alone, is estimated at $80 million, an amount which very nearly equals South West Africa's own estimated revenue receipts. We shall be more than prepared to continue to assist the peoples of the Territory after independence, if that is what they desire; and we are in a good position to do so, because of our close association with South West Africa over many years, our geographic proximity and our links in numerous fields; but it will be clear that our assistance then cannot be on the same scale as it is today. Even now the growing needs of the indigenous peoples can hardly be met from local and South African resources combined.
21.	After independence, therefore, as in the case of most newly independent States, they will inevitably continue to look beyond their borders for assistance.
22.	In all the circumstances, we simply cannot understand the motives of those who discourage new foreign investment or call for the cessation of existing foreign investment in South West Africa. It cannot be in the interest of the peoples of the Territory to deprive them of the contribution to their welfare which overseas investors make in the context of their business operations there, for it is the inhabitants themselves who gain from such investments. And it must surely be clear that, the closer we move in the direction of self-determination and independence, the more important foreign investment becomes in developing the essential economic launching-pad which new States need in order to get off to a sound start. An attempt to retard the economic growth of the Territory simply means a prolongation of its economic dependence upon others. I would ask those discouraging, or advocating a withdrawal of, investments in South West Africa at least to take account of the wishes of the inhabitants of the Territory, and to cease arrogating to themselves exclusively the privilege of deciding what is in their best interests.
23.	From what I have said today, it should be clear that South Africa has adopted an approach to its problems and its relations with other countries which is not out of tune with the current trend of negotiation and detente now influencing international relations. This applies both to the conduct of South Africa's internal affairs and to the wider international sphere.
24.	I have in mind, in this regard, relations, with our neighbors as well as with the United Nations. We subscribe to this policy because we are convinced that, provided our efforts are not undermined by external influences, it will promote peace in our part of the world.
25.	It should not be necessary to commend a similar approach to Members of this Organization, since that approach is implicit in the Charter. But a return to the Charter in this respect might lead the Organization to higher levels of achievement in the pursuit of its principal objective: international peace A number of important changes have taken place in the world situation since the twenty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly. A series of new victories has been achieved by the Asian, African and Latin American peoples in their struggle to win and safeguard national independence. Countries of the third world are getting united on a wider scale to oppose the super-Power policies of aggression, expansion and war; they are playing an ever greater role in international affairs. Meanwhile, some important events have taken place in international relations. In the East, the leaders of China and the United States have held talks after more than 20 years' suspension of relations between the two countries. They have made clear the differences of principle between the two sides and agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should handle their relations on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, non- aggression against other States, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence, and that international disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. Recently, Prime Minister Tanaka of Japan paid a visit to China, and the two sides have reached an important agreement on the normalization of the relations between China and Japan, thus realizing the long-standing aspirations of the two peoples and opening up a new chapter in the relations between the two countries. In the West, the Soviet Union and the United States held summit talks and signed a number of bilateral agreements on co-operation in the fields of science and technology, culture, education and health. The European Economic Community has grown and expanded. In the Middle East, far-reaching progress has been made in the Arab nation's struggle to free itself from super-Power control. The struggle of the people of various countries and the changes in international relations have helped in varying degrees to promote the relaxation of international tension.
141.	However, it cannot but be noted that there is no essential change in the situation in which a super-Power is pushing expansionism by all means in contending for world hegemony. The acute and complicated contradictions and struggles between imperialism on the one hand and the oppressed nations and peoples on the other have not abated.
142.	To this day, the United States war of aggression against Indochina is still going on. Because of the meddling by the Soviet Union, the turmoil on the South Asian subcontinent has failed to subside. The stalemate of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East remains. In Europe, with the two military blocs confronting each other, there is no genuine security and cannot be any. Colonialism of different forms persists in many parts of the world. The sovereignty and independence of many small and medium- sized countries are still being infringed and their national resources plundered. Twenty-seven years have elapsed since the end of the Second World War. There are still foreign military bases of various kinds and large numbers of foreign troops on the territories of many countries. The arms race between the two super-Powers is being stepped up unceasingly, seriously menacing the independence and security of the peoples of the world. The whole Western world is in the grip of financial and monetary crises, which have aggravated its various contradictions. In these circumstances, how can the world not be in turmoil? The world is still in the process of great turbulence, great division and great realignment. The struggle between aggression and anti-aggression, interference and anti-interference, subversion and anti-subversion, control and anti- control is bound to continue for a long time.
143.	The Chinese delegation holds that the people of all countries must not be deluded by certain temporary and superficial phenomena of detente at the present time and develop a false sense of security. While striving for world peace and the progress of mankind, we must maintain sufficient vigilance and make necessary preparations against the danger of new wars of aggression any imperialism may launch.
144.	To end the war in Indochina as soon as possible is the most urgent matter for easing the tension in the Far East. At present, the people of the whole world, including the American people, strongly condemn the United States Government for its wanton bombing, mining and blockading of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and resolutely demand that it immediately stop all its acts of aggression against Viet-Nam and the whole of Indochina and withdraw all the armed forces of the United States and its followers, so that the peoples of the three Indochinese countries may solve their own problems independently, free from any foreign interference. Fair and reasonable ways for the peaceful settlement of the Viet-Nam and Indochina question have been put forward in the seven- point proposal of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the elaboration on its two key points and in the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the IndoChinese peoples in April 1970. Of late, the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam issued a statement on 11 September demanding that the United States cease its policy of "VietNamizing" the war and supporting the Saigon puppet regime, and pointing out that a solution to the problem of South Viet-Nam must proceed from the actual situation in South Viet-Nam, in which there exist two administrations and two armies as well as other political forces, and stating that a provisional government of national concord composed of three equal segments must be formed to take charge of affairs in the period of transition. This proposal is fair and reasonable. It shows that the VietNamese side has no intention of imposing a Communist regime on South VietNam. Rejection of this proposal precisely bespeaks the attempt to continue to impose the Nguyen Van Thieu puppet regime on the South VietNamese people. The Chinese Government fully sup-ports the just stand of the VietNamese people and of the three IndoChinese peoples.
145.	The three IndoChinese countries are close neighbors of China, and the three Indochinese peoples are the Chinese people's brothers. We are duty bound to support them in their just struggle against foreign aggression, and we will never interfere in their internal affairs. On behalf of the Chinese Government, I once again solemnly declare from this rostrum: so long as the war in IndoChina goes on in whatever form, the Chinese Government and people, not flinching from the greatest national sacrifice, will firmly support the three IndoChinese peoples in fighting to the end.
146.	It is necessary to point out here that the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia, under the leadership of Samdech Norodom Sihanouk, Head of State of Cambodia, is the sole legal representative of the Khmer people and effectively controls nearly 90 per cent of Cambodian territory. The Lon Nol regime is imposed on the Khmer people by foreign forces, and it is illegal from the very beginning. The representatives of the Lon Nol clique have no right to occupy Cambodia's seat in the United Nations. More and more countries in the world have recognized this reality and truth. The Chinese delegation holds that the United Nations should rectify the present unreasonable and illegal state of affairs and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia its lawful rights.
147.	On 4 July this year, initiated and promoted by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, North and South Korea reached agreement on the principles and steps for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, thus strengthening the confidence of the 40 million and more Korean people, who have been divided for 27 years, in the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland. The Chinese Government and people warmly welcome this agreement. Nineteen years have elapsed since the armistice in Korea. The Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew from Korea as early as 1958. But in South Korea there still remain a so-called "United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea" and a so-called "United Nations Command". This is an anachronism. The combination of the two implies a threat to North Korea. This is an underlying factor making for the continuation of tension on the Korean peninsula. Now, North and South Korea have agreed to achieve gradually the reunification of Korea independently and by peaceful means without reliance upon foreign forces or interference by them. Why should the United Nations keep these two stumbling blocks in front of the Korean people? The General Assembly should discuss the proposed item "Creation of favorable conditions to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea" [A/8752 and Add.1-10] and adopt a pertinent resolution to remove these two stumbling blocks. It is regrettable, however, that the discussion of this fair and reasonable proposal has been deferred to next year. To dodge a problem is no solution. It is argued that the discussion should be postponed to next year because North and South Korea are now in contact. This argument is untenable. One may ask, will there be no more contacts between North and South Korea next year? This is obviously a pretext. A postponement is neither in the interests of the Korean people nor conducive to relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula. We hope that the countries concerned will reconsider their stand.
148.	Now I wish to speak on the question of the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent. We all remember that last December, in this very hall, the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session [2003rd meeting] adopted by the overwhelming majority of 104 votes a resolution calling for cease-fire and troop withdrawal by India and Pakistan [resolution 2793 (XXVI)]. Subsequently, the Security Council also adopted, by 13 votes in favor and 2 abstentions, resolution 307 (1971) which demands a ceasefire, troop withdrawal and release of prisoners of war by all those concerned. However, while the relevant resolutions of the United Nations were not yet implemented, the Soviet Government and its followers raised at the Security Council last August the question of the admission of "Bangladesh" into the United Nations.  In disregard of the reasonable demand of many countries to postpone the consideration of the question, they insisted on a vote to compel China to use the veto. China's stand for postponing the consideration of this question does not mean that we are fundamentally opposed to the admission of "Bangladesh" into the United Nations. China cherishes friendly sentiments for the people of East Bengal and has no prejudice against Mr. Mujibur Rahman. We stand for postponing the consideration of this question, in order to promote a reconciliation among the parties concerned and the implementation of the United Nations resolutions, which are the very immediate concern. However, the Soviet Government has hurriedly pressed for the admission of "Bangladesh" to the United Nations. This is definitely not aimed at helping "Bangladesh", but at forcing China to use the veto, maintaining and aggravating the tensions among the parties concerned on the subcontinent and whitewashing its foul act of supporting the Indian Government in dismembering Pakistan last year. But its attempt will not succeed. If it had been national self-determination, it should have been the people of East Bengal solving their problems by themselves. Why should Indian troops have invaded East Pakistan? And why should the 90,000 and more Pakistani war prisoners and civilians have been taken to India?
149.	After the admission of "Bangladesh" has been vetoed, certain people are trying to bypass the Security Council and refer the question to the General Assembly for discussion. This is clearly done with ulterior motives. This will in no way help promote a reconciliation among the parties concerned on the subcontinent, nor will it reflect honor on the country inciting such a move. China stands firm on principles. China considers that the question of whether or not reasonable United Nations resolutions supported by the overwhelming majority of its Members are implemented is a matter of principle affecting what direction the United Nations is heading for. And on matters of principle China will never retreat.
150.	The present situation of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East is solely created by the two super-Powers for their respective interests. Taking advantage of this situation, these two super-Powers are using Arab countries' territories and sovereignty and the Palestinian people's right to existence as so many stakes with which to strike political deals. The United States is openly supporting the aggression by Israeli Zionism. The other super-Power claims to "support and assist" the Arab people in their struggle against aggression. Has it supported and assisted them? It has indeed sold them no small amount of weapons. But strangely, the weapons supplied are not allowed to be used. Is this not asking people to buy scrap iron? Moreover, it demands privileges and bases, and even attempts to subvert their Government. What kind of "friend" is this? It is more dangerous than an open enemy.
151.	However, recent developments show that the heroic Arab people will not allow others to ride on their backs and lord it over them for long. They have taken determined actions to shake off super-Power domination. This commands admiration. Do not believe the sensational nonsense deliberately spread by a super-Power that no counter-attack should be made against Israel's armed aggression for that would spark a world war. That is meant to scare people. It has been borne out repeatedly by the history of the 20 years and more since the Second World War. We believe that, so long as they strengthen their unity and persevere in their struggle, the Arab countries subjected to aggression are fully capable of recovering their sacred territories and the injured Palestinian people of regaining their national rights.
152.	The Chinese Government has always opposed assassination and the hijacking of individuals as a means of waging political struggles and is also opposed to adventurist acts of terrorism by individuals or by a handful of people divorced from the masses, because they are harmful to the development of the cause of national liberation and people's revolution. But we strongly condemn Israel for the recent barbarous aggression and massacres it has committed against Lebanon, Syria and other Arab countries on the pretext of the "Munich incident". The Chinese people will always stand together with the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their just struggle against aggression.
153.	The situation in the Mediterranean is closely related to that in the Middle East and Europe. In contending for hegemony, the two super-Powers have dispatched large numbers of war vessels to the Mediterranean and set up many military bases there, posing a threat to the security of the countries around the sea. Now more and more Mediterranean countries have raised their voices for "a Mediterranean of the Mediterranean countries", and demanded the withdrawal of foreign fleets from the Mediterranean. Their demand is entirely just and the Chinese Government and people firmly support it.
154.	It is fully understandable that the peoples of the European countries, who have gone through two world wars, are all concerned for the peace and security of Europe. Twenty-seven years have passed since the end of the Second World War, and yet many European countries are still under the military control of one super-Power or the other, with large numbers of foreign troops stationed on their territories. Making use of the confrontation of the two military blocs, each of the two super-Powers is trying hard to keep its allies under control and undermine the opposite side. In these circumstances, how can one speak of genuine peace and security for the people of the European countries? What calls for attention is the fact that there are now some people who, capitalizing on the European people's eager desire for peace, are trying hard by various tactics to cover up the reality that European peace and security are still under threat, and to create the false impression of a European detente and "all quiet on the western front", so as to attain their ulterior purposes. The fact that a super-Power could, when it considered it necessary, launch a surprise attack in order to occupy an ally with massive troops shows that such a "military alliance" is no guarantee of peace at all. Security is out of the question for any country when it is under virtual occupation.
155.	We hold that, in order truly to ensure peace and security for Europe, it is necessary to oppose firmly aggression, interference, subversion and control by the super-Powers, to disband military blocs, to withdraw foreign armed forces and to bring about peaceful coexistence between the European countries on the basis of respect for independence and sovereignty, mutual non- aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and equality and mutual benefit. Otherwise, the so-called; European security conference can only be another name for the division of spheres of influence between the two super-Powers by making use of military blocs. Such a conference would better be called "the European insecurity conference" rather than "the European security conference". An increasing number of countries are demanding that all the European countries should take part as equals in the European security conference and its preparations with equal powers and opposing the holding of the conference as between two blocs. They especially oppose the two big Powers monopolizing everything behind the backs of the other countries and manipulating the destiny of their people. This is an expression of the profound aspirations of the European people. The Chinese Government and people resolutely support the people of the European countries in all their efforts to oppose the power politics and hegemony practiced by the super-Powers.
156.	In Africa, particularly in southern Africa, the mass movements against white colonialist rule, racial discrimination and apartheid and for national liberation have made great new progress, marking a further enhancement of the political consciousness of the African people. The people in southern Africa and other regions which have not yet achieved independence are increasingly aware that the only way to overthrow white colonialist rule and win national liberation is to rely mainly on their own efforts, fully arousing and organizing the masses and waging an unyielding and valiant struggle. It is necessary to seek external assistance, but more and more facts have proved that it is impossible to put an end to colonialist rule by relying on other people. The Chinese Government and people resolutely support the heroic people of Mozambique, Angola, Guinea (Bissau), Azania, Zimbabwe, Namibia and Spanish Sahara. Their struggles are just, and so long as they carry on perseveringly, fear neither hardship nor sacrifice and advance wave upon wave, they will surely, with the sympathy and support of the peoples of Africa and the whole world, win final victory.
157.	As a developing country, China, from its own experience, fully sympathizes with the deep aspirations of the Asian, African and Latin American countries for the defense of their national independence, the protection of their resources and the development of their national economy. We resolutely support the Latin American countries in their struggle to defend their 200-nautical-mile maritime rights. We resolutely support the petroleum and other raw material exporting countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America in their struggle against plunder by foreign forces. We resolutely support the developing countries in their struggle to prevent imperialist countries shifting their economic crisis on to them. We resolutely support the small and medium-sized countries in their struggle against big Powers plundering their fishery resources.
158.	We hold that, in order to change the backward state of their economy, the developing countries should first of all rely on themselves; that is, they should rely mainly on their own efforts and take foreign aid as an auxiliary. The just struggles of the people of all countries support each other. Those countries which have already won liberation are all the more duty-bound to support and assist those countries subjected to oppression and aggression. But now some people are using aid as a means for controlling other countries and expanding their own spheres of influence.
When they give something to other countries, they assume the airs of a benefactor and demand all sorts of privileges. They send to the recipient countries experts and advisers who behave as tyrants, ordering people about and lording it over them. How could this be called aid?
159.	We hold that all countries which are sincere in providing aid to others, including multilateral aid through the United Nations, should help the recipient countries and not exploit them. Their loans should be interest-free or, at least, low in interest. They must not press for repayment but should allow its postponement. When providing a loan or other forms of aid, they should strictly respect the sovereignty of the recipient countries, attach no conditions and ask for no privileges. The purpose of providing aid to other countries should be to help the recipient countries stand on their own feet and to develop an independent national economy. They must not reduce the recipient countries to dependence and subordination in the name of "economic aid" or "the international division of labor", still less place them under their control on the pretext of "aid". China, too, received some foreign aid in the past and had direct experience in this regard. Therefore, today when we provide aid to other countries, we endeavor to act on the above-mentioned principles. Of course, our capabilities in this respect are limited and the aid we can give is not much. But we hold that the above-mentioned principles should be propagated and applied universally.
160.	Now I wish to speak on the question of disarmament. Not long ago some agreements on the limitation of strategic armaments were reached by the Soviet Union and the United States in high-level talks. There is no need for us to comment on these agreements if they are regarded merely as bilateral affairs between the Soviet Union and the United States. But if they are being blown up as tremendous achievements on the road of reducing the threat of nuclear war, we cannot agree. These agreements only stipulate some limitation on the quantity of certain categories of nuclear weapons in the possession of the Soviet Union and the United States, but impose no limitation at all on their quality, nor do they mention a single word about the destruction of nuclear weapons. This can by no means be regarded as a step towards nuclear disarmament. On the contrary, this marks the beginning of a new stage in the Soviet-United States nuclear arms race. Before the ink on the agreement had dried, the one hastened to test new-type nuclear weapons and the other expressed its intention to make a big increase immediately in its military expenditure. How can this be described as reducing the threat of a nuclear war? We hold that no fond illusion should be cherished about these agreements. In 1921, the major naval Powers of the time prescribed a limitation on their respective total tonnages of capital ships, and the limitation was reaffirmed in 1930. Everybody knows what happened in the end. It is not without meaning to recall this historical case today.
161.	Moreover, the Soviet Union and the United States have stated in the document on the basic principles of relations between them  that they have a special responsibility to avert conflicts which would serve to increase international tensions, and they have recognized each other's security interests based on the principle of equality. What special responsibility and what equal security interests? According to Khruschev's "theory", do they not stand for Soviet-United States collaboration for world domination? Of course, one can talk like that, but it would not be so easy to have it realized.
162.	As everyone knows, war is the continuation of politics. The invention and the development of nuclear weapons have not changed, nor can they change, this truth. Although no new world war has occurred since the Second World War, local wars of various types have never ceased. Why? Because imperialism resorts to armed force in carrying out aggression and expansion. Where there is oppression there is resistance, and where there is aggression there is struggle against aggression. This is inevitable so long as imperialism exists. But now the Soviet Government asserts that in a nuclear age there is no other way than that of peaceful coexistence among States, which presupposes, above all, the renunciation' of the use of force in international relations, that is, the non-use of both conventional and nuclear weapons. It has even spread the alarmist theory that the destructive power of even conventional warfare has by now increased so greatly that the large-scale use of conventional weapons can lead to the annihilation of entire nations. But the world will be safe once there is a resolution on the non-use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. This is a sheer hoax. As a matter of fact, the Soviet Government does not believe in its own theory. Its practice in the Middle East, where it gave weapons to Arab countries but forbade the use of them, does smack a little of this "theory". Yet, in the Indo-Pakistan war last year, it gave undisguised support to the Indian Government in its armed aggression against Pakistan. What kind of non-use of force is this?
163.	People condemn war and consider it a barbarous way of settling disputes among mankind. But we are soberly aware that war is inevitable so long as society is divided into classes and the exploitation of man by man still exists. There are two categories of wars, just and unjust. We support just wars and oppose unjust wars. If a socialist still wants to be a socialist, he should not oppose all wars indiscriminately. The non-use of force in international relations can only be conditional, and not unconditional. The condition is to realize peaceful coexistence through mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, and equality and mutual benefit. And in order to realize this, it is imperative to oppose the policies of aggression and expansion of any imperialism. When imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism of various descriptions are still using force to enslave, commit aggression against, control and threaten a majority of the countries of the world, it is betrayal to the people of the world to advocate non-use of force in international relations indiscriminatingly, without regard to conditions and in an absolute way. If one still has a grain of socialism in him, why does he not produce something presentable for instance, opposition to aggression in international relations, and especially aggression backed by nuclear weapons? Why should he, on the contrary, choose to produce such shabby stuff as renunciation of the use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons? In that way, does he not allow himself to be seen through right away?
164.	Permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons this sounds so nice and looks so much like China's proposition, but in fact it is completely different. We say that, as the first step towards the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, agreement should first be reached on the non-use of nuclear weapons. And we have publicly declared that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons. This fully shows that China is developing nuclear weapons for defensive purposes and with the aim of breaking the nuclear monopoly and proceeding from there to eliminate nuclear weapons. If the Soviet Union entertains the same defensive purposes as it has claimed, why does the Soviet representative not dare to come up to this rostrum and make a similar declaration? How can it make people believe its big talk in favor of the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons to be sincere when it, while mouthing the word "prohibition", is constantly brandishing its nuclear weapons, obdurately opposing the possession and development of nuclear weapons by countries with few or no nuclear weapons, feverishly improving and developing its own nuclear weapons and deploying them at the gates of other countries? It asserts that the renunciation of the use of force and prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would be effective only when the two are linked together. In actuality, this is demanding that the people of the world give up their armed struggle against aggression; otherwise, nuclear weapons will be used against them. Is this not its plain logic? Big talk is useless. The proposal of the Soviet Government, no matter how much it is couched in diplomatic language, has the real intent of making all oppressed nations and peoples tamely submit to the nuclear threat of the one or two super-Powers. But they have grossly underestimated the political consciousness of the people of the world.
165.	In order truly to do away with nuclear threats, it is necessary to completely prohibit and thoroughly destroy nuclear weapons. Yet the Soviet. Government dares neither to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons nor to touch on the question of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, but advocates the cessation of all nuclear tests. Why? As everyone knows, the Soviet Union has made hundreds of nuclear tests. When it had made enough tests in the atmosphere, it proposed the partial ban on nuclear tests. Now when it has made enough underground tests, it calls for a ban on all nuclear tests. Actually this means that the Soviet Union could make any kind of tests when it had the need, and that when it no longer has the need the others are not permitted to make any test. This is another trap blatantly designed to maintain its nuclear monopoly, following the partial nuclear test-ban treaty and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)]. As a Chinese saying goes, "The magistrates are allowed to burn down houses, while the common people are forbidden even to light lamps." China absolutely will not fall into this trap. At no time and in no circumstances will China recognize such a right for the Soviet Union or any other nuclear Power. No one but those Powers alone are permitted to develop nuclear weapons; they may threaten others but others are not allowed to exercise the right of self-defense. Can there be such reason on earth? At present, a mere cessation of all nuclear tests without complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons can only hinder countries with few or no nuclear weapons from developing their nuclear capabilities for self-defense but will not affect in the least the nuclear hegemony of the super-Powers. The real purpose of the proposal of the Soviet Government is to maintain its nuclear monopoly and nuclear superiority by capitalizing on many countries' legitimate desire for peace, so that it can have a free hand to carry out its nuclear threat and nuclear blackmail against countries with few or no nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapons are something which people can neither eat nor wear. China is a developing country and certainly does not want to spend one penny more than necessary on such stuff. China is making nuclear tests under compulsion. Its nuclear tests are taking place in its deep interior, and their number is limited. China is ready at any time to stop all its nuclear tests, but only on the day the nuclear weapons of the nuclear super-Powers and all nuclear countries are completely prohibited and thoroughly destroyed, and not before.
166.	On the question of convening a world disarmament conference, we have explained the position and views of the Chinese Government at the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly [1983rd and 2022nd meetings]. We cannot agree to the Soviet position on the "world disarmament conference" as set forth in the Soviet Foreign Minister's letter of 14 August this year [A/8757] to the United Nations Secretary-General. The "world disarmament conference" as proposed by the Soviet Union has neither the necessary requisites nor a clear aim. It would in fact be an "empty-talk club" which would indulge in far-ranging rambling discourse without solving any practical problem. To hold such a conference would only serve to hoodwink and lull the people of the world. It is better not to hold it.
167.	The actual situation in the world today is this. The two super-Powers are maintaining military bases of various kinds, including nuclear bases, and stationing large numbers of their armed forces, including nuclear-missile forces, in many countries; their airplanes, warships and submarines, including those carrying nuclear weapons, are flying and plying everywhere; and they have up to now refused to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly not to use them against non-nuclear countries. To varying degrees, all the countries in the world with no nuclear weapons and those with few nuclear weapons are exposed to their threat. The most urgent question today is the withdrawal of foreign armed forces, rather than the reduction of armaments. Let the two super-Powers withdraw all their armed forces, both conventional and nuclear, back to their own countries. If they do not even want to effect a withdrawal, how can one believe that they are willing to make an arms reduction?
168.	The cry for general and complete disarmament has been going on for more than a dozen years. But the result is general and complete arms expansion by the two superPowers, while all the small and medium-sized countries of the world are in a position of defense inadequacy. This hoax should not be allowed to continue. In order that a world disarmament conference will make a true start and carry on fruitfully instead of becoming a bout of deceptive empty talk, it is imperative to create the necessary conditions for the convening of such a conference, namely, all nuclear countries, particularly the Soviet Union and the United States which possess the greatest amount of nuclear weapons, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, and that they not only will not use nuclear weapons against each other, but, more importantly, will not use them against the non-nuclear countries, and they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible to create the necessary conditions for all the countries, irrespective of their size; to discuss and solve on an equal footing the important questions of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and the reduction of conventional weapons.
169.	Since the beginning of this year, the United Nations and its Security Council have done much work thanks to the joint efforts made by the overwhelming majority of the Member States. What merits special mention is that the Security Council held special meetings in Africa on African questions. This was an unprecedented action taken at the demand of many African countries. The meetings adopted a number of useful resolutions on some African questions. At the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in the capital of Chile, many developing countries forcefully exposed the situation in which certain developed countries, by trade, tariff, monetary and other means, are monopolizing international markets, shifting their economic crisis onto, and stepping up the plunder and exploitation of, other countries, thus aggravating the irrational international phenomenon of "the rich becoming richer and the poor poorer". The developing countries strongly demanded that this state of affairs must be changed. At the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment held in the capital of Sweden, many countries of the third world strongly condemned imperialism for carrying out policies of aggression and war and put forward a number of sound views and reasonable opinions on the question of conserving and improving the human environment. At the sessions of the sea-bed Committee, many countries of the third world carried out resolute struggles to safeguard their own natural resources and upheld the just position that each country has the right to determine the scope of its own territorial sea and jurisdiction. At all these meetings and conferences, many countries of the third world showed their firm determination to oppose imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism and played important roles.
170.	However, we cannot but point out with regret that owing to obstructions by the one or two super-Powers the United Nations has remained weak and ineffective in dealing with many major international issues. Some correct resolutions adopted by the United Nations remain unimplemented due to hindrance by one or two big Powers. Many organs and agencies of the United Nations are still dominated by a small number of countries and fail to reflect the demands and opinions of the great number of countries of the third world. In the United Nations there still prevails the very serious phenomenon of discussions without a decision and decisions without implementation. All this should be corrected speedily.
171.	Here I wish to deal with the Chinese Government's views on the review of the United Nations Charter. As is known to all, the United Nations Charter was drawn up near the end of the Second World War and it was a product of the historical conditions prevailing at the time. However, history is making advances and things are developing. In some respects the Charter formulated 27 years ago obviously cannot meet the tremendous change that has occurred in the international situation and in the United Nations. There were 51 original Members at the founding of the United Nations. Since then more than 80 countries have joined the United Nations, most of which are newly independent countries. It is understandable that there is a demand for the United Nations Charter to reflect fully the present state of affairs in the world. We maintain that on the basis of upholding the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter careful consideration should be given to the views of various countries for necessary revisions of the Charter so as truly to give effect to the principle that all Member States, big or small, are equal. Of course, we likewise consider that the revision of the Charter is a serious and important question, and we are ready to join you all in serious explorations.
172.	The world is at the cross-roads, and so is the United Nations. If the United Nations is to regain its prestige and play its due role, it must conform to the trend of the world, truly express the just demands of large numbers of its Members and the people of the world, act strictly in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and free itself from manipulation and control by the big Powers. It must be trustworthy in word and resolute in deed. Otherwise, it would be very difficult for the United Nations to avoid eventually taking the old path of the League of Nations. The Chinese delegation is ready to work together with the delegations of all countries which love peace and uphold justice to make the United Nations truly capable of playing a role in safeguarding international peace and promoting the cause of the progress of mankind.
The first word I should like to mention as I mount this rostrum for the fifth time is hope, a difficult virtue. I am encouraged to do so, Mr. President, by your accession to this high office, which was distinguished last year by the prestige of Mr. Adam Malik. I am thinking of the ties which have linked my country to yours for almost six centuries, ties which, if such a thing is possible, will be strengthened still further by Mr., Gierek's forthcoming visit to France. I also have in mind the important lesson of perseverance that Poland has continually lavished on Europe and the world. But the virtue of hope has also been called to mind by the praises earned in a matter of months by our new Secretary- General-a worthy successor to the man who, for the sake of the United Nations, pushed himself to the very limit of his strength. We all knew that Kurt Waldheim excelled in every intellectual quality. Today we all know that he is no less distinguished by his strength of character. He is not a man to shun the new duties which loom in his path, and so it is to him that I would first address myself.
61.	France immediately and unconditionally condemned "the acts of terrorism and reprisals which are increasing the numbers of innocent victims", to quote the exact terms of the communique that my friend Mr. Schmelzer, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, read on 12 September on behalf of the Conference of the 10 European Ministers of Foreign Affairs who were meeting near Rome. My country therefore shares the anguish of the Secretary- General and endorses his initiative, which we feel sets an example in two respects: first of all, because it aims at breaking the merciless chain of indiscriminate violence, and secondly, because the man who took this initiative intends to grapple not only with the most tragic consequences but also with the deep-seated causes of the problem, as the most authoritative voice in France again requested him to do some days ago in connexion with the Palestinian problem; that "human and therefore political problem". I am in particular happy that the Assembly has decided to include on its agenda the examination of the problem of international terrorism as a whole and that it has entrusted this task to its Sixth Committee, which will, I am sure, approach this urgent and painful issue with all the attention and to recall the word used a few moments ago by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon from this same rostrum-objectivity that it requires. Mr. Waldheim has, moreover, already proved this. No obstacle deters him when it is a question of implementing Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
62.	Why should the spokesman for an old European country feel today despite all the preoccupations he and every one of us has  that hope prevails over his distress of mind? It is because this year has seen two events which are grounds for certainty: first of all, Europe is moving ahead; secondly, such a forward movement brings us nearer our common goal, namely, closer co-operation and better understanding with all peoples. If I ask your permission to link this central idea, like a conducting wire, to certain major issues which require our reflection, it is because I am speaking on behalf of a country which, as I say again deliberately, has allies but neither has nor wants enemies.
63.	So let us turn our attention to Europe, towards the whole of Europe, where we shall find grounds for reassurance.
64.	It was on 3 June 1972 that the Treaties of Moscow^ and Warsaw  were ratified. It was on 3 June 1972, at the same moment, that the final protocol of the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin was signed by Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Mr. Gromyko, Mr. Rogers and myself. This protocol implemented an agreement which has been supplemented by arrangements concluded by all the German authorities. The negotiations were difficult, but none of the parties imposed its point of view on the others. On the contrary, the balance achieved between the reciprocal concessions was an example worth following and could only serve to strengthen equilibrium in Europe.
65.	May the same spirit inspire the negotiators who are now striving to define relations between the two German States. The success of their efforts matters all the more for this Assembly because one of their objectives is to permit these two States to present themselves together before our Organization. When the time comes-and the sooner the better-the four Powers which will continue to have special duties vis-a-vis Germany and Berlin will undoubtedly be the first to want to support these two candidates for admission to the United Nations. We have become even more aware since China has joined us that the United Nations has a universal mission.
66.	One year ago [1942nd meeting] I said of the European Economic Community that it was in the process of being enlarged. On 1 January the Community will group together some 250 million Europeans. Meanwhile, owing to the success of the negotiations with countries which are members of the European Free Trade Association and are not applying for membership, a vast network of agreements will link the Community to the whole of Western Europe. In a month's time in Paris the Heads of State or Government of member countries of the Community will meet, as was said recently in the course of a Franco-Italian meeting by my colleague and friend, Mr. Medici, not so much to congratulate themselves on such a success, but rather to take stock of the responsibilities incumbent upon them, responsibilities first of all towards their own people who do not want European economic integration to lose in depth what it is gaining in breadth. On the contrary, they want to expand into new fields, beginning with those of currency and the battle against inflation,
67.	With regard to the other industrialized countries, the Community should also be prepared, without ever abdicating its autonomy of decision, to encourage extensive and balanced development of trade on the basis of reciprocal advantage.
68.	But the French Government feels that it is particularly essential for the enlarged Community to define vis-a-vis the developing countries and, in the first instance, vis-a-vis the former associates of the Common Market, a policy no less generous than that practiced by the six members, a policy worthy of being called European. Lastly, there can be no development restricted to Western Europe. Consequently, while Western Europe is being built, the countries which comprise it are striving to strengthen their ties or to forge new ties with the nations which inhabit the eastern part of our continent.
69.	And here is the third reason for Europeans to regard 1972 as memorable despite certain inevitable disappointments: the conference on security and co-operation in Europe no longer looks like just a grand design. In two months, multilateral preparations for the conference will at last begin in Helsinki. We shall do everything possible to ensure that next year the conference itself will attain its true objective, an objective that is of interest and concern to all the countries represented here: to replace-for this is indeed the issue the confrontation of blocs with dialog between peoples.
70.	It took a thousand years of harsh and turbulent history for Europe to thus arrive at the beginnings of wisdom. The memory of the horrors of two world wars which began there help Europe today better to understand the price of peace and better to uphold the chances for it. The dangers through which democracy has passed in so many European countries, and to which it often succumbed, have put Europe in a better position today to weigh the price of freedom. The grandeur, but also the shadows, of its colonial past enable Europe the better to shun many forms of imperialism. Never has Europe, in its relative equilibrium, seemed better able to defend a certain ideal, which is none other than that of the United Nations: respect for international order and for the independence of each nation, the safeguard of human rights, and the rejection of everything that divides the world into rival hegemonies.
71.	Already many people are turning towards this Europe, which is rediscovering its universal mission, believing in it and expecting a great deal from it. It is time for Europe to realize this; by asserting itself, it is gradually creating its own responsibilities towards the international community. Europe must understand these new duties and not shirk them.
72.	Whatever the economic, political and social problems that face the members of the international community and which are echoed here, Europe must be prepared to make its own response.
73.	We felt this especially strongly at the last UNCTAD meeting in April and May in Santiago, Chile. This meeting was, on the economic level, one of the most keenly awaited events of 1972, and it was held, significantly, in one of the Latin American countries which are so dear to France and which are both strongly marked by European influence and confronted with all the difficulties of profound transformation. Can we not then say that if the Santiago meeting has had positive results it was to the extent that the developing countries found understanding and support from some European nations? But also, that if the results were disappointing it was because this great movement of solidarity is as yet only in its early stages?
74.	Some progress was made at the third session of UNCTAD and it is only fair to mention this. In particular, the significance of the joint conclusions which were reached on the need for complete and whole-hearted participation by the developing countries in trade and monetary negotiations in 1973 was widely appreciated. 
75.	In addition, I welcome, for example, the agreement on special measures in favor of the least developed among the developing countries.  The fact remains, however, that on two essential points primary commodities and aid the balance-sheet of UNCTAD did not meet our hopes.
76.	In the first case this lack of success and the meeting could have ended in total failure had the African-sponsored draft resolution on the financing of buffer stocks not been adopted was due to the overly abstract search for new formulas on the subject of outlets and prices. Rather than lingering over this debate on theory, would it not be wiser to examine, case by case, the situation of each commodity which is of particular concern to the developing countries in order to take specific measures to remedy the inadequate revenue which these countries receive from their exports?
77.	In this respect the current United Nations Cocoa Conference will put to the test our determination to arrive at a satisfactory solution. The same is true for aid. Must we really reopen discussion on the objectives decided on by common agreement? Would it not be preferable to concentrate our efforts on the means of attaining them? The real problem is whether we shall follow up our resolutions; in other words, whether our political determination matches our intentions. Underdevelopment is not of concern only to international experts; it is primarily our concern, but statesmen need to have the support of public opinion. UNCTAD, at least, has understood this. It is proposing that we have a world development information day. That resolution  will, I am sure, attract the attention of our Assembly.
78.	The need to make Europe's own voice heard; the difficulty in attaining this; progress-depending on the case-towards political co-operation among our Governments since it, as one of the prerequisites of world equilibrium, works in the interest of all peoples and for peace these are the three conclusions that we are compelled to draw when we look at the strife and disruption going on in the world.
79.	In the Middle East can we discern any reason to hope? I, for my part, see two reasons. The first is related to my dominant theme. We have seen emerging and then growing among members of the European Community a similarity of intentions, which has several times led to concerted action. The second shows to what extent the efforts of the European Community, when it affirms its own identity, coincide with those of the international community. The Secretary-General and his special representative do not allow themselves to be discouraged by stagnation, or by delays, or by apparently unchanging attitudes. Indeed, how could they give in to fatalism? How could we ourselves renounce our responsibilities? Has not the past year shown the futility of efforts undertaken outside the United Nations?
80.	We were guided by two clear and simple ideas from 22 November 1967 until 13 December 1971, two ideas on which a peace agreement may simultaneously be based: the occupied territories must be evacuated subject to minor rectifications; and all the States concerned must undertake to conform, under United Nations guarantees, to the rules which regulate peaceful relations among sovereign States. I should like today to give a new form to the appeal which, for the fourth time, I express from this rostrum with all the moral force that continuity gives my country's policy: does any people or country of the Middle East not understand that for its independence to be definitively ensured it must be sheltered from the interplay of outside scheming or rivalries? To this fundamental question there can only be a definitive and sure answer here, not elsewhere.
81.	Africa, too, needs the United Nations. Last year gave us proof of this. In southern Africa why did a sense of hope, still frail, follow a heightened sense of concern? Because the Africans themselves, gathered in the capital of Ethiopia, induced the Security Council to entrust the Secretary-General with a mission, which was to make contact. May this symbolic opportunity be seized. The stakes are far greater than the question of Namibia alone. If international ethics regains its proper place, and the spirit of the Charter along with it, we will no longer have to condemn, year after year, violations of human rights and of the principle of racial non-discrimination, stressing that they are all equally reprehensible, no matter who is the perpetrator and who the victim.
82.	If international morality and the spirit of the Charter regain their proper place, we will no longer have to deplore the fact that Africa's march towards development and unity is hindered by racial antagonisms, which at times cause much bloodshed without evoking sufficient reproach or horror. This ascent towards unity must continue. France regards it with an active goodwill, which extends to associations that are usefully balanced. But no vision of the future can exempt us from the duties inherited from the past. We intend to assume those duties in two ways: as Europeans and as-Frenchmen. As Europeans, true to the spirit and letter of the two Yaounde Conventions, we regard favorably ties of association between the English- speaking African States and our Community, on the sole but essential condition that the rights gained to date by the African countries, which already have ties of association, are preserved. As Frenchmen we are resolved to continue our efforts at co-operation, even if some aspects have to be changed, on the sole condition that our partners and friends continue to want it themselves.
83.	But Asia? Can it be said that the United Nations does not have a voice it can make heard there, or a specific role to play there? That idea might conceivably have been defended before China was seated here. At our last session we were awaiting its delegation with impatience. I have never better understood to what extent that haste was justified than when I had the privilege in the capital of a great people "older than history", in the words of General de Gaulle of greeting and listening to Chairman Mao Tsetung after long talks with the Head of the Chinese Government and the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I had never better understood how essential it was for China to be in our midst, since we want truly to make a patient and sincere effort to establish in Asia a peaceful order based on the reconciliation and coexistence of independent peoples.
84.	For that matter, we are already seeing some necessary dialogs taking place. For its part, Japan, which I have visited since our last session, is contributing to that, and we must thank it. The Koreans are now providing a good example for all of us who believe that, as we have long said, ideological differences can be overcome by peaceful means. That conviction explains why we felt a harsh anomaly in the sudden eruption of the Indian subcontinent. Today we have a twofold duty: to welcome the new State which has just been born and help it to bind up its wounds; then to encourage the warring parties of yesterday to follow to the end the path of reason and reconciliation on which there must be no turning back.
85.	But, above all, will the moment never come when our Organization can put into operation a vast effort of solidarity on behalf of peoples that are victims of the war in Indochina and that are all the more dear to us because they suffer so unjustly? These people of the four States of Indochina want to live in independence in a neutral and peaceful South-East Asia. France knows, of course, from experience how difficult it is to put an end to some conflicts; but I do not hesitate to say that the opportunity to bring to Indochina a peace whose political and military terms can be equally perceived is now at hand. I cannot believe that this opportunity will again be lost. No, I cannot believe that, six years after a certain address delivered in Phnom Penh which history has already proved right-a history which would have been less painful and less bloody if the voice of General de Gaulle had been better heeded.
86.	The survey I have just made leads me to a very natural conclusion: on the one hand, Europe is gradually becoming aware of itself and of the role it must play in serving world equilibrium, and thus peace; on the other hand, the more France realizes that truth, the more she believes that the mission of the United Nations is not only useful but irreplaceable.
87.	Why? We must ask ourselves that question very clearly, for the world has changed to such a degree since the birth of the Organization that it would be a mistake to be satisfied with the old justifications applicable to a time gone by, which preceded the entry into this Organization of most of the States represented here. I shall give my answer immediately: the respective tasks of the European Community and of the United Nations are indeed very different. The Community is an economic power par excellence whose political goals are based on its service to a certain type of civilization. The United Nations is essentially a moral force which cannot have a secular arm because its raison d'etre is to assemble, for the purpose of maintaining or restoring peace, governments representative of all systems, all doctrines, all regimes. But both have one essential thing in common: they tend to prevent the division of the world between two decision-making centers. Understand me well: the rejection of hegemonies, far from creating distrust or hostility towards the very great Powers, is the very prerequisite for a genuine and fruitful dialog. The same President of the French Republic who in a few weeks' time hopes to receive nine Heads of Government received Mr. Leonid Brezhnev in Paris and met with Mr. Nixon in the Azores. With Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Pompidou signed the declaration of 13 principles which makes Franco-Soviet co-operation exemplary and, as the President of the Republic has just said again, gives it capital importance. With Mr. Nixon he discussed the continuance of a friendship as old as the United States itself and ever strengthened by mutual frankness.
88.	The more relations improve between two very great Powers with which we maintain ties of co-operation or alliance, the more we gain, if peace gains therefrom. But, surely, no country among us, even the least powerful, intends to give up the right to choose and to guide its destiny itself.
89.	For that right to be preserved it must be kept from slipping almost from sight, as would happen if left to a natural course of events. That is why so many Mediterranean countries and I am thinking especially of Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia, which are so close to us are showing such concern to have continuous dialog with Europe, in a form still to be determined. The motives that prompt them to look towards Europe are, on the whole, the same as those which justify their attachment to the principles of the Charter.
90.	Such is the spirit in which we propose to participate in the major debates here, in particular those which concern the problems of over-armament and underdevelopment which, for that matter, are connected. But I intend to conclude on the essential thing, which is also the most threatened and challenged. I am aware that I speak on behalf of a country which has certainly not been irreproachable in the course of its lengthy history but which, nearly two centuries ago, proclaimed not the rights of Frenchmen but the rights of man.
91.	I mentioned a moment ago that one of the essential tasks of our Organization was to condemn racial discrimination in all its forms and to combat it by the most effective means, that is to say, means consistent with the principles of our Charter. In the same spirit, the French Government last year deposited the instruments of accession to the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX), annex] and this year submitted to parliament a law, which was unanimously adopted, on the elimination of all expressions of racism.
92.	France is participating actively, as members know, in the convention work of the United Nations on human rights. We have, in addition, been initiators in the work in which our Organization is currently engaged to draft an international instrument for the protection of journalists on perilous missions. We cannot be indifferent to the fate of those who, in their search for objectivity, sometimes knowingly placing their lives in danger and make an essential contribution to the knowledge of the modern world and to the emancipation of peoples. Often we feel, as I have said, the need for an appeal to public opinion, which alone can jolt people out of their apathy and hasten a solution to the most serious political crises. Is it impossible to hope that increased protection will be given to those who serve the public and serve truth? We hope that this year the Assembly will be sympathetic to our efforts.
93.	At its last session the General Assembly unanimously decided, in resolution 2860 (XXVI), that a Human Rights Day should be celebrated on 10 December 1973 to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
94.	It was in Paris that the Declaration was proclaimed on 10 December 1948, and France, true to its long tradition, intends solemnly to celebrate this anniversary.
95.	Assuredly, before the immensity of the problems that face the world and the urgency of certain decisions, this celebration will have mainly symbolic value, but the world of today has more need than ever of symbols-symbols strong enough to avenge justice and to comfort brotherhood.
Mr. President, I should like to start by echoing the congratulations which my colleagues have extended to you on your assumption of office as President of the twenty- seventh session of the General Assembly. It is a tribute to you and to your country.
99.	As this is the first time that I have addressed the Assembly since the election of the Secretary-General, I should like to take this opportunity also to salute him. He has proved in the last nine months our wisdom in electing him and he has brought to this Organization the same dedication and the same talents he gave to his own country as diplomat and Foreign Minister.
100.	There is an arresting phrase in the Preamble to the United Nations Charter. It bids us all "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". The United Nations was born from the death and destruction of two world wars in this century in which it was proved beyond any doubt that there is no longer any gain, economic or political, to be won from aggression. Those wars started in Europe. It is not therefore surprising that we have concluded in Western Europe that there is no future for any country in trying to achieve its economic or political aims by the use of force, and we are combining to remove the past rivalries in Europe and the causes of them. It is only when that lesson, which we have painfully learned, gains universal support that we shall have fulfilled the precept of this Charter which requires us to live as good neighbors. We long ago decided that collective action was necessary to meet any potential aggressor. We organized accordingly and, although at great cost, Western Europe has enjoyed physical security. As long as there is a threat we will sustain the necessary effort.
101.	But, in addition to defense, national leaders have two responsibilities which must run in harness. The first is to achieve for their people a continuing improvement in the standards of education and living and the second is to guide their country's policies so as to contribute to harmony in international society. Civilization for man can thrive only in a climate of peace.
102.	At this point of history, therefore, the public experiment in partnership being conducted by the enlarged European Community is of prime importance. Western Europe, late in the day but better late than never is putting into practice for the common good a philosophy which embraces full economic and political partnership. We are doing so for two overriding reasons: to outlaw the wars which have twice brought the continent to its knees and to enhance by a customs union the prosperity of the member States. We do not intend to lose our national identities but to merge our complementary personalities for the greater good of all. These developments must be of profound significance in the context of the wider world.
103.	Were the Community to confine its benefits to the compass of its own membership, it would be missing its opportunity in terms of the general health of the world community. An inbred and introvert community could indeed invite trade wars and stimulate selfishness. For the United Kingdom, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, any form of narrow European isolation would be totally alien to our whole philosophy. But there is no question of any such thing. No one contemplates that in the European Community. The call for the policies of the good neighbor in the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations finds an echo in the Preamble to the Treaty of Rome, where the purpose of the Community is stated thus: "Desirous of contributing by means of a common commercial policy to the progressive abolition of restrictions on international trade" and "intending to confirm the solidarity which bind Europe and overseas countries, and desiring to ensure the development of their prosperity, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations".8 So the Community has explicitly shown that it is pursuing the same objectives as the United Nations, a fact of undeniable importance when it is realized-as perhaps it seldom is that the Community conducts 41 per cent of the trade of the world and that Europe's contribution will be of great importance in the discussions of, for example, international monetary reform.
104.	In each of the last three years the total flow of resources from Britain multilateral and bilateral, private and public to developing countries to help them raise their standard of living has been over the target of 1 per cent of our gross national product. The existing members of the Community have already played a notable part in this international effort. But I believe that the European Community as a whole can make a much more effective contribution by co-ordinating the efforts of individual member States in a conscious, co-operative program for the development of the developing world. The deliberations of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development fUNCTAD/ in 1972, in which we were glad to play a leading part, serve to remind us how complete is our interdependence. We must find more satisfactory solutions to the problems to which UNCTAD has drawn such graphic attention. Europe, too, can make a telling contribution to solving the accumulating problems of the twentieth century, which may be grouped under the heading "the environment". I am glad to announce that, subject to parliamentary approval, the United Kingdom will contribute up to  2 million over a five-year period to the proposed United Nations Environment Fund, depending on the response made to the $100 million target.
105.	In all these ways, the enlarged European Community will pass the test of neighborliness which is set in the preamble to the United Nations Charter, in terms both of its own membership and of its future relationship with the rest of the world.
106.	Can we in Western Europe extend the area of confidence and hope, a theme to which Mr. Schumann, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, spoke yesterday [2041st meeting/ with eloquence and general acceptance? For that we shall need in Western Europe the active response of the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe when the conference on security and co-operation in Europe and negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions come to be staged.
107.	We must face the facts even when they are unpleasant. Since the last World War the confrontation over the years between the Warsaw Pact countries and those of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization led to an almost total loss of confidence. Western Europe had no desire for this, but the fact is that neighborliness, once confidence is broken, cannot be recreated in a day.
108.	Progress in detente has by any standard of tolerance been painfully slow. Nevertheless, there have been modest gains. The test-ban Treaty  holds; the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks have placed a limitation on anti-ballistic missiles; the treaties between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union and between the Federal Republic and Poland are a contribution to stability, as the Polish Foreign Minister has himself just declared; the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin can do much for the security and well-being of the city's inhabitants. This is a notable contrast to the days when Berlin was threatened by isolation and the need for an airlift. We should mark that contrast. Negotiations between the Federal Republic of Germany and its East German neighbor are at last making some progress. And in this improved climate, which I think most of the speakers have marked in this debate, a European security conference may be able to identify and to exploit other areas which can be used for the common benefit both of Western Europe and of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. It will not be easy. Where social and economic systems are so different and where the gulf is so wide between the Soviet interpretation of the free life and that which is practiced in the West, it is best to try for limited objectives. But we must, if life is to be tolerable, replace the negative conception of coexistence with a fabric of trust. We willingly put our hand to that task in Western Europe and look forward to this first meeting an event in itself on a common platform of countries that are members of the Warsaw Pact Organization and of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to be joined by the European neutrals. Mutual and balanced force reductions present a daunting problem because there are so many facets, military and geographical, which go to make up what is known as the balance of power in Europe, and indeed the balance of power in the world. So far it is a fact of life that it is the military balance on which the present peace rests, and that is likely to be so for some time to come. It will be our objective in all these discussions to find new approaches to neighborliness with the East, consistent with the physical security of our respective peoples.
109.	The Secretary-General, in the wise introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/'8701/ Add.l], has rightly drawn attention to the important signs of detente among the great Powers, signs which include the developments which I have just described. But the Secretary-General equally rightly pointed out the contrast between these signs and the persistence of conflict in several key areas of the world and the failure, both of the Governments concerned and of the international community, to find acceptable solutions to the underlying causes of the confrontation.
110.	Although there are signs of rapprochement in Europe and indeed in Asia, there remain historic areas of continuing hostility. The danger in these places is that deadlock will be tacitly accepted as the best for which anyone can hope. That is the last doctrine which this Assembly can accept. The Secretary-General's statements and actions since he assumed office bear witness to the fact that he has no patience with the passive acceptance of deadlock. To resolve the Middle East conflict we at the United Nations made a start by framing Security Council resolution 242 (1967). My Government continues to adhere firmly to that, resolution. It will be commonly conceded, I think, by all my colleagues who are here, that we will not arrive at any alternative framework which would command a comparable measure of consent. It is better, therefore, to stick to it. This resolution provides the essential basis of any just and durable settlement primarily because it acknowledges the essential requirements of the parties, first for withdrawal, and secondly for security.
111.	My Government has consistently supported the mission of Mr. Jarring, the Secretary-General's Special Representative appointed under the resolution. I very much hope that in the months ahead no opportunity will be missed to work towards an end of the present confrontation with the long-drawn-out misery of the refugees which it entails, and also the ever-present threat of war.
112.	In the last few months there has been a dramatic change. Egypt has dispensed with Soviet military support. It should be recognized that this step towards depolarization is an opportunity to resume the quest for a peaceful settlement. It may be fleeting, so it should be seized. Nor should we be deflected, from this aim by the cycle of violence and reprisal which has been given fresh impetus in recent weeks.
113.	Mr. Rogers, Secretary of State of the United States, drew our attention on Monday [2038th meeting] to many instances of the world-wide problem of terrorism and violence. This is a disease to which many of us in this Assembly have fallen victim. We have our own special problem of indiscriminate terrorism in Northern Ireland. In 1971 in this Assembly I drew urgent attention to our responsibilities for the climate in which the terrorist operated his beastly practice. I said: "Sooner or later, uncompromising confrontation leads to violence [1944th meeting, para. 86.] I also said, ". .. time works for the anarchist". [Ibid.] I then drew the attention of this Assembly of nations to the situation which seemed certain to develop, and here you will forgive me if I quote once more: "... anarchy superseding the law of nations and with it the inherent challenge to all governmental authority." [Ibid., para. 87.] This is exactly what is happening now. I continued with a quotation from my statement at the 1838th meeting: '"We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down ... even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice.' " [Ibid.]
114.	Now we are up against many situations in which terrorists are meting out destruction to the innocent in the name of some hideously distorted interpretation of justice. We have wasted time in these last two or three years. Terrorism must be stopped so that law and order in the world society will not be totally undermined-and we all know this in this Assembly.
115.	The Secretary-General was right to recommend this subject for inclusion in our agenda [A/8791 and Add.l], and I am glad that the Assembly has so included it [item 92]. This question must be vigorously pursued. We in Britain will support drastic measures to stop this rot, and we welcome the initiative of Mr. Rogers! I think we must recognize that the essence of the success of any action lies in the collective application of the remedies. It is only through the international community that effective measures can be taken to end the hideous cycle of terror and violence. That is the lesson all of us in this Assembly have to accept and to apply.
116.	There are certain practical steps we can all take. First, on the question of hijacking, States which have not yet become parties to the Conventions of The Hague  and Montreal  should move with all possible speed to do so. We should also do all we can to bring into effect further measures to close every haven to the hijacker and the saboteur. The United Kingdom, at the recent meeting of the Legal Committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization, has worked actively to that end. Secondly, there are three main areas in which we should make urgent progress in dealing with the problem of international terrorism. We must agree on further obligations which States should assume in regard to the prosecution and surrender of perpetrators of terrorist acts. We should decide on further controls which could be imposed to prevent the movement of terrorists from one country to another. We should do everything possible to increase co-operation among national police and security forces by encouraging the exchange of information and by taking other measures to prevent these acts and to apprehend their perpetrators. These and other measures should be considered without delay, but I repeat that action, to be effective, must be collective. We shall make our full contribution in the discussion that has already begun at this session of the General Assembly.
117.	The good-neighborliness to which we are summoned by the Preamble to our Charter applies to" us all without exception. It is not limited by geography or race. The Ugandan Government's action in expelling Ugandan Asians and confiscating their assets, without clear and unequivocal assurances of full and prompt compensation, illustrates the degradation to which intolerance can bring its disciples. This is an outrage against standards of human decency, in the face of which this Assembly cannot remain silent. These Asians have had their homes in Uganda, some of them for generations. They are now being ejected and stripped of most of their belongings and of their savings accumulated over many years. My Government, in spite of the fact that Britain is a small, overcrowded island, had made arrangements whereby Asians from East Africa holding British passports were coming into Britain in an orderly flow over the years. As far as Uganda is concerned, this agreed program has been thrown out of the window, and the Asians have been given a time limit of 90 days in which to leave. There are now only 42 days left. President Amin has said that if the Asians have not left before that deadline he will put them into "camps". We do not accept that that deadline has any justification in law or in morality. The Government of Uganda is responsible for the proper treatment of those who have lived in that country for many years, and putting them into "camps" is contrary to all accepted standards of civilized behavior. We have an obligation to take into Britain those who are British nationals and have nowhere else to go. We will keep our word, and we will keep the law. But the law is not everything. There are human problems, rights and feelings which should have equal consideration. The Ugandan Government should be called upon to change its policy and treat these people with humanity and not with contempt. Injustice must be condemned wherever it rears its ugly head, whether it is perpetrated by Europeans or Africans or Asians or whoever. Every country in the Assembly, therefore, should use its influence to insist that this injustice should end.
118.	I am making two direct and simple requests to you as members of the world community assembled here. The first is to show your good-neighborliness by sharing some of the practical problems of resettling these unhappy people. I am exceedingly grateful and pay a tribute to all those who have come forward with offers of help. The second is that you should all join in calling upon General Amin to extend his arbitrary and inhumane deadline of 90 days and to allow the Asians expelled to take their belongings with them. These are two simple, humane concepts. My delegation will today request that this question should be added to our agenda as an urgent and important item.  We ask that the Assembly debate this matter without delay and we are ready to submit a draft resolution-for this inhumanity which creates refugees is of international concern. I trust that it will be overwhelmingly accepted, because, should this Organization fail to do so, there is no one to whom any person, whatever the color of his skin, can turn for common justice. This is the basis of my appeal to all of you today.
119.	In conclusion, therefore, I believe that when we speak or write we should constantly remind ourselves of those words in the Preamble to this Charter: "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". Our minds admit the sense of this precept, but our acts fall far short of it. We must be vigilant and careful for our fellow men and act with urgency if we are to gain that peace with justice which all our people so intensely and insistently demand.
Mr. President, I offer you on behalf of India our most cordial congratulations on your election as the President of the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly. By electing you, the Member States have recognized your own skill and wisdom and have also honored the struggles and achievements of the Polish people. India has had close and friendly relations with Poland, and I wish to assure you of our fullest co-operation as you discharge your responsibilities.
47.	I should also like to pay a tribute to our outgoing President, Adam Malik, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for the patience and devotion with which he guided our work during the last session.
48.	We recall the long years of dedicated service which U Thant gave to the United Nations arid for which he will always be remembered with affection and admiration. At the same time, we greet our Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim. His dynamism and his high sense of purpose had been recognized even before his election at the end of our last session. Since then his tireless efforts in the exercise of his duties have earned him high respect. We wish him continued success.
49.	In India, we are celebrating this year the twenty-fifth anniversary of our independence. As a result of the long struggle of our people, we became independent in the year 1947. In the years that followed, the freedom of most countries from colonial domination was achieved and a community of interest in justice and progress began to grown among the newly independent countries. In the quarter of a century that has since passed, we have had our share of difficulties and successes. Today we are more united and determined than we have ever been before in the last 25 years. Our faith in our democracy has become deeper, our goals for the betterment of our people are clearer, and our resolution to achieve them has become firmer. We realize that basically we must rely on our own values and resources in order to strengthen our economy and to accelerate the pace of our development. The bulk of the burden must fall on us as indeed it has fallen on us in the past. At the same time we believe that international co-operation is vitally necessary if humanity as a whole is to be freed from poverty and want. Our unfinished revolution in India will not be completed until full economic and social justice is assured for all our people. In this spirit, we seek nothing but co-operation and friendship with all, on a basis of equality.
50.	India adheres firmly to the policy of non-alignment and peaceful coexistence. This does not, and cannot, mean an exact middle position between any two extreme views on matters of international concern. India's policy of non-alignment is based on the need in the modern world to maximize the area of peace, reduce tension and ensure stability with justice. We believe in the sovereign parity of all nations; we accept the supremacy of none. Our friendship is open to all countries on the same terms. We trust in co-operation among equals, not in co-operation on the basis of domination by one country over another. This policy determines our attitude to all countries, and will continue to govern our relationship with our neighbors.
51.	The last year has been marked by significant detente among nations, big and small. The meetings of leaders in Moscow and Peking, the agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States, especially on the limitation of strategic arms, are helpful changes from the earlier and sterile, and at times dangerous, confrontations. In Europe many prospects for the reduction of tensions have opened up. Some of the recent events in Asia encourage the hope that our part of the world might also soon be moving towards greater understanding and co-operation. Our purpose in this improving situation will be to ensure that the momentum towards an ever-expanding area of understanding and accommodation is maintained.
52.	The world at large is rejecting more and more the concepts of spheres of influence, under the guise of balance of power and of domination of smaller Powers by the mightier ones. In this context the Secretary-General has noted in his thoughtful introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [Af8701jAdd. 1], that the idea of keeping peace and security through a concert of great Powers is outdated, if not outmoded. The current processes of detente can produce healthy and abiding results only when they do not ignore the interests of countries that are yet to participate in them. Non-aligned countries have long striven for such contacts and consultations as are now in fact taking place. At the same time they have repeatedly emphasized the risks to true independence if agreements are not concluded by broad-based consultations.
53.	A recent encouraging development has been the greater and more determined pursuit of bilateralism in the search for solutions to many international problems. In the past there were many instances when the interests of outside Powers prevented the settlement of problems which could have been achieved by mutual consultations among the parties directly concerned. Examples of this kind are not altogether absent in our time. Nevertheless, in areas as widely separated as Central Europe, North Africa, West Africa and Asia, agreements have been reached for solving a number of problems through the efforts of the countries directly concerned. The settlement of problems mutually and bilaterally can, we think, strengthen peace, security and independence.
54.	Looked at from this point of view, the recent developments in the relations between India and Pakistan mark a significant departure from past years, when hostility and suspicion were unfortunately the dominant features. Direct negotiations have provided a more dependable means by which we can settle and solve our problems to the benefit of the vast population of the region. In a sincere search for a durable peace and good-neighbourly relations, we opened negotiations with Pakistan last February which culminated in the Simla Agreement of 3 July 1972. The two Governments have agreed that all problems between them should be settled by peaceful means through mutual consultations.
55.	The President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India have pledged full support and expressed their complete determination for the faithful implementation of the Simla Agreement. For this purpose, further accords are to be arrived at by mutual consultation and discussion. The use of force has been totally abjured. They have also agreed that in Jammu and Kashmir the entire line of control as it existed at the time of ceasefire on 17 December 1971 will be respected by both sides. The two Governments have been taking steps to carry out this agreement and when some doubts and difficulties arose a few weeks ago, these too were resolved by direct negotiations. The military commanders have been meeting from time to time to work out the delineation of the line of control. Agreement on delineation has been arrived at practically everywhere except for a few small pockets where the total area involved is only a few square miles. We have offered to the Pakistan side to have joint inspection and survey, wherever necessary, in order to complete the delineation. We hope that the military commanders of the two sides will meet without any further delay to finalize delineation in the remaining small pockets by holding joint meetings, joint inspections and surveys whenever necessary. We hope that very shortly the entire line will be delineated. The completion of this task will, as already agreed, be followed by mutual withdrawal of troops. In the meantime, exchanges have been taking place of sick and wounded prisoners of war and of those civilians who came to be under the custody of India or Pakistan at the outbreak of hostilities on the western sector.
56.	There are naturally several problems arising out of the armed conflict, and the two Governments have agreed that these problems, as also other basic unresolved matters between the two countries, would be settled by mutual agreement. A series of meetings at various levels is envisaged to achieve this objective. The welcome accorded to the Simla Agreement by the international community will sustain the efforts of the two Governments and their leaders to work patiently towards a durable peace.
57.	The Simla Agreement is the first major fruitful step in the search for mutual understanding and co-operation between India and Pakistan. Its full and effective application should bring about conditions in both countries which will enable their peoples to utilize their resources and energies for the pressing task of advancing their welfare. The peoples of India and Pakistan have many common interests and aspirations and they would wish to live as good neighbors. The Simla Agreement has therefore been widely supported by the people of both the countries.
58.	The emergence of Bangladesh as a sovereign country is destined to be of vital importance in strengthening peace, stability, security and progress in the subcontinent. We welcome Bangladesh as an equal partner in this common task of the countries of the region. The heroism and fortitude of the people of Bangladesh will be an invaluable asset in the reconstruction of their country.
59.	We deeply regret that Bangladesh was not enabled to take its place at the opening of this session of the General Assembly. A country with 75 million people, it has been recognized by over 90 other sovereign States and has already found its rightful place in many international forums. The earliest admission of Bangladesh to the United Nations will further strengthen the United Nations system, will reinforce the principle of universality of our Organization, and will contribute to the more expeditious normalization of relations among the countries of the subcontinent and the achievement of peace and harmony in the area. We are convinced that this General Assembly can do much to bring this about, through reconsideration of Bangladesh's application by the Security Council.
60.	We sincerely hope that, in the shortest possible time, Pakistan and Bangladesh will be able to solve all the problems between them with understanding and as equal sovereign States.
61.	We view with deep satisfaction the fact that India's relations with other neighboring countries continue to grow in depth and so serve to help strengthen the forces of peace and progress in South Asia. The relations between China and India have not shown the necessary and expected improvement. On our part, we continue to be ready, as indeed we have indicated in the past, to resume normal relations with China and to improve them in our mutual interest and with mutual respect. Against the background of the normalization and detente that have taken place in Asia and in other parts of the world such an improvement in Sino-Indian relations is, in our opinion, all the more desirable.
62.	Naturally, I have taken a few minutes to explain at some length the significant developments on the Indian subcontinent, the state of our relations with some of our immediate neighbors, and the hopes for peace and progress they inspire. These issues are nearest to us. I must now deal briefly with some other vital international problems.
63.	The presence in this hall of 132 States should make us doubly conscious of the absence of representatives of many large areas of the world which are still under colonial rule. Nor can we ignore the fact that in several countries rampant racism is being preached and practiced. The solution of these problems will require a degree of awareness and co-operation which are unfortunately still lacking. The Indian delegation will do its utmost to work out, together with the others, all such practical means as the United Nations can pursue. We shall continue to support the struggle for independence being carried out by the people of all colonial Territories, including Namibia, Zimbabwe, Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). We will not relax our efforts to eliminate racial discrimination, whenever and wherever it appears. The meetings of the Security Council last winter at Addis Ababa provided an opportunity for focusing attention on these problems. We look forward with interest to the outcome of the Secretary-General's efforts with regard to Namibia and to the more effective use of the Commissioner and the Council for Namibia.
64.	The situation that has now arisen in Uganda cannot but cause concern to all of us. The problems facing the Asians affected by the expulsion order are essentially humanitarian in character and can be solved only in a spirit of compassion and understanding. The people facing deportation should be afforded reasonable time to be able to wind up their affairs in an orderly manner and depart in safety. A vast majority of them have lived there for generations and they should be allowed to take with them their personal belongings and a reasonable amount of assets to enable them to restart their lives in other lands with some measure of hope and confidence. We hope that the Government of Uganda will respect these human considerations and do everything possible to discharge its responsibility towards the person and property of these unfortunate people and so lessen their hardship. Any help other countries can give in overcoming this problem will, of course, be most welcome; India, for its part, is doing all it can.
65.	We must ensure that our solidarity in the common struggle against racial discrimination and colonial domination is not undermined. Since we all agree that racial discrimination is an evil to be fought, we, all of us, cannot but oppose it, whatever form it may take.
66.	Tensions and frustrations continue to mount in the Middle East and indeed, as recent incidents have shown, are rising to unprecedented heights of senseless and savage reprisals and terror. The efforts of Ambassador Jarring and of our Secretary-General have not yet borne fruit and meanwhile Israel is persistently consolidating its position to the total detriment of Arab and Palestinian rights and interests. Israel has consistently obstructed all attempts at progress towards a peaceful solution of this problem as laid down in Security Council resolution 242(1967) and has created the situation, where threats to international peace and security are increasing daily and at times ominously. We would also ask why the permanent members of the Security Council have for months failed to meet in the face of this deteriorating situation and this grave problem.
67.	India stands firmly against interference by outside Powers aimed at preventing any people from determining its destiny or choosing its form of government in accordance with its own wishes. The tragedy in Viet-Nam is the prolonged denial, in the most brutal manner, of this basic right of the people. We cannot but strongly deplore and express dismay at the continued and ever-increasing bombardment and aerial bombing of innocent men, women and children, their cities, villages and homes, and the indiscriminate destruction of ports, industries, crops, forests and all other means of existence. We have consistently held and expressed the view for a long time that force and foreign military intervention cannot bring this problem to an end. This view is shared by a large and ever-increasing number of countries. Recent indications are that the United States of America has also come to accept this view. We believe that the seven-point proposal put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South VietNam provides a reasonable basis for peaceful negotiations. The continuance of bombing with savage intensity in Indochina in these circumstances must command our utmost opposition.
68.	We regret the attitude of non-cooperation by Saigon, which holds out little hope of progress towards a peaceful settlement of this problem. The independence, integrity and non-alignment of the three States of Indochina are vital to the peace and progress of Asia. The Geneva accords  provided the framework within which these objectives could be achieved. The decision of the Saigon Government to refuse a visa to the Chairman of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in VietNam is in clear violation of its obligations.
69.	We are disappointed that the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament has not been able to finalize even limited measures during the past year's deliberations. Bearing in mind the link between the strengthening of international security, disarmament and economic development, we expect that the objectives of cessation and reversal of the arms race, especially in nuclear armaments, the elimination of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and the achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control will be vigorously pursued. Our general views supporting the convening of a world disarmament conference, after adequate preparation and with the participation of all States, have been made known and we look forward to a constructive debate during this session.
70.	On the question of the strengthening of international security and related subjects, we are confident that our discussions will enable us to give effect, in a more practical and fruitful manner, to the ideas embodied in the Declaration itself [resolution 2734 (XXV)], with such further elaboration as may be necessary.
71.	The adoption of General Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), declaring the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace, is a welcome follow-up of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security. The creation of zones of peace and co-operation, free from great-Power military rivalries and interventions, and the removal of bases conceived in that context, must be seen as part of legitimate regional efforts towards strengthening international security. My delegation would support the taking of further steps to give fuller meaning and substance to the Declaration and would co-operate with other delegations for this purpose.
72.	The United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm last June, has awakened hopes and fears at the same time. The prevention of pollution is a matter of common concern to the entire human race. But the developing countries cannot accept any line of reasoning which makes the prevention of pollution an excuse for slowing down growth in the poorer countries.
73.	Addressing the Conference, the Prime Minister of India pointed out that "Environment cannot be improved in conditions of poverty. Nor can poverty be eradicated without use of science and technology."
74.	To the bulk of the human population poverty continues to be a much bigger menace than pollution. The true lesson of the Stockholm Conference is that we must start the quest for a world without poverty and without pollution. We consider that the program should be formulated on a world-wide basis in order to assist countries to meet effectively the requirements of the growth of human settlements and to improve the quality of life in existing settlements by creating a human settlement development fund.
75.	The peaceful uses of the sea-bed and the utilization of " the vast and as yet untapped resources of the sea-bed in the interests of mankind remain a matter of importance to us. We cautiously hope that the preparatory work entrusted to the United Nations Committee on the sea-bed  will result in the early convening of a conference on the law of the sea.
76.	Recent developments in the world economy and in the monetary field have caused grave concern to us all and have pointed to the need for the establishing of a more durable and equitable world monetary system. Let us not forget that the world economy will not be restored to health by focusing only on the payments problems of the prosperous countries. Monetary, trade and development problems are all closely interrelated and the developing countries have a vital stake in all of them. The developing countries must therefore participate fully in any decision-making process affecting the future of the international monetary system, so that their legitimate interests may be fully safeguarded.
77.	Last week the International Monetary Fund at its annual meeting  showed some awareness of the problem by setting up a committee of Governors in which the developing countries have increased representation. We consider that the link between the special drawing rights and additional development finance, which we have always advocated and the need for which has now been widely realized, should be established soon.
78.	India participated, with great expectations, in the third session of UNCTAD, held in Santiago earlier this year.
The need for taking speedy follow-up action on the decisions taken at that conference cannot be over-emphasized. It may be too early to attempt a final evaluation of the results of the conference, but clearly many trade and allied issues of great concern to the developing countries have remained unresolved. Continued efforts from all sides are therefore necessary if the high hopes that were entertained in respect of that conference are to be realized.
79.	Two years ago my delegation had occasion to emphasize the great importance of the adoption by the General Assembly of an International Development Strategy for the 1970s. It cannot, however, be said with any degree of confidence that the commitments voluntarily assumed by the international community only a short time ago are being implemented with any vigor and vitality. If anything, there has been a slide-back in the fulfillment of the goals and objectives of the Decade, and the interests of the developing countries have been given only residual consideration. During the remaining years of this decade, therefore, it will be necessary for all of us to catch up with the time loss and to evolve effective and concrete pro-grammes of international co-operation in the economic field.
80.	At the same time, the continuous and well-coordinated review and appraisal of the implementation of the Development Strategy will need to be equally emphasized. We hope that the two newly established committees of the Economic and Social Council, the Committee on Review and Appraisal and the Committee on Science and Technology for Development, will be able to make an effective contribution in this field, in close co-ordination with the useful work already being done by UNCTAD and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization [UNIDOJ.
81.	Our agenda has nearly a hundred items on it, and I have commented on only a limited number of issues. However, we are conscious that many other problems, whether or not they are included in our agenda, create anxieties and difficulties in many parts of the world. The Secretary-General, in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/8701lAdd.l], has given his views on salient aspects of the international scene as it is today, and on the perspective for the future.
82.	In order to complete my presentation I should like to touch upon the Indian experience over the last year or so.
83.	As I said here 12 months ago [1940th meeting], the year 1971 opened for us with great hopes and yet throughout the year we faced endless, and at times nearly insurmountable, difficulties. Confronted with the most appalling difficulties and human tragedies, the Indian people showed remarkable unity and determination. Within three months of the cease-fire nearly ail of the 10 million refugees had gone back to their homes in newly independent Bangladesh. Despite our limited resources we have co-operated fully with Bangladesh in the Herculean task of relief and reconstruction.
84.	The Indian people are now engaged in increasing their agricultural and industrial production. The Government of India has introduced programs in order to achieve greater social justice and more satisfying human values for the Indian people as a whole. In that great experiment the Government and people of India look to the United Nations as a continuous source of inspiration and a vast field of co-operation.
85.	Yet our Organization is constantly being enfeebled, if not undermined, in a number of ways. Some seek in it partisan support; others make an issue of money and finance; still others try to use it to underwrite their domestic policies. All of these may appear to some to be legitimate, but developing countries such as India look upon this Organization as a bastion where international peace and justice can be protected and where progress can be assured. For that purpose the great principles of the Charter cannot be pursued selectively: they should be taken in their totality, and applied realistically in a given situation. U Thant has already drawn attention to this problem, and we are anxious that in the coming years it should be possible to work out a viable system in which the seeming contradiction in Charter principles would no longer prove to be a hindrance to solving several international problems of our time.
86.	Such a step, taken together with the more massive and co-operative utilization of modern science and technology, may well fulfill the dream for which this Organization was established. There is a need for vigilance and study to decide how we can make our Organization more representative, more effective and more responsive to the multitude of needs of people all over the world.
87.	Finally, I would simply say that in spite of many setbacks and disappointments the millions and millions of people of India look to this Organization with faith and hope, and wish that this session of the Assembly may take yet another step, however modest, towards achieving the goal of peace, justice and progress.
Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly for this session, and 1 wish Secretary-General Waldheim well as he embarks on his heavy responsibilities.
65.	There is much violence in the international air, and the atmosphere of it can be felt in this very hall. But we should not forget that the past year has been fruitful for international conciliation. The main theme has been the victory of dialog. Complexes and taboos which had prevented contact between adversaries have almost everywhere been overcome. We read of meetings and agreements between the United States and the People's Republic of China; between West and East Germany; between the Federal Republic of Germany and Poland; between North and South Korea; between the United States and the Soviet Union; between the United States and North Viet-Nam; between the rivals of yesterday who are the partners of today in the European community; and even between India and Pakistan on the very morrow of their armed clash.
66.	How improbable all this would have seemed a short time ago! There is a new spirit in international relations. The polemical and rhetorical mood which dominated the past two decades has given way to a strong instinct for conciliation. Hie question that preoccupies nations today is not how they fell into conflict in the past, but how they can live side by side, together, in the future.
67.	If we look more deeply into the successes of diplomacy in the past year, we find a strong similarity in the conditions under which they were achieved. These successes have all been secured by direct settlement. They have all been the result of laborious and reticent preparation. They have all been the product of agreement, not of external adjudication. In every single case the pursuit of agreement has had to take place outside the United Nations frame-work.
68.	This is of course a significant reflection on the institutional condition of this Organization. It justifies a long hard look at its techniques, its procedures and its atmosphere, which have clearly not been congenial to the craftsmanship of peace. The plain fact is that strident public debate is not a good method of peacemaking but a poor substitute for it. An annual exercise in polemics with preordained voting results either paralyzes conciliation or delays its commencement.
69.	I said here last year [1946th meeting] that the Middle East was the only area in which the parties to a conflict were not engaged in a dialog to bring it to an end. That is still the situation. Those who will have to live together side by side in our region have still not come face to face at a table of negotiation. This is a primary source of deadlock. In all other international disputes the breakthrough has come on the level of communication, and not through substantive commitments ahead of negotiation. The very decision of governments to make contact with each other creates a dynamic of its own. It transforms the context of their relationships and leads to mutual adjustment of their positions and thereafter towards binding agreements.
70.	Despite this central disappointment, the Middle Eastern scene has not become darker in the past year. The cease-fire has been maintained. There seems to be less feasibility for full-scale hostilities. Despite deplorable slogans about "inevitable struggle", it is clear that resumed fighting would serve no interest and advance no settlement. The retirement of Soviet forces and equipment from Egypt has stripped the conflict of its dangerous global dimension. Powers outside the Middle East cannot solve our region's problems; they have not fought its wars and they will not build its peace. The idea of a settlement imposed from outside has become visibly weaker. It is explicitly rejected by some of the Powers; and the summit meeting between the leaders of the United States of America and the Soviet Union in May 1972 revealed what an illusory prospect it is. Once it becomes generally understood that a military solution is not feasible and that an imposed solution is excluded by the international realities of our times, a negotiated peace will emerge as the only valid alternative. The central aim of our policy is to create this consciousness: we aspire to break out of deadlock into a new vision and a new hope.
71.	The developments in Egypt during July 1972 made it natural for the Israeli Government to restate its positions on a negotiated peace. Our ambition is to see an end of belligerency and conflict and to advance towards a peaceful future. Negotiation is not an act of "humiliation" or "surrender" for anybody, as some Arab leaders have said. It is a supreme assertion of national sovereignty and of international responsibility. Courage in leadership does not belong to the battlefield alone; it can be put to the service of conciliation and peace.
72.	In maintaining the cease-fire positions until peace is obtained, we do not seek to perpetuate the cease-fire lines or to freeze the existing situation for ever. Our proposals for permanent boundaries to be established for the first time between Israel and its Arab neighbors will be determined by the need to ensure security and to prevent new wars such as that which arose from the fragile and vulnerable armistice lines of 1967. The construction of a stable peace and security between Israel and Egypt requires a precise, detailed negotiation on territorial delimitation.
73.	The deadlock on the over-all settlement in this sector arises from the fact that Egypt has so far refused to begin negotiation unless its position on the final outcome is conceded in advance. There is no valid precedent for such an approach. Negotiation creates the final result; the final result does not create negotiation. We seek no binding commitments from Egypt in advance on matters that are subject to negotiation. We have not sought to determine the final peace boundary, and we have drawn no alternative maps.
74.	It is unlikely that a transition from complete deadlock to complete peace can be made in one stage. Accordingly, the Israeli Government through its Prime Minister reiterated on 27 July this year its readiness to negotiate a special Suez Canal agreement. Such an accord would be a contribution and a stimulus to an over-all peace. We would consider such an arrangement as a temporary solution and as a step towards peace. In the atmosphere of confidence created by such an agreement, a momentum for further accords would be generated.
75.	It is far-fetched to assert that the positions which I have briefly outlined today offer Arab Governments no possibility of honorable and meaningful negotiation. These principles correspond to the norms of international conciliation. What is required is the application to the
Middle East of the spirit and method that have had successful results elsewhere.
76.	The lack of Egyptian response so far to Israel's willingness to negotiate a temporary Suez agreement has long been an obstacle to progress. So, too, is the deadlock created by Cairo's insistence on determining the boundary and withdrawal issues before and without negotiation. In addition, a new massive barrier to peace has arisen through the resurgence of the Arab terrorist outrages which have sent a shock of revulsion through the civilized world.
77.	The story seems unending. Only a few hours ago, the heroes of the Arab liberation movement handed a transistor radio to a woman passenger about to embark on an airliner from Paris to Israel, with hundreds of passengers. It contained a heavy explosive charge. The passenger showed the vigilance necessary to transmit it to the security authorities. The moral qualities of this terrorism come to expression here.
78.	When the Secretary-General decided to request the inclusion in the agenda of an item on international terrorism [A/8791 and Add.l], he was giving a correct and perceptive interpretation of his rights and duties under the Charter. Organized groups of terrorists, for whom violence is both a means and an end, are threatening the texture of international life. Innocent civilians live in fear of attack by murder squads from abroad. The airlines work in an atmosphere of vulnerability. The international mails are violated by the assaults of cowardly men whose malice knows no compassion and no restraint.
79.	There are many forms and varieties of terrorist violence. They spread like a contagious germ. They respond to destructive and nihilist impulses that have taken root in contemporary culture. And the ultimate arrogance of the terrorists is not that they perform their outrages, but that they then ask for understanding and endorsement. They base their assault on the proposition that all restraints, civilities, immunities and human solidarities must be sacrificed to what they unilaterally proclaim to be their "rights". When they endanger the principles of international order, such as the sovereignty of States, the legal systems of free societies, the universal freedom of the air, the physical safety of men and women who handle the international mail, then the United Nations would lose all credit and repute if its Secretary-General were not to focus its attention and conscience on the approaching abyss.
80.	It is disquieting that the inclusion of the item in the agenda was so strongly opposed that it was nearly lost. Civilized mankind should take a keen look at the Governments which opposed the inclusion of the item or advocated its long postponement. The truth is that their Organization came within a few votes of moral death last week. And the Foreign Minister of Brazil was perfectly right in deploring the General Assembly's failure to endorse the wording of the item as recommended by the General Committee [2038th meeting]. Once the deliberate and unprovoked murder of unarmed civilians is justified by reference to the murderers' "motives" or "frustrations", we might as well include murder amongst the legitimate indulgences of a permissive society and wipe the sixth commandment off the tablet of man's ethical history.
81.	The Israeli delegation will support the draft resolution presented by the United States [A/C.6/L.851] and will give careful study in an affirmative spirit to the text proposed for an international convention against terrorism [A/C.6/ L.850].
82.	But while the problem has its international aspects, especially in aviation and in police security, much depends on the willingness of individual Governments to take measures of prevention on their own soil. The terrorists are particularly active on the territory of free democratic States in which tolerance and hospitality are cherished values. It thus becomes painfully necessary for such States to develop habits of sharp detection and action which are, in a sense, contrary to their easy temperament. But a free society cannot long survive if it fails to defend itself against those who would destroy its freedom and menace its survival by illicit violence. Similarly, many a government must face a moment of agonizing truth when it is called upon to judge the results of giving the terrorists what they want under the threat of dreadful blackmail. To withstand hijackers and kidnappers requires very strong nerves. A compromise convenient for the short term will usually have the effect of giving terrorism a new lease of strength, thereby endangering more victims than are immediately at stake.
83.	In addition to the need for international and national action there is an important area for regional co-operation. The terrorists have made the liberal societies of Western Europe the main arena of their activities. It is here that the majority of outrages against vulnerable aircraft and civilian establishments have taken place. We attach importance and interest to the discussion initiated by the Federal Republic of Germany at the Council of the European Community a few weeks ago regarding measures to combat international terrorism.
84.	My Government has considered certain specific concrete proposals for international, regional and national measures to combat terrorism and we shall bring them forward at the appropriate Committee stage.
85.	It is of course right and inevitable that the item on our agenda [item 92] should be drafted in universal terms. It would, however, be mere pretense to lose sight of the fact that the most rampant terrorism today is that which has its root in Arab hostility to Israel. It was after all the ghastly crime at Munich that gave the incentive for the debate which the General Assembly has decided to hold.
86.	In this context I come to discuss the methods used by Arab terrorist organizations; their political aims; and, above all, the crucial role of Arab Governments in creating and maintaining them.
87.	The original targets of Arab terrorism in the early 1950s were the lives and homes of Israelis on their own soil. The toll was heavy and constant. A bus load of passengers at Scorpion Pass; a group of farmers celebrating a wedding at Patish; a party of scholars on an archaeological expedition at Ramat Rachel; farmers in the collective villages of the Jordan Valley; fishermen on Lake Tiberias. These are random extracts from our nation's memory of bereavement. No other people has had to live all its days with a mark of interrogation hanging over its collective and individual security. A United Nations representative, General E. L. M. Burns of Canada, wrote then of these fedayeen activities that they were worthy of the Nazis. In those days murder was not regarded anywhere as a symptom of revolutionary "progress".
88.	The terrorist bands called the "fedayeen", which, thereafter, became the "Palestine Liberation Organization", developed their main activity in the 1950s and the early 1960s. In other words, they have absolutely nothing to do with the situation created by the 1967 war. Their object has been and is to destroy security of life for Israel, irrespective of what the armistice or cease-fire configuration is at any given time. After 1967 they transferred their violence from frontier areas to Israel's urban centers; shoppers in Mahne Yehuda Market in Jerusalem; housewives in a supermarket; students in a college cafeteria; passers-by in a crowded bus station-and on one horrifying morning a clearly marked school bus at Avivim in Northern Israel. As the mangled bodies of our children, still clutching toys and copybooks, were flown by helicopter to hospitals and morgues, there came across the frontier the gloating voice of Mr. George Habash, Commander of the so-called Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, announcing that it was wise to kill Israelis while they were still young. It is difficult to speak or hear of this morbid monster without a cold chill of revulsion. The essential point for these "liberators" is that their victims should be defenseless, vulnerable and unarmed. This is their chivalry.
89.	The rest is part of the recent experience and memory of everyone in this hall. Before the squalid butchery at Munich, the worst horror was at Lod Airport, where a group of depraved mercenaries from a distant land methodically slaughtered 26 civilian passengers-one of them was an eminent Israeli physicist, others were humble Puerto Rican pilgrims coming from the United States. Condemnation was world-wide; but alas it was not universal. Those who take their weekly instruction from the cultivated prose of Hassanein Heykal should ponder his commentary on the massacre at Lod. I quote from an article by him dated 9 June 1972:
"If there had been three Palestinians there instead of three Japanese I should have been enthusiastic about it, in spite of the fact that at the bottom of my heart I'm for the three Japanese."
90.	The Egyptian Prime Minister's reaction was less sophisticated and more simple, although it had a note of blasphemy. He invoked divine blessing on the murderous example:
"I want to say that what happened at Lod Airport proves that we can, with Allah's help, achieve victory in our battle with Israel. This is the only reaction I have to this matter."
91.	In the history of revolutionary violence there is a constant clash between ends and means. But in the Arab terrorist movement, dedicated to enslavement and genocide, there is no such ambivalence. The aims which Arab terrorism serves are even worse than the means it employs. The means are murder and kidnapping. The aim is not to win freedom for the Arab nation, whose freedom is so
amply and lavishly assured, but to liquidate the national? liberation which the most ancient of nations has already achieved.
92.	There is no need of interpretation here. Quotation is enough. The Palestine terrorist organizations are not at all concerned with finding a solution for the problems of Palestinian Arabs within the framework of a Middle East of which Israel forms a part. This, in fact, is what they are fighting to prevent. The aim is much more radical. Let their leader, Yasser Arafat, speak for himself:
"Al Fatah started its activities in 1956 and its armed struggle in 1965. Its aim is the liquidation of the Zionist Israeli existence."
President El-Sadat is often very frank on this theme. On 2 June 1971 he told the Egyptian National Council:
"The Zionist conquest to which we are being subjected will not be terminated by the return of the occupied territories. This is a new Crusader war which will persist during our generation and through the coming one."
93.	A document called the Palestine Covenant was adopted by all the Palestine liberation groups at the sixth congress of the Palestinian National Council, which met in Cairo in September 1968. The Covenant lays down that the Palestine State is to be an Arab State, that it is to comprise the whole area west of the Jordan not part of it, and that only Jews who were living in Palestine before the "Zionist invasion" could be citizens. The rest -the vast majority- would be pressed to depart. So the aim of this terrorist movement is the liquidation of the solitary Israeli State for the purpose of establishing the nineteenth Arab State. A compact expression of this policy came from former Egyptian Foreign Minister Mahmoud Riad in a press conference in Paris on 1 October 1971, when he said: "I give complete support to the organizations and their program of wiping out the Jewish State."
94.	The concept of "politicide"-the extinction of the identity and personality of a State-is so unfamiliar, indeed unique, that it may be difficult for other Governments to grasp its significance. Israelis study this notion against the background of another unique experience, the memory of which no other people has ever shared. In the Hitler decade we learned that some things are too terrible to believe but that nothing in our people's history is too terrible to have happened.
95.	In questioning Israel's axiomatic right to security and independence, the terrorist organizations commit a disruptive heresy in the life of our age. They rise up in revolt against history, law, justice, humanity and peace. There are now 18 Arab States, with a population of 100 million, an area of 4-1/2 million square miles and unlimited wealth and opportunity. Facing them alone on the scales of equity is the small State of Israel. There is, therefore, only one nation which stands or falls in history by the way in which this conflict is resolved. By-its solitude and uniqueness, Israel's secure existence is the overriding moral imperative in this dispute. The moral quality of the Arab terrorist organizations is determined not only by their brutal acts but by the destructive vision which inspires them. Their
close links with neo-Nazi and anti-Semitic organizations are in full harmony with their inner nature.
96.	I have said that the resurgence of Arab terrorism is a massive obstacle or the road to peace. This is not only a reflection on the psychological atmosphere. *t is true that a condition of hate, fear, bloodshed and bereavement works against the prospect of a conciliatory effort, which would be difficult enough in any case. What is no less grave is tha we find it impossible to accept the distinction between these organizations and the Arab Governments which are our destined partners in the peace effort. The support given by those Governments to the organizations undermines the credibility of their peaceful professions and even the professions are few and far between.
97.	Egyptian support for the terrorists finds expression in the press, radio and television. The terrorist leaders see Cairo as the center at which they co-ordinate matters of common concern with the League of Arab States. Egypt serves as the center where the heads of the terrorist movements meet the representatives of the various Arab countries passing through Cairo. Not a week passes without a central Egyptian personality meeting with a terrorist leader for co-ordination and co-operation. Cairo Radio gives a special program on Palestine in which terrorist activities are constantly praised. The special radio station broadcasting from Cairo, called "Saut Falastin", belongs entirely to the terrorists, who are free to broadcast what they like. The station broadcasts constant agitation and incitement against Israel and justifies every terrorist action.
98.	Egyptian support on the military level is very broad. On many occasions delegations of the organizations with Arafat at their head pay visits to Egyptian army camps in the rear and at the front. Arafat wears an Egyptian army decoration for valor.
99.	The terrorist organizations are permitted to carry on activity everywhere in the country to mobilize volunteers. Apart from their own independent mobilization machinery, they receive active support in this respect from the Libyan Embassy in Cairo, which openly signs up volunteers, pays them and sends them to Libya for training.
100.	Delegations from the various terrorist organizations receive information and instruction in Egyptian military bases. The Fatah stands apart from the rest and has special privileges in Egypt. Its members actually go through training together with Egyptian soldiers in the ranks of the Egyptian army. The "Ein Jalud" unit of the Palestine Liberation Army is commanded by an Egyptian officer. Egypt also helps the organizations with supplies of arms, ammunition and other military material.
101.	The crisis that broke out between Lebanon and the terrorists in June 1972 brought to the fore Egypt's role as guardian and protector of the organizations. Realizing that the terrorist movement might find itself obliged to quit Lebanese territory, the Egyptian President took action to forestall any Lebanese attempt to harm the terrorists. Mahmoud Riad, Secretary of the League of Arab States, was sent as a special mediator. President El-Sadat was not content with that. He sent his personal representative to Beirut in order to exert pressure on the Lebanese Government not to cancel the Cairo agreement of November 1969, which provided for the terrorists' presence in Lebanon.
102.	Egypt's leaders address the terrorist bodies at all their conferences. In any clash between the terrorists and their victims, the Government sponsors the terrorists' cause. In September 1970 a Pan American aircraft landed in Cairo, where the hijackers calmly blew it up in the sight of the authorities. When the Jordanian Defense Minister was murdered as a guest on Egyptian soil, his hosts allowed the murderers to go free.
103.	In Lebanon there are 5,000 terrorists, whose constant activity is undisturbed by the authorities. Under the Cairo agreement between Lebanon and the terrorist organizations, the Lebanese Government granted the terrorists legal recognition, freedom to organize and a base for activity against Israel. Beirut is the seat and center of terrorist planning and propaganda. It is from Beirut that groups set out with detailed plans to commit murder and hijackings and set off explosions in Europe and elsewhere. It was in Beirut and Baalbek that Kozo Okamoto received shelter and training for his assault on the airport at Lod.
104.	Syria was the first Arab State which supported terrorist activities from the outset. President Al-Assad said on 2 September 1971 in the weekly journal Al Mussawar that:
"... the fedayeen are to be found in more than one area of Syria, and they have absolute freedom of movement on the Syrian front. Moreover,"-said President Al-Assad-"we encourage and stimulate them and often we complain that they are not sufficiently active . . .".
105.	Libyan support for terrorist assaults in the Middle East and Europe needs no documentation. President Qaddafi's admiration of the Munich murderers was rhapsodic and explicit.
106.	Whatever the position may be with other terrorist groups, there is no truth or value in a discussion of Arab terrorism which does not face the fact that it is a recognized arm of Arab Governments in a policy of war against Israel. These organizations could not exist, still less function, without the shelter, support, endorsement, financial aid, arms, training facilities and territorial bases supplied by certain Arab States. All the activities of these organizations without exception violate the principles which the signatories of the Charter including Arab signatories-pledged themselves to defend. It is not an accident that the Governments which sponsor Arab terrorist organizations are unable to fulfill normal international obligations. The Arab Governments have not signed the Tokyo Convention;  they have not signed the Montreal Convention;? they have not responded to the Secretary-General's proposal for drawing the attention of the twenty-seventh session of this Assembly to the problem of international terrorism [A/8791 andAdd.lJ.
107.	Now. whether or not the General Assembly can take effective action in this matter, it does at least possess the capacity of accurate judgment. Such honorable words as "liberation", "resistance", "commando" have no application and have never before been applied to attempts to liquidate a lawful sovereignty, to compound the Nazi assault on Jewish survival and to wage a campaign of indiscriminate assault against civilians in the Middle East and elsewhere.
108.	The attitude of Arab Governments towards Arab terrorists is today a graver obstacle to peace than the admittedly disparate positions of the parties to the problems of withdrawal, boundaries, navigation, peace, etc. I say in all frankness: I cannot today believe that Egypt and Syria are willing, or that Lebanon is able, to make peace with Israel; and in that profound skepticism the attitude of those movements to terrorism plays the central role.
109.	The discussion must inevitably take us back to a consideration of the word "Palestine" that appears as the title of the terrorist organizations. Now, is it true that there is a distinct people deprived of self-determination, languishing in poverty, squalor and humiliation, dependent on organized violence as its sole prospect of redemption? Nothing could be further from the truth.
110.	There are some 2-3/4 million Palestine Arabs in the world today. Three quarters of them are in the original territory of Palestine, on both sides of the Jordan that is to say, under Jordanian rule or within the area at present under Israel's jurisdiction. The other quarter are in Kuwait, Lebanon, Syria and Saudi Arabia. Moreover, 1,300,000 Palestine Arabs now hold Jordanian citizenship, which has been available to them since 1950, when Jordan annexed the territories of the west bank with the consent of the Palestinian leaders.
111.	For the entire period of the armistice regime between 1949 and 1967 all Palestine Arabs-except a few hundred thousand who are citizens of Israel were living under Arab sovereignty and Arab flags. In other words, the question of their civic and political identity was a matter for determination by Arab Governments and authorities alone.
112.	The Kingdom of Jordan was a Palestinian State, in the double sense that a majority of its citizens were Palestinians and a majority of all the Palestinians in the world were citizens of that State.
113.	In a final peace settlement a new permanent boundary will be drawn between Israel and its eastern neighbor. Some hundreds of thousands of Palestine Arabs would in all conditions be a community within the State of Israel; this is normal. There is no such thing as 100 per cent self- determination, although the Arab nation comes closer to that figure than any other in history. Those Palestinian Arabs who will be outside Israel's permanent boundary once it is drawn will be free to determine their future in conjunction with the Arab Governments and peoples concerned.
114.	As recently as 8 September 1972, the Israeli Prime Minister made it plain that in her conception of a peace agreement there would have to be important modifications of the previous armistice lines in order to preserve security and to avoid new wars. But she added that it was not her conception that under such an agreement the vast majority of all the Palestine Arabs in the administered territories would have to fall within Israeli jurisdiction.
115.	It follows, therefore, that the political status of the Palestine Arabs would find its solution within a peace settlement. Now, here is the most drastic paradox of all: the "Palestine Liberation" organizations are the implacable opponents of an Arab peace with Israel. Yet nothing but peace with Israel can clarify the political and civil destiny of the Palestine Arabs in a manner compatible with Israel's sovereignty and security, with regional peace and with their own basic interests.
116.	In the meantime, this community is not languishing in despair and poverty: there is a new freedom of movement and contact. The national product of the Samaria-Judea-Gaza areas, administered by Israel since 1967, in which a million Arabs live, has nearly doubled since 1968. The per capita income has risen from 1 670 in 1968 to 1 1,100 in 1972. The agricultural product has tripled. There were less than 4,000 private vehicles in 1969; there are nearly 7,000 today. There were 3,000 television sets there in 1967; today there are 40,000. Fifty thousand workers find labor opportunities in the Israeli market, from which they bring back  1300 million a year. There is no unemployment. Wage levels have trebled since 1967. The value of exports from these territories has risen from  1220 million to  1305 million.
117.	Perhaps more significant than the language of statistics is the spectacle of human contact, commerce and exchange that brings hundreds of thousands of Israelis and hundreds of thousands of Palestine Arabs into a normal and fruitful communion the like of which never existed before.
118.	In the latter half of 1971, 200,000 Arabs from neighboring countries freely crossed the Jordan bridges towards Israel. It is not inconceivable that, when the agreed peace boundary is drawn, the relations between Israel and its eastern Arab neighbors could evolve across open boundaries into something like the community structure in parts of Western Europe today.
119.	So while Arab terrorists in Beirut and European capitals manufacture their bombs and plot their assassinations, the majority of the Palestinian Arabs are living solid lives enriched by a widening contact with their neighbors still clouded, of course, by a lack of political definition, but nevertheless alive with the hope and prospect of a peaceful regional future.
120.	There is, of course, hardship in every sector of Middle Eastern life. But there is not one single problem of the Palestinian Arabs that can be advanced towards a solution by the action of the terrorist groups. There is not one single legitimate interest of the Palestinian Arabs that would not come to reasonable satisfaction in a negotiated peace settlement between Israel and its neighbors. The terrorist groups are not only the enemies of law and order across the Middle East and in many parts of the world: they also alienate the Palestine Arabs from their true interest and their authentic vocation.
121.	The problem of curbing the terrorists is now our most urgent preoccupation. We are resolved to resist and weaken them in our region. We believe that national, regional and international action against Arab terrorism is an indispensable prelude to the fruitful exploration of peaceful prospects for the Middle East.
122.	I have spoken of psychological and human obstacles on the road to peace. Some of these obstacles could easiK be removed. I refer, for example, to the problem of prisoners of war.
123.	There are 10 Israeli prisoners of war in Egyptian hands; they have been there for two and a half to three years. On the other hand, Israel holds 61 Egyptian prisoners of war, most of whom have been in captivity for nearly three years. Syria has been holding three Israeli prisoners of war for the last two and a half years. Israel holds 45 Syrian prisoners of war. Israel also holds 10 Lebanese prisoners of war.
124.	With the cease-fire well into its third year we propose the mutual release and repatriation of all prisoners of war. The arithmetical advantage is overwhelmingly on the Arab side; but in the broader human sense everyone would gain.
125.	The Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 12 August 1949 lays down in article 118 that: "Prisoners of war shall be released and repatriated without delay after the cessation of active hostilities." This provision of the Geneva Convention is clear and definite. In accordance with it there should have been a release of prisoners when the cease-fire entered into force on 7 August 1970.
126.	Articles 109 and 110 of the Convention provide that prisoners of war who are seriously wounded or who are seriously sick must be sent back to their own country even before the cessation of active hostilities.
127.	It is reported that Egypt considers the six pilots amongst the Israeli prisoners that it has captured as being of greater importance than the 60 Egyptian prisoners held by Israel, who are mostly ordinary soldiers. But this is certainly not a humane approach to the problem. All prisoners of war, irrespective of rank, must be released in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Geneva Convention. A gesture of goodwill by Egypt and Syria on behalf of 115 Arabs and 13 Israeli prisoners would help diminish the acute lack of confidence which now obstructs any progress towards peace. What valid argument can there possibly be against this course?
128.	At the same time our Jewish destiny and responsibility inspire our concern for the plight of the small Jewish minority in Syria where 4,500 Jews are held as helpless hostages, forbidden to depart, discriminated against, humiliated, their movement restricted, essential services denied them, their property confiscated, and their livelihood in constant jeopardy.
129.	The plight of Syrian Jewry has been brought to the United Nations General Assembly and its Committees in the past. Two years ago committees to help the Jews of the Arab countries arose in 25 different countries in four continents, and an international committee came into existence. Some of the Arab countries responded to the humanitarian pressure of world public opinion and permitted the Jews who had remained in their territories to leave. Only Syria has persisted in its present position. Public opinion should not rest or remain silent until the imprisoned are released and the Jews of Syria permitted to reach safety.
130.	Year in and year out the problem of the Jewish community in the Soviet Union comes to the General Assembly and its Committees.
131.	The history of the Jews in Russia is a continuous chain of hardship and suffering from the days of the Tsars until the present time. Recently their urgent aspiration to emigrate to their historic homeland has broken through the barrier of silence. Thousands have reached Israel, where they have been received with a deep poignancy arising from a long separation. Many people of goodwill throughout the world saw in the emigration of these Jews, however few, a sign of broader tolerance and humane understanding.
132.	But there has now been a setback; while still permitting the emigration of thousands of Jews, the Soviet authorities have placed limitations on the freedom of movement of scores of thousands in disregard of their fundamental human rights. Many have been arrested just for wishing to go to Israel and have been sentenced to imprisonment. The Soviet information media publish calumnies, slanders and incitement against them.
133.	Many of those who register in the emigration offices are dismissed from employment and thus lose their livelihood. An open anti-Semitic campaign is being conducted, and in the period 1971-1972 alone, dozens of anti-Semitic books have been published in the Soviet Union, in addition to the anti-Jewish campaign conducted by the press and official media of information.
134.	And now as part of the attempt to dissuade Jews from submitting applications for exit permits to Israel, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics decided on 3 August to impose a special tax on Jews with higher education who wish to go to Israel. This effectively deprives thousands of people of any possibility and any hope ever to join their families and to realize their national aspiration. A scale has been established for each level of education, sometimes reaching $25,000 and more per person.
135.	It seems to us that the Soviet argument on the brain drain is not relevant or applicable here. The Soviet Union is not one of the needy developing countries, and Israel is not offering Jewish members of the scientific professions who come from the Soviet Union superior financial rewards. Israel is only able to give them a home, where they will feel as Jews who are not being discriminated against.
136.	Likewise irrelevant is the argument that graduates are obliged, as it were, to repay the cost of their education.
137.	The noted Soviet demographer, Urlanis, states in an article published on 26 July 1970 in Literaturnaya Gazeta that, in the conditions obtaining in the Soviet Union, the average university graduate repays by four years' work the State's investment in his training. The majority of scientists have thus already repaid that investment many times over by their creativity, their invention, their research and their professional work. The decree is not only a harassment of thousands of Jews, it is a serious infringement of intellectual freedom and scientific liberty. It creates the enslavement of scientists and intellectuals whose only crime is that they have studied and worked and contributed to the progress of their country, and today obey the call of their historic consciousness and wish to pursue their intellectual and social vocation elsewhere.
138.	Scientific personalities and institutions across the world have reacted with astonishment and indignation to this limitation of intellectual freedom. It is precisely because we wish to see a greater harmony between East and West, between the Soviet Union and the West, in all fields, including that of science, that we raise our voice in protest against this superfluous obstacle to international understanding.
139.	The General Assembly moves towards its agenda in an atmosphere of crisis for international institutions. There was never a time when a universal framework for international relations was more objectively necessary than today. Yet the concept of international organization is still surrounded by apathy and doubt. The United Nations should act with consistent purpose within the real limits of its capacity and strength. It should reinforce its role in international development in the light of the difficulties and dislocations revealed at the third session of UNCTAD in Santiago. It should take a careful course on the problems of the environment which were impressively brought to light at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm in June. We must not allow an exaggerated ecological alarmist to act as a brake on accelerated development: for poverty and backwardness in most of the world have a more polluting effect on the life of our age than the excesses of industrialization in a small part of it. We should complete it universality by the admission of Bangladesh to membership. And we must not discredit our protest against racial discrimination in the southern parts of Africa by a craven silence about the brutal and capricious persecution of Asians undertaken by the present ruler of Uganda. The distribution of tasks and responsibilities between sovereign Governments and international institutions requires a delicate exercise in understanding. The United Nations must become an instrument for solving conflicts, not an arena for waging them. It should take a diplomatic, not a parliamentary view. Its task is to provide and promote consensus and agreement, not to take refuge in illusions of enforcement or adjudication. If we temper ambition with restraint we may yet endow this Organization with a constructive purpose and enlarge its humane role in the history of our turbulent age.
Mr. President, New Zealand joins with the previous speakers in offering you its warmest congratulations on your election to the presidency. You have already brought efficiency and vigor to the conduct of our work. Like other speakers, I would like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to my personal friend, Adam Malik, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, who presided so admirably over last year's arduous session.
174.	We meet this year oppressed by the tragic events of recent weeks. A new and horrible form of savagery has been visited upon a desperately vulnerable and unprepared world. Yet this year more than most has been marked by the promise of a new era of international peace and stability. For most of its life the United Nations has mirrored the mutual suspicions and hostilities that characterized the attitude of the super-Powers over that period. Now the easing of tension in the relationships among the great Powers is reflected in a growing pattern of reconciliation among the smaller Powers. The courageous initiative of President Nixon, the summit talks in Peking, Moscow, Warsaw and elsewhere and other vigorous moves towards detente, particularly by the two super-Powers, are in the best spirit of the Charter. As both a courtesy and a duty we should pay a tribute to all the Powers concerned for the prospect of a new peace which seems to lie ahead of us.
175.	Another development in international relationships that is welcome to New Zealand, as a country having a special interest in the European Economic Community, is the impending enlargement of that Community through the entry of the United Kingdom and other new members. We look forward to the emergence of a stronger, more outward-looking and united Western Europe. The trend towards reconciliation between the countries of Western and Eastern Europe is gathering momentum. The negotiation of non-aggression treaties between West Germany and Poland and between West Germany and the Soviet Union and the four-Power agreement on Berlin were welcome first steps in that direction. We strongly hope that the current negotiations between the two Germanys will end in an agreement that will permit us very soon to welcome both to membership in the United Nations,
176.	The changes in great-Power relationships have modified the policies of countries in the area of the world of most direct interest to New Zealand. I refer to Asia and the Pacific. We have been especially encouraged by the Simla meeting between the President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India aimed at settling peacefully the differences between their two countries. The major problems, of course, are not yet solved; but the way has been opened for a durable settlement in the subcontinent under which the three countries of the region will be able to live together in peace. I would emphasize that New Zealand earnestly feels the need for such a settlement.
177.	Last year's crisis in East Pakistan caused human suffering on a vast and frightening scale. New Zealand, small though it is, has not hesitated to draw attention to the material and political needs which had to be met in order to end that tragic situation. The new State of Bangladesh has emerged from the chaos and suffering. However, independence alone and of itself cannot put an end to human misery. The reconstruction and development of Bangladesh represents an enormous task which the new Government cannot be expected to accomplish without massive external assistance. A great deal has already been done, both by the United Nations and by individual countries. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Indian Government, specifically, have successfully tackled a refugee operation larger than any ever before undertaken in the history of the world. The United Nations and non-governmental bodies have undertaken rehabilitation operations on an unprecedented scale and have thus averted more widespread suffering in the new nation. We in New Zealand have tried to help wherever we can to reduce the suffering in Bangladesh and to promote peace and stability among fellow members of the Commonwealth of Nations on the subcontinent. However, much more needs to be done. In such a vast undertaking it is essential that all partners have the full support and co-operation of the others. For this practical reason, New Zealand believes it is important that Bangladesh should be admitted to the United Nations as soon as possible.
178.	By a happy coincidence, the agreement between India and Pakistan was followed almost immediately by one between two other Asian neighbors, North and South Korea. That agreement opens the way for the deep and bitter hostilities of the past to be worked out by the Koreans themselves. In due course the Organization will no doubt have a role to play. At this juncture, however, we believe that the Assembly took a very wise decision when last week it deferred consideration of the Korean items [2036th meeting], thereby acknowledging that the two Koreas should have the opportunity, and should be encouraged, to come to terms with each other.
179.	The movement in Asia towards reconciliation has not so far been reflected in Indochina and VietNam, in Laos and in the Khmer Republic but it is not for want of effort on the part of South Vietnam and its friends. The United States has offered to withdraw all its forces in return for an internationally supervised cease-fire and the return of the American prisoners. The United States and South Viet-Nam together have offered to hold new elections in which the national liberation front can take its full part in organizing the elections and to have the elections internationally supervised. President Thieu of South Vietnam has offered to resign before the elections take place. My Government supports these proposals, which are directed towards obtaining a just and durable peace settlement in that part of the world.
180.	The encouragement that countries have had this year to seek a peaceful resolution of their differences has also been reflected in the Pacific region. New Zealand, Australia and a number of newly independent small nations of the South Pacific have been developing a very real spirit of community and co-operation. More recently the most outstanding evidence of this spirit has been the creation of what is known as the South Pacific Forum. In that Forum the government leaders of Fiji, Tonga, Western Samoa, Nauru, the Cook Islands, Australia and New Zealand have met together to discuss issues of practical interest to our Governments and peoples. As was mentioned by my Australian colleague yesterday, Papua New Guinea has been invited to observe the next meeting. The first Forum, held in Wellington in August last year, has been followed in 1972 by two further meetings, one in Canberra, Australia, and the other in Suva, Fiji. Talks have covered a very wide range of subjects. However, it is a measure of the Forum's concern with immediate practical issues that it has already established a South Pacific Bureau for Economic Co-operation. This is a serious effort to stimulate new thinking and create greater opportunities for the development of trade and economic advancement throughout that vast area of the Pacific Ocean, particularly in the south.
181.	There is scope for a much greater involvement by the United Nations in the economic progress of the developing countries and the newly independent countries of the South Pacific. Perhaps because of their geographical remoteness, the problems of these countries too have seemed remote to other countries. Yet only a very little more attention, as measured in the total United Nations effort, would do so much more for these small and isolated communities. For that reason we are very pleased that the Asian Development Bank has accepted the independent island nations of the South Pacific as members and that loans are already being made available to them. Also, the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East is becoming increasingly involved in the development of the island nations, as are the United Nations Development Program, UNICEF and the specialized agencies concerned. However, I repeat that there is still much more to be done in that area.
182.	Over the years, New Zealand has involved the United Nations in the process of decolonization as it applied to New Zealand's island Territories. Some years ago we invited the United Nations missions to observe the act of self- determination in the former Trust Territory of Western Samoa, and also in the Cook Islands. This year the Assembly will have a report from a visiting mission of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which at New Zealand's invitation visited the Non-Self-Governing Territory of Nive [A/8723/Rev. 1, chap. XVI, annex I]. That mission was under the able leadership of Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania. In my own Government's view, the report of the Committee is a very well-balanced, fair and, we believe, helpful document. We hope it will do more than enable the Assembly to consider the political issues to which the report itself was directed. It should also lead to a greater understanding of the special problems of survival and development faced by other very small dependent Territories.
183.	A minute ago I touched upon the remoteness of the problems of the South Pacific as seen by the rest of the world, and perhaps especially by the European countries. I draw attention now to the serious apprehension which exists in that vast area about the continuance of nuclear testing in the Pacific region.
184.	There is a regional concern because this year a further series of nuclear tests was conducted in the Tuamoto archipelago, and that is the fifth such series since 1967. My Government is aware that the problem of nuclear weapons testing is a global one and that nuclear tests are at present being conducted by four different nations. We also realize that nuclear testing is a part of the wider problem of the nuclear arms race. But I want to make it quite clear here today that the continuation of atmospheric nuclear testing in French Polynesia is deeply resented by the people of the whole of the South Pacific region and, indeed, of the North Pacific as well.
185.	At its meeting in Fiji earlier this month, the South Pacific Forum that I spoke of earlier unanimously expressed its deep concern that the French Government, in conducting its latest nuclear tests, should have failed to recognize the wishes of the people of the South Pacific area, despite the views so clearly expressed by the Governments and the peoples of those countries. The Forum strongly reaffirmed its opposition to all such nuclear experiments anywhere in the world.
186.	In support of that standpoint, the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, referred to again this afternoon, has asked all States intending to carry out nuclear weapons tests to abandon those plans.  Countries in Asia, and in Latin America bordering the Pacific, have declared their total opposition. It is our intention to seek the Assembly's endorsement of these calls to cease all nuclear weapons testing.
187.	Nuclear testing is an issue on which the smaller States have had to speak bluntly to some of the larger Powers whose activities affect us.
188.	In the debate last year [1955th meeting], the New Zealand representative spoke of the great Powers taking policy decisions that profoundly affect the economic stability of smaller nations. There is still a pressing need for the great Powers to recognize that smaller economies can rock dangerously in the waves of their major-policy decisions. There is still a pressing need for a further liberalization of world trade and monetary matters. New Zealand attaches considerable importance to a successful outcome of the multilateral trade negotiations under the framework of GATT in 1973. The Kennedy Round failed to meet our hopes.
189.	New Zealand, like so many other, smaller countries, is heavily dependent on trade in primary agricultural commodities. We are vitally concerned, on that account, with the progress that will have to be made with eliminating or reducing barriers to trade in agricultural products. The developing countries quite rightly want to have their say in these talks, in these negotiations, in these kinds of decisions. Like us, they are less interested in tariff reductions on industrial products, which seem to be the pervading preoccupation of such talks, than in primary products. There are few benefits for smaller and developing nations in enhancing the economic advantages of the great industrial Powers. But I urge the need for less international charity and more true international economic reality.
190.	I suggested that the past year has seen the advent of a more favorable general political climate. Unfortunately, it will also be remembered as a year in which the resort to terrorism, individual killing of totally innocent and unsuspecting people, mass cruelty, mistreatment, and even genocide, have left a very tragic mark. Private violence as a means of influencing issues between States must be condemned as strongly as State violence against States, which of course is proscribed by our Charter.
191.	The revulsion to which violence gives rise, in the minds of all people throughout the world, renders these horrible actions politically sterile and useless, indeed counterproductive. It does not further the cause which they variously profess to espouse. Take two outstanding examples: those who claim to speak for the Palestinian and the Croatian peoples. What this violence does do is to increase the readiness of Governments to concert their actions to halt this scourge throughout the world.
192.	The New Zealand Government approves the efforts made by the Secretary-General to seek a greater awakening of the United Nations interest in these horrible actions and events.
193.	In the field of human rights, the right to life and security of person must have first place in anyone's scale of priorities. Nobody will underestimate the difficulties of grappling with the subject of international terrorism. Yet, it is surely right that this subject should be on our agenda. It will be a sad reflection on our strength of purpose and on the capacity of this Organization if no effective means can be found to eliminate the threat to innocent lives which this modern phenomenon presents.
194.	At the same time, we must not overlook other problems of human rights which may gravely affect very large numbers of people in particular areas of the world. The question of people of Asian origin expelled from Uganda is a case in point, as was already mentioned. My Government understands the wish of the Government of Uganda, or of any other Government, to ensure that the control of its economy remains largely in the hands of its own nationals. But there is more than one way of implementing such policy, and many countries have shown the way.
195.	The decision taken by the Uganda Government involves the abrupt wrenching from their own homes and the expulsion from the country of people who, for the most part, have that country as their only home and who spring from generations of people who haVe lived in that country. The New Zealand Government, which has offered a place in our own multiracial society to some of those expelled from Uganda, hopes that the Government of Uganda will even now reconsider the decision that it has taken. We would expect that, at the least, a more reasonable time limit for departure will be set and that, having regard to the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the persons concerned will be allowed to transfer from the country those assets to which they have an undoubted personal right. And so we strongly support the initiative taken by Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom. My delegation, as you can see, is in favor of his request for the inclusion in the agenda of a new item entitled "International implications of the expulsion of the Asian community from Uganda" [A/8794].
196.	Before I leave the subject of human rights I should like, only very briefly, to refer to three measures taken by the New Zealand Government which may be of interest to some countries represented in this Assembly. First, New Zealand has enacted its own Race Relations Act and should this year ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX), annex]. Secondly, our Government is this year passing legislation providing for the introduction of equal pay for women. New Zealand.was the first country in the world to give women the vote and so we are rather proud to be among the pioneers in making this further contribution to women's rights. The third measure I have in mind is a bill recently introduced in our Parliament which we hope will be passed this year and which will introduce a system whereby accident compensation amounting to 80 per cent of salary will be available to all employed persons who may suffer injury in any circumstances whatever, including accidents such as road accidents or any other kind of accident which is not related in any way to work at their jobs. We regard this as a major social advance and will be happy to provide details to any other countries which may be interested in it.
197.	A notable achievement in international co-operation of the best sort has been demonstrated in Stockholm where the Conference on the Human Environment alerted the world community to the dangers created in our environment by mankind's sometimes reckless use of the earth's resources. The fact of the Conference and its achievement is surely evidence of the vitality of this United Nations. I should like to place on record my Government's appreciation for the efforts made by Sweden as host Government to bring about the success of the Conference. We hope that the role played by Mr. Maurice Strong as Secretary-General of that Conference will be further recognized as we consider, I hope at this session, the setting up of new institutions, including a governing council for environmental programs and an environment fund. In anticipation of the Assembly's decision on the Fund, my Government will be prepared to contribute over a five-year period the sum of $320,000.
198.	The future crisis of world population, which will double by the year 2000, is inextricably linked with the problem of the world environment. Great tensions already exist in some parts of the world between populations and the space, natural resources and social structures available to them considerable stress. If these problems are not better understood now and dealt with in a pragmatic and, I hope, understanding way, we will be giving our children a legacy for which they will not thank us and in which we will take very little pride. Our Government is anxious to take its full share in international efforts which must move forward, we believe, speedily. We welcome the decision to hold the World Population Conference in 1974 [resolution 2683 (XXV)]. New Zealand will also continue, as we have in the past, to support the United Nations Fund for Population Activities which, after only two years, is already an active and worth-while agent of this Organization for this global endeavor.
199.	New Zealand has always "been a staunch supporter of the United Nations. New Zealand has always constantly supported the concept of an active role for the Secretary- General, and I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to Mr. Waldheim. We commend his firm approach to financial and administrative problems and questions at a difficult time. We commend him for the forthright action he has taken to draw the Assembly's attention to the growing question of violence and terrorism. In many more ways also the Secretary-General this year has exercised energetically the powers of initiative with which his office is properly endowed. We trust that he will continue to do so and he is certainly assured of the support and co-operation of New Zealand in that role. 
200.	Again, Mr. President, I congratulate you in your high office. I wish you every success in your heavy and demanding task.
Comrade President, allow me first of all to congratulate you on your election to the high post of President of the most important international political forum, the General Assembly of the United Nations. The unanimity displayed in your election is a reflection of the respect which States Members of the United Nations have for the peace-loving policies of the Polish People's Republic and for you personally.
39.	We should also like to congratulate the Secretary- General of the United Nations, Mr. Waldheim. Although he has occupied the post of chief administrative officer of the United Nations for less than a year, he has already shown his desire to co-operate in ensuring that the role of the United Nations in the maintenance and strengthening of peace is enhanced and its activities in the solution of this main task under the United Nations Charter expanded.
40.	It is logical and natural for sessions of the United Nations General Assembly to begin with a general political debate. Representatives of States Members of the United Nations assess the main international events, review the results of past United Nations activities in the light of the purposes and principles proclaimed in the Charter, and set definite tasks for the future. The political impetus which the United Nations receives during the general debate is helpful in the subsequent consideration of the items on the agenda.
41.	Even at last year's session of the General Assembly new trends were observed in relations among States which went some way towards meeting the desire of the peoples to secure lasting peace on the earth. Today there is reason to believe that these trends are growing stronger, although 
the forces opposed to a relaxation of tension in the world have not ceased their activities.
42.	In these circumstances the United Nations should make new efforts to promote the solution of acute international problems. As a Member of the United Nations and a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union will continue to make its contribution to the cause of the struggle for peace and the transformation of the United Nations into an even more effective instrument of peace.
43.	The Soviet State will soon celebrate its fiftieth anniversary as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The Leninist formula of the state unity of the peoples of the Soviet Union contains a powerful potential for peace- building. A profound interest in peace is organically inherent in the voluntary and equal union of socialist republic which have joined efforts in a constructive endeavor for the good of their peoples, and predatory wars and the oppression of other peoples are organically alien to such a union.
44.	For the Soviet Union the policy of peace is an adequate reflection, in the sphere of .external relations, of its internal social nature. In the decisions of the Twenty- fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our country put forward a program of peace and international co-operation which, as is universally recognized, reflects not the narrow interests of any State or group of States but the aspirations of all peoples, of all mankind. Every step taken to implement it has a constructive influence on international development as a whole.
45.	"Our policy of principle", as Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, said, "is the active defense of peace, freedom and the security of peoples. We are pursuing it together with our friends and allies, co-ordinating our steps in the international arena."
46.	If aggression is committed, the Soviet Union always sides with the victim of the aggression. If trouble threatens our allies and friends, we always come to their aid. And when we sign treaties, we implement them and fulfill our obligations.
47.	The objectives for which the Soviet Union and all the countries of the socialist community have been tirelessly fighting for many years have taken concrete form in the positive changes which have come about in the international situation. Together with our allies and friends we shall continue to fight for peace, freedom and the progress of the peoples.
48.	While consistently pursuing a policy of peace, the Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community certainly do not claim to have a monopoly in this area. In the interests of peace, we are prepared to co-operate and we do co-operate with all States which are also prepared to do likewise. Whatever their social system and in whatever part of the world they may be situated, the door is closed to no one.
49.	The broader the circle of countries pursuing a constructive foreign policy line and the larger the contribution each of them makes towards reducing tension, the more significant are the changes for the better in international affairs. Recent developments confirm this.
50.	In the past, post-war periods have always turned out to be mere respites between wars. In the present circumstances real possibilities exist for a fundamentally different development, namely, a transition to a system of stable peace, in order to ensure which the United Nations was established.
. 
51.	This transition requires the solution of problems engendered by the Second World War and the special features of development during the subsequent quarter of a century. If we tried to express in the most general form the essence of the changes that have taken place, we should say that it consists in the fact that there is now a possibility of solving some of these problems, while constructive work has begun with a view to settling others.
52.	The territorial realities that have arisen in Europe, the continent where both World Wars originated, are gaining universal recognition and being formalized under international law. The entry into force of the well-known treaties concluded by the Federal Republic of Germany with the USSR, signed at Moscow on 12 August 1970, and with the Polish People's Republic, signed at Warsaw on 7 December 1970, confirms the inviolability of European boundaries, including the boundary between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany and the western boundary of Poland.
53.	The conclusion of the agreement on West Berlin eliminates a chronic source of friction between States in the very center of Europe.
54.	The clearing of the legacy of war from European soil must be completed through the normalization of relations between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with the requirements of observing the sovereignty and independence of both those States and settling relations between Czechoslovakia and the Federal Republic of Germany on the basis of recognizing the Munich Agreement as invalid from the very beginning. As you know, negotiations are being held on this matter and I should like to express the hope that they will have a positive outcome.
55.	Negotiations will soon take place on the conclusion of- a peace treaty between the USSR and Japan which should play its part in closing the book on the Second World War in Asia and in providing a lasting basis for peace and co-operation on that continent as well. For our part, we shall make efforts to ensure the success of these negotiations, but the same desire must of course exist on the other side too.
56.	On the whole the "cold war" is being replaced by recognition of the truth that in the nuclear age there is no other basis for relations between States having different Social systems but peaceful coexistence. More and more often this is taking the form of binding international legal documents.
57.	The prerequisites for many-sided and equal cooperation among States, in the political and other fields, are multiplying.
58.	The high level of such co-operation attained in relations between the USSR and France is an especially conspicuous reflection of these new trends. Soviet-French relations are growing increasingly stronger and we note this with great satisfaction. The trends I have referred to are increasingly manifest in the Soviet Union's relations with a number of other States as well.
59.	As a result of the Soviet-United States summit talks in Moscow in May of this year, a start has been made in the process of rebuilding relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America.
60.	-	Our country attaches great importance to its relations with the United States, a great Power wife a different social system. For our part we shall do everything in our power to develop these relations and we believe that this is in the interests of the Soviet and American peoples and in the interests of maintaining and strengthening international peace. The broadening of co-operation between the two countries has already begun to become a reality, although there remain and will remain political and ideological disagreements of principle between the Soviet Union and the United States as States having different social systems.
61.	Naturally, we proceed from the assumption that no improvement in Soviet-United States relations should be achieved at the expense of other States. This is an important principle of our policy in relations with any State. It is our conviction that all States should be guided by this principle in their mutual relations and it is this criterion which we apply in assessing the significance of various developments in relations between different countries.
62.	Since the first years after the Second World War, international relations have been complicated by the division of the world into military and political groupings which set some States against others and constantly carry the risk of a military conflict. The architects of the policy of establishing military blocs, pursuing the arms race and whipping up international tensions, who for a long time determined the foreign policy of the major Western capitalist Powers, worked hard to bring the world to the dangerous brink of a military conflict. Even today we are constantly encountering the consequences of that policy in various parts of the world.
63.	We can therefore scarcely over-estimate the importance of even the first steps which are now being taken to lay the foundations of security on the basis of the collective efforts of all interested States.
64.	We are now oh the eve of an all-European conference on questions of security and co-operation. Preparations for such a conference are to enter the practical phase very shortly. The great importance of this planned meeting of States lies in making Europe genuinely peaceful and in transforming relations among States on the European continent on the basis of mutual understanding and trust; we are in favor of such a policy and such a course of action in European affairs.
65.	In the well-known Prague Declaration,  the European socialist countries have already put forward their suggestions as to how, in their view, a system of security in Europe should be built up. Many other States have also expressed their views on this score. This is a great and extremely important task and the all-European conference is expected to make an important contribution to its solution.
66.	We are convinced that, if all interested States and Governments show a proper responsibility and a readiness to seek solutions which would be in the common interest, the conference will go down in the history of our time as a great success for the cause of peace.
67.	In Asia, too, the idea of ensuring security, which is equally in the interests of all Asian States, is also beginning to gain ground. The Soviet Union considers the question of security in Asia to be an important task also. TTiose who, for some reason, are not now in sympathy with it should understand that the countries of Asia are no less interested than the Soviet Union in strengthening peace in that area.
68.	Although there has been noticeable progress towards a relaxation of international tension, it is hardly likely that anyone would dispute the fact that so far only a beginning has been made and that much more remains to be done. What is more, unless further progress is made and unless the efforts to achieve greater detente are intensified, all that has been gained could be lost. There have been such cases in history.
69.	Some of the problems awaiting solution within an international framework affect the interests of practically all States. If we consider the substance of any of the problems leading to international complications and if we focus our attention on what directly generates the danger of war and the unleashing of military conflicts, we can only come to the conclusion that it is the use of force by some States against others for the purpose of territorial annexation and for the purpose of subjugating peoples and establishing domination over them, in other words, for predatory purposes.
70 This has been true up to now and remains true today.
71.	In the past tens and hundreds of millions of people in Asia, Africa and America were reduced to slavery by colonial force. Today, when almost all of them have freed themselves, the slightest opportunity is used to restore direct or indirect colonial domination over them.
72.	Those who ventured in the past, and venture now, to use force for purposes which have nothing in common with the interests of the peoples are not greatly troubled by the fact that no dispute between States has ever been, or could ever be, settled on a lasting and just basis by means of force. The use of force for the purpose of aggression, territorial annexation and oppression of other peoples has as a rule laid the foundations for further hostility and further conflicts. For this the peoples have to pay, human beings perish and the great material treasures created by their toil are destroyed.
73.	That is why progressive political leaders for almost as long as States themselves have existed have recognized the need to eliminate the use of force from relations between States. But mere understanding of this is, of course, not sufficient. Practical efforts by States are required. This is all the more necessary now that the presence and stockpiling bf nuclear weapons in the arsenals of States have radically changed the concept of the consequences which military conflicts can have for the peoples of the world.
74.	Although varying views can be held as to the likelihood that this or that crisis or conflict will develop into a nuclear confrontation, as long as nuclear weapons exist, this possibility and this danger also exist. No State, no Government can ignore this. Our country believes that it is possible to eliminate or, at least, to reduce drastically the danger of a conflict between States provoking a nuclear catastrophe. That can be done if renunciation of the use of force in international relations is elevated to the level of international law and if at the same time-I repeat, at the same time the use of nuclear weapons js prohibited.
75.	The Soviet Government is convinced that serious consideration of these questions cannot be put off any longer. The conditions for this are already more favorable now than before and the possibilities for adopting positive decisions are broader.
76.	For those reasons, and because it is aware of its responsibility as a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union has submitted for consideration at the twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly the item entitled "Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons" [A/8793].
77.	The essence of our proposal is that it provides for the renunciation by States of any use of force to resolve international disputes; including the use both of nuclear weapons and of such types of weapons as are commonly called conventional. It is proposed that this renunciation be of such a nature that no one could avoid observing it strictly; this is possible if the United Nations shows the necessary understanding of its responsibility for the fate of the world.
78.	Such an approach is fully in accordance with the fundamental principle proclaimed in the United Nations Charter under which the Members of the United Nations "shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations" [Article 2].
79. The real state of affairs in the world makes it necessary to solve the question of the non-use of force in general and the question of the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons in conjunction with each other.
80. Ever since they first appeared, nuclear weapons have always been considered the most dangerous weapons of mass destruction. This is even truer now since the strength of these weapons is not a constant but is growing.
81.	It would be wrong to lose sight of another aspect of the question: with the development of conventional types of weapons, the danger that they might be used in military conflicts has also increased several times even by comparison with the period of the Second World War. In the last quarter of a century nuclear weapons have not been used in military conflicts, yet who can be unaware of how many tragedies have been brought about by the use of conventional weapons and how numerous have been the victims of their use?
82.	All this argues in favor of the prohibition of the use of force in violation of the United Nations Charter in conjunction with the prohibition of the use, first of all, of nuclear weapons, which are especially important.
83.	The wisdom and expediency of such a decision have also been demonstrated by the experience which the United Nations has already gained in the consideration of problems of security and disarmament. The repeated attempts of the United Nations to find a solution to both these problems are fresh in everyone's memory. Attempts have been made now from one side, now from the other, now in terms of considering the question of the non-use of force, now in terms of considering the question of the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. And what has transpired?
84.	To take only recent years, the States Members of the United Nations have unanimously adopted a resolution on strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force in international relations [resolution 2160 (XXI)], a Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolution 2625 (XXV)], and a Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)].
85.	At the real core of all these documents is the principle of the non-use of force in international relations and of the settlement of all disputes between States solely by peaceful means. All the necessary formulations have been carefully worked out and weighed on the political scales and all aspects of the problem seem to have been taken into account, but it is no secret that the goals set have still not been fully achieved; force is being used and human blood is being shed.
86.	More than 10 years ago, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a Declaration in which it proclaimed the use of nuclear weapons to be a crime against mankind and civilization [resolution 1653 (XVI)]. Since then the United Nations has repeatedly advocated the signing of an appropriate international convention by all States. However, the Declaration on the prohibition of the: use of nuclear weapons was not supported by all the nuclear Powers and it has still not been possible to initiate productive negotiations on the conclusion of an international convention on the question.
87.	Many reasons can be found for the ineffectiveness of the decisions adopted by the United Nations on these questions, but one of the most substantial is unarguably that they were considered and decided upon by the United Nations in isolation from one another.
88.	When the question of prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons was raised, several States had doubts as to the possibility of taking such a step if the use of force was not precluded in relations between States. We shall not now enter into a discussion of the question of the extent to which those doubts were justified but, whatever the case, they became an obstacle to agreement.
89.	At the same time, when the question of prohibiting the use of force was considered, the significance of any decisions adopted proved to be limited in the absence of agreement concerning nuclear weapons, that is to say, the most powerful weapons of mass destruction. The separation of one question from the other introduced a certain lack of understanding and suspicion and weakened the effectiveness of the best decisions of the United Nations. Furthermore, their effectiveness was further restricted because they were all in the form of recommendations, or, at best, declarations of intent. They were not given the force of law.
90.	The proposal of the Soviet Union [A/8793] envisages the adoption of the most realistic and effective decision possible in modern conditions. It is precisely such a decision which is in the interests of all States, regardless of their social systems, the size of their territory and population, or whether or not they possess nuclear weapons.
91.	As a result of such a decision, those States which are militarily stronger, and above all the nuclear Powers, will obtain greater mutual assurance that they are under no threat from one another. The security of each of them will be safeguarded more reliably and at the same time on an equal basis, that is to say, no one will gain a unilateral advantage at the expense of another in comparison with the situation which prevails at present, and no one would lose anything.
92.	Those States which are militarily less powerful, including all those which do not possess nuclear weapons, would also gain. Now, they are justifiably concerned at the danger that nuclear weapons might be directed against them if aggression is committed. The prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons in conjunction with the renunciation of the use of force would remove this threat and greatly strengthen the security of all States.
93.	It goes without saying that the obligation of States to renounce the use of force, including nuclear weapons, can in no way impair their right to individual and collective self-defense as laid down in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. On the contrary, that obligation would reinforce the right to self-defense against aggression and the right to struggle to eliminate the consequences of aggression in cases where it has already been committed and the aggressor seeks to benefit from it.
94.	No one can challenge the inalienable right of States and peoples subjected to aggression to repulse it by employing all possible means so long as the aggressor continues to use force, encroaches upon their freedom and sovereignty and tries to retain territories seized by force. It will suffice to refer to the examples before everyone's eyes: Indochina and the Middle East. Who would dare to contest the incontestable fact that brute force has been and still is being used against the peoples of Indochina and against the Arab States and that they are entitled to use all the necessary means to rebuff the aggressor?
95.	Renunciation of the use of force in relations between States in no way limits the right of the peoples of colonial countries to fight for their freedom and independence using any means which may be necessary in that struggle. This right is recognized by the United Nations as being a legitimate one. It is based on the fact that violence was used against those peoples, who have been the victims of colonialism and aggression, and, in resorting to force to liberate themselves, they are only restoring justice and their flouted rights.
96.	The adoption of a decision on non-use of force and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would thus be beneficial to all. But this also makes it necessary for all States, particularly all those Powers which possess nuclear weapons, to participate in its elaboration and adoption. Otherwise no decision, not even the very best one, could attain the desired objective.
97.	The Soviet Government has given thorough consideration to the question of the most appropriate form for a decision by the United Nations on the renunciation of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. We propose that consideration of this item should result in the adoption of a clear-cut decision, which, in the interests of maximum effectiveness, should bind together appropriate actions by the two main organs of the United Nations the General Assembly and the Security Council. On behalf of the Soviet Union, the Soviet delegation is submitting the following draft resolution for consideration by the General Assembly:
[The speaker then read out the text of a draft resolution which was subsequently circulated as document A/L.676. For the text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh session, Annexes, agenda item 25.]
98.	The proposed draft speaks for itself. It envisages a major step on the part of the General Assembly a decision on behalf of States Members of the United Nations on their renunciation of the use or threat of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. It contains an appeal to the Security Council to take action to make this declaration binding on all States. For this purpose, and in accordance with well-known provisions of the United Nations Charter, a meeting of the Security Council should be convened at the level of members of Governments or other specially designated representatives.
99.	The Soviet delegation is authorized to state that the Soviet Union will stand ready to participate in the convening of such a meeting of the Security Council and in its work. We shall be ready to join in this political action with all other States which are permanent members of the Council. We are convinced that there can be no higher duty for those States on which the Charter of the United Nations places a special responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
100.	We appeal to all States represented in the General Assembly to study carefully the draft we have submitted and, on the basis "of it, to adopt-unanimously a resolution which will reflect the firm will of this world Organization to put an end to any use of force in relations between States in violation of the United Nations Charter and to eliminate the threat of nuclear war.
101.	In so doing, the United Nations will be giving strong support to the cause of a further relaxation of international tension, the strengthening of peace and increased mutual understanding in relations between States. This step will be in the interests of all those to whom peace, security and peaceful coexistence are not merely words but a guide for action.
102.	The task of building a lasting peace requires the adoption of effective measures to prevent and avert military conflicts in the future. But it is no less important to put an end to the conflicts which are poisoning the international atmosphere now and to put out the military fires in areas where the right of peoples to be masters of their own destinies is being encroached upon. Lack of progress in settling these problems cannot but cause deep anxiety for the future course of world affairs.
103.	The position of the Soviet Union concerning the war against the Vietnamese people is known to all. The continuation and expansion of the United States intervention in Viet-Nam and other countries of Indochina provoke indignation and condemnation. Probably never before have so many declarations been made containing promises to leave Viet-Nam and to stop the war as have been made recently. And never before has there been such a striking contrast between words and deeds. No matter how much the United States manipulates reports on reductions in the strength of the United States infantry in Viet-Nam in order to appease the public, behind those reports there is in reality an unprecedented expansion of military activities and of their cruelty and inhumanity. No matter how many assurances it gives us that it does not wish to settle the internal affairs of the Viet-Nam people for them, it is in fact pursuing a policy that is aimed at eliminating the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the people's armed forces of liberation and at preserving the Saigon puppet administration as the sole legitimate authority in South Viet-Nam.
104.	One can only wonder why the only correct conclusion has not yet been drawn: namely, that the Vietnamese people cannot be defeated. Their resistance will not be broken either by heavier bombing, the blockading of ports or damage to hydro-technical installations. The Vietnamese people are fighting heroically against aggression and fighting for just aims, in order to be master in their own country. They cannot allow anyone from outside to prescribe a political and social system for them or to impose puppets who uphold interests that are foreign to the Vietnamese people.
105.	A way out can be found, but only through serious negotiations, for which a constructive basis has been provided by the well-known proposals contained in the statements by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam of 11 September 1972 and by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam of 14 September 1972.
106.	The essence of these proposals is clear and simple. The United States of America must respect the right of the Vietnamese people to genuine independence and the right of the people of South Viet-Nam to self-determination. It must stop the war of aggression in Viet-Nam. put an end to the bombing and mining, the blockade and all military activities in Viet-Nam, renounce the policy of the "Vietnamization" of the war, immediately withdraw all United States troops from South Viet-Nam and discontinue its military participation and support of the Saigon puppet regime. In the solution of the internal problem of South Viet-Nam, it is essential to work on the basis of the real situation: two authorities, two armies and other political forces exist there. The basis for the solution of the problem lies in the equality of the parties and a rejection of annexation. To that end it is necessary to set up in South Viet-Nam a provisional Government which has been agreed on nationally on a tripartite basis and which will handle all matters during the transitional period and organize general elections on truly free and democratic lines.
107.	All those who respect the rights of the peoples and all those who have not lost the ability to assess the state of affairs objectively cannot but recognize that these proposals are very well founded, reasonable and logical and that they express the goodwill of the Vietnamese people. They cannot but reject categorically allegations that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam is trying to impose a "Communist regime" on South Viet-Nam.
108.	If the United States of America wants the negotiations in Paris to lead to the restoration of peace, it should reply positively to the statement by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam of 11 September 1972. If, however, it is pursuing some other goal, then the talks in Paris can only lead to a deadlock, the war will continue and the full responsibility for it will rest with the United States of America.
109.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it fully supports the proposals by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam. All those who cherish the ideals of freedom and independence cannot fail to have a sense of solidarity with the Vietnamese people in their struggle.
110.	A solution to the problems of the Middle East must be found. Recent events linked with the new criminal acts of aggression by Israel against Arab countries, including Lebanon, show how serious is the danger and how far the Israeli leaders are going in their reckless policy.
111.	The responsibility which rests with the aggressors is shared by all those who protect them and whose support enables Israel to defy the United Nations and its decisions regarding the elimination of the consequences of the aggression and the restoration of peace in the Middle East. The Israeli leaders must know that an adventurist policy can lead only to apparent success and that in the final analysis it will inevitably entail retribution.
112.	The attempts to appropriate Arab lands and repeated military acts of aggression cannot be tolerated. The United
Nations has the necessary right and the possibilities to put the aggressor in his place.
113.	Only a long-term and just settlement in the Middle East in accordance with the well-known decisions of the United Nations can ensure the peace and security of all-we repeat, all-States in this region. The Israeli troops must be withdrawn from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967.
114.	For the Soviet Union, support for the legitimate demands of the Arab countries, for the United Nations decisions regarding a political settlement of the Middle East conflict, and for the mission of Ambassador Jarring is a policy of principle. We are pursuing it and we shall continue to pursue it unswervingly.
115.	We also support the just struggle of the Arab people of Palestine for the restoration of their inalienable rights, which have been recognized by the United Nations. At the same time, we cannot, of course, condone the acts of terrorism committed by certain elements among the members of the Palestinian movement which have led, among other things, to the recent tragic events in Munich. Their criminal acts also strike a blow at the national interests and aspirations of the Palestinians and are used by the Israeli criminals to cover up their own piratical policy against the Arab peoples.
116.	On the basis of positions of principle, the Soviet Union opposes acts of terrorism which disrupt the diplomatic activities of States and their representatives, transport communications between them and the normal course of international contacts and meetings, and it opposes acts of violence which serve no positive end and cause loss of human life.
117.	Peace will not be truly lasting until an end is put to the arms race, which is one of the main sources of distrust among States and of an increased danger of war. The struggle for disarmament has been going on for a long time The Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community see in the struggle for disarmament one of the main orientations for their foreign policy activities. And this policy will be continued. Some of the things that seemed almost unattainable even 10 or 15 years ago are now reflected in treaties and agreements that have entered into force. These include some which to a certain extent curb the nuclear arms race and reduce the threat of nuclear war: the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373(XXII), annex], the Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the three environments, and others. In addition, the first agreement in history on the elimination of a type of armaments which falls within the category of means of mass destruction, namely, bacteriological and toxin weapons, has now been concluded.
118.	To the sum total of obligations in the field of the limitation of the arms race and disarmament already assumed by the majority of States, one more has recently been added: it concerns those types of armaments which have the greatest destructive force. I am referring to the Soviet-United States strategic arms limitation agreements, signed at Moscow on 26 May 1972. Limiting to the minimum the deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems, the agreements eliminate one of the main motives for unleashing a competition between offensive and defensive missile weapons, the full consequences of which are difficult to predict. By establishing quantitative limits for strategic offensive arms for the first time, the agreements curb the most dangerous trend in the arms race.
119.	The conclusion of the Soviet-United States strategic arms limitation agreements is an important step which will help to reduce the threat of nuclear war and to curb the arms race and which will open up new prospects for progress towards general disarmament. Both sides have agreed to continue the talks with a view to arriving at further agreements in that direction.
120.	Each successful step in the struggle to limit the arms race is important in its own right and is, at the same time, important as a starting point for further efforts. The possibilities for further progress towards the solution of new disarmament problems will increase with each new step on which agreement is reached. Our country has always desired this and we shall spare no effort in continuing to work, together with all other States, to relieve the peoples of the burden of weapons.
121.	The Soviet Union favors the earliest possible solution of the question of the halting of the production of chemical weapons and their destruction, concerning which negotiations are being held in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. It also favors the halting everywhere and by everyone of nuclear weapon tests, including underground tests, the elimination of foreign military bases on alien territory and the establishment of nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world.
122.	States have acquired a great deal of experience in negotiations on disarmament. Various methods have been used and are being used; some of them have fully justified themselves and should be used further. At the same time it can hardly be considered proper that, since the advent of the nuclear age, there has not yet been a single occasion on which States have all gathered together to consider the question of disarmament, which affects all States, socialist and capitalist, large and small, developed and developing, nuclear, and non-nuclear. We can therefore only welcome the fact that the idea of convening a world disarmament conference has become one of the most popular ideas among the States of the world and among world public opinion.
123.	The General Assembly will be considering in a specific manner the question of convening a world disarmament conference [item 26]. Our views on this are well known. We consider that this conference should be a forum at which all countries without exception could present and compare, on an equal basis, their views on the whole range of disarmament questions and come to agreement on practical steps designed to curb the arms race and achieve disarmament. This applies both to weapons of mass destruction and to conventional weapons.
124.	The Soviet Government believes that full advantage should be taken of the opportunities that are now taking shape for the convening of a world disarmament conference. We, for our part, shall continue to do everything in our power to ensure that it is held and is successful.
125.	The question of the strengthening of international security is once again on the agenda of the General Assembly [item 35], This problem is an urgent one and will remain so as long as there are forces at work which are interested not in implementing the principles of the United Nations Charter but in aggravating international tension and suppressing the liberation struggle of the peoples.
126.	Great victories have been won by the peoples in their struggle to eliminate colonial oppression. But this problem has not yet been completely solved and millions of people are still living under the colonial and racist yoke.
127.	The Soviet Union, which was the first country in the history of the world to eradicate national oppression and to ensure genuine prosperity for dozens of nations and nationalities, is irreconcilably opposed to all manifestations of racism, apartheid, colonialism and neocolonialism. Our country opposes all attempts to exert pressure direct or indirect-on States which, after a hard struggle, have won the right to independent development and are now building their national economies, carrying out progressive social and economic reforms and defending their rights to own the natural resources that belong to them. It is the duty of the United Nations to assist those States in every way possible to strengthen their sovereignty and independence.
128.	In international politics it is necessary constantly to take account of the various questions posed by scientific and technological progress and the requirements which such progress is making on an ever-increasing scale in the field of international co-operation. This applies to economic, scientific and technological links, which are becoming ever richer in content. It applies directly to new areas in which States are active, particularly outer space.
129.	It was on the basis of those considerations that the Soviet Union submitted proposals on principles governing the activities of States in outer space, on the conclusion of a treaty concerning the moon and on a number of other matters. At the current session of the General Assembly we are proposing that consideration should be given to the item entitled "Preparation of an international convention on principles governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct television broadcasting" [item 37]. Our purpose in raising this question is to link inseparably, from the very beginning, the use of this new type of space technology to the noble purposes of strengthening peace and friendship among peoples.
130.	The United Nations must promptly acquire a genuinely universal character. Universality could lend the United Nations new strength and enable it to consider world problems with greater results. We therefore see no justification for attempts to create artificial obstacle to the admission of new States to the United Nations.
131.	We consider it necessary to ensure the earliest possible admission to the United Nations of the German Democratic Republic, which is fully entitled to be admitted, as is, of course, the Federal Republic of Germany too. This will be in the interests of the further development of co-operation among States and will be in line with the political situation taking shape in Europe.
132.	No one should cast doubt on the legitimate right to membership in the United Nations of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, which has recently gained its national independence. That State has a legitimate right to become a Member of the United Nations.
133.	In general, the United Nations should rid itself as quickly as possible of the burden of the past, which is still making itself felt in its activities in various spheres. One such sphere is that of questions relating to Korea. This year there are new possibilities before the General Assembly for a constructive approach to the discussion and solution of these questions. Such possibilities had been afforded by the proposal put forward by the non-aligned and socialist States concerning the "Creation of favorable conditions to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea" [A/8752 and Add. 1-10]. But those who in the past created a hotbed of tension in the Korean region and are now trying to maintain it have prevented the General Assembly from considering this proposal at the current session. Everyone understands that an artificial delay in this case can only be harmful and that those States which resort to such methods are showing themselves to be opposed to a just settlement in the interests of the normalization of the situation in Korea and the strengthening of peace in that area.
134.	As to the Soviet Union, our position on the question of Korea has been set out many times. We are in favor of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and support the measures and efforts of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to achieve the independent and peaceful unification of the country.
135.	During the period in which the United Nations has existed, attempts have been made on more than one occasion to destroy its Charter. Whatever the subjective intentions of those who are now raising the question of the review of the United Nations Charter, the objective reality is such that this will entail great dangers for all the activities of the United Nations.
136.	The Soviet Union considers that the interests of all States without exception require that attention should be focused not on a revision of the United Nations Charter but on its strict observance and on fuller utilization of the possibilities it affords.
137.	What is necessary for the United Nations to succeed is the readiness and determination of Member States to act together in the interests of solving the problems facing the Organization. This should make the United Nations a real center for concerted action by nations to achieve common goals, which is an obligation under the United Nations Charter.
138.	Those who seek to divide the United Nations either according to the principle of the size of the territory or
population of States or by classifying them as "rich" and "poor" are doing a disservice not only to the United Nations but also to the cause of preserving and strengthening peace as a whole.
139, That is not what inspired the founders of the United Nations. They wanted the United Nations to be strong and firm in rebuffing aggressors and to be capable of promoting co-operation among all countries irrespective of their size and level of economic development.
| 140. As to the Soviet Union, it has invariably done and will continue to do everything it can to ensure that the United Nations acts precisely in that manner. The policy of the struggle for peace and security is the general policy of the Soviet Union in the international arena. That policy was adopted half a century ago by. the socialist republics which joined together to form the Soviet Union and it is still the policy today.
141.	The twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly is a regular session. But it could become a prominent landmark in the formation of a new system of peaceful relations among States. For this purpose it should focus its attention on the main and most acute political problems brought to the fore by life itself and the whole course of international development.
During the past few years the world has made remarkable advances toward the Charter goal of practicing tolerance and living together in peace with one another as good neighbors.
45.	In 1972 alone, the United States and the Soviet Union have undertaken with each other to do their utmost to avoid military confrontations, to respect the sovereign equality of all countries and to promote conditions in which no country would be subject to outside interference in its internal affairs. The Soviet Union and the United States have also placed precise limitations on our defensive and, at least for the next five years, on our offensive strategic missile systems. The United States and the People's Republic of China have undertaken to broaden the understanding between our peoples, to improve relations between us in the conviction that this would be in the interests of all States, and to oppose any efforts to establish hegemony in Asia or toward division of the world into spheres of influence. The United Kingdom, France, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed on specific provisions to ensure unimpeded movement to and from Berlin by road, rail and waterways. The Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic have opened negotiations on a treaty to normalize their relations. And North and South Korea have intensified their talks on the plight of divided families and have agreed to establish a joint committee to examine problems of unification.
46.	There have been many other accomplishments in pursuance of the Charter's objectives in 1972. I mention these merely to illustrate how old patterns of hostility are being eroded. If continued, this process will in time find positive reflection within the United Nations itself.
47.	We are encouraged, too, by calls in both Eastern and Western capitals for a more secure and open Europe. A step toward realizing this goal would be the creation of a more stable military balance in central Europe through negotiation of mutual and balanced force reductions. We are currently in consultation with our allies, and we believe exploratory talks on this subject could begin within the next several months. We trust they will be productive.
48.	It is equally important to move toward more normal relationships in Europe relationships which have not existed since the end of the Second World War. Toward this objective, a conference on security and co-operation in Europe, if it is carefully and constructively prepared, could play a crucial role. A conference whose over-all effect was to put a stamp of approval upon the rigid divisions of Europe would only prolong the problems of today into yet another generation. On the other hand, a conference which promoted a more normal relationship among all of Europe's States and peoples would reinforce the trend toward better 
relations on other levels. That is why we believe that the conference must take practical steps to promote the freer movement of people, ideas and goods across the breadth of the continent.
49.	We are also now studying alternative approaches for the forthcoming Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. The United States will pursue the following general aims. First, our endeavor will be to negotiate on offensive weapons. In so doing we shall seek to expand the scope of strategic offensive weapons included in the limitations and to establish an equitable balance in the major delivery systems. Second, we shall wish to examine carefully qualitative limitations which could enhance stability. Third, we will aim to reduce levels of strategic arms. As President Nixon said to this General Assembly in 1969, our objective is ".. . not only to limit the build-up of strategic arms, but to reverse it."
50.	Of course we also attach importance to the work of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which has now turned its attention to preventing the accumulation of chemical weapons for use in warfare. Work in that Committee has come a long way towards resolving some of the important and complex issues related to possible significant restraints in this area. The United States is intensifying its study of all proposals and we look forward to responding to them at an early date.
51.	It is clear from what I have said that the United States believes that a practical step-by-step approach is the best way to achieve genuine progress m disarmament.
52.	Let me take note of other areas in the world in which progress needs to be accelerated.
53.	In Africa, this Assembly must continue to champion the efforts of all peoples of all races to secure human dignity, self-determination and social justice. The United States will continue to lend its full support to all practical efforts to those ends.
54.	In Latin America, while growth rates in recent years have far exceeded Alliance for Progress targets, economic development is still a primary concern and a primary need. The United States Government remains committed to a substantial program of economic assistance, particularly through regional organizations. And, in recognition of the importance of trade to development, we are actively supporting the participation of Latin American and other developing countries in the coming negotiations on a new international monetary system.
55.	In Viet-Nam the United States has reduced its armed forces from about 550,000 to 35,000. President Nixon has proposed a cease-fire in all of IndoChina under international supervision, an exchange of prisoners of war, and a total withdrawal of United States forces. Under this proposal the political future of Viet-Nam could be negotiated by the VietNamese themselves. President Nixon has also pledged a major effort to assist both VietNamese States in post-war reconstruction. In such circumstances it is hard to understand why the other side persists in believing that the war should be continued.  
 
56.	And in the Middle East, the momentum towards a peace settlement must be regained. We should take note of two positive elements. First, the cease-fire is now in its twenty-sixth month. Second, the climate for a settlement seemed to improve very much as 1972 progressed. We must, however, recognize that the Munich killings have set off deplorable patterns of action and reaction and I emphasize that the United States believes that both action and reaction are deplorable-and that these patterns have seriously clouded the prospects for early progress. Nevertheless, neither side has permanently closed the door to future diplomatic efforts. We believe that the forces favoring a peaceful settlement still have the upper hand. Our task in this Assembly, our task individually as representatives of nations, is to do everything possible to see that the forces that favor a peaceful settlement are supported.
57.	The "no war, no peace" situation which prevails now in the Middle East does not and will not serve the interest of anyone in the area. Certainly a stable, just and durable peace agreement based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967) continues to be the objective of the United States. But this, we believe, cannot be achieved without the beginning of a genuine negotiating process between the parties concerned. No settlement imposed from the outside can long endure. Negotiation is not capitulation. Negotiating activity among long-standing antagonists across the world is occurring at present. Why should the Middle East be an exception? When North Korea can talk to South Korea, when East Germans can talk to West Germans, when Indians and Pakistanis can meet in the immediate aftermath of war and prior to the withdrawal of troops, then surely the Middle East should be no exception to the general rule that differences should be reconciled through an active dialog between the parties concerned.
58.	Let me hasten to add that we do not hold that the process need necessarily begin through direct negotiations. We understand that other diplomatic avenues exist. Ambassador Jarring remains available to help the parties negotiate the terms of a peace settlement in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
59.	Another-and in our view the most promising-first step would be proximity talks leading to an interim Suez Canal agreement. What would such an agreement do? It would separate the combatants, restore to Egypt operation of and authority over the Suez Canal, involve some Israeli withdrawal, preserve the cease-fire, and provide momentum for further efforts towards an over-all settlement.
60.	It is encouraging that both sides agree that such an interim agreement would be not an end in itself but rather the first step towards an over-all peace settlement. Such a practical test of peace on the ground would be in the interests of both sides, and the United States remains prepared to assist in achieving it, if that would be helpful to the parties. Moreover, an over-all settlement in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) must meet the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Governments on both sides as well as of the Palestinian people.
61.	In considering some of the great political developments of the past few years, one cannot help but observe as the Brazilian Foreign Minister has just done- that the United Nations has not been directly involved. This fact has often been cited in attacks against it.
62.	We are all aware, of course, that the Charter does not intend the United Nations to be the center of all diplomacy. Still, as the Secretary-General puts it temperately in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization, . . in the political sphere the Organization's place is . . . uncertain" [A/8701/Add.l, p. 1]. With that thought most of us would agree.
63.	As we look to the future, it is well to keep in mind that it is not so much in institutional reforms-and we are certainly not opposed to such reforms-as in national wills that the solutions to the problems must be sought. The future of this body, the future of the United Nations, depends on national wills, on the ability of nations to work together, accommodating themselves to each other's problems, if you will. Yet to the extent that better work methods and more realistic institutional arrangements will help, we also must bring them about.
64.	For example, we believe that for the Security Council to maintain its influence and authority, ways must be found to ensure the representation of States, other than the present permanent members and I am speaking about States whose resources and influence are of major importance in world affairs. The absence of Japan, for example, is notable in a body designed to engage the responsibilities of the world's principal Powers.
65.	We believe in greater recourse to fact-finding commissions, to good offices and to quiet preventive diplomacy.
66.	We believe that the increase in bloc voting, often without independent regard for the merits of the issue, is leading increasingly to unrealistic results.
67.	The discussion of the United Nations weaknesses in dealing with political problems has reached its peak just at a time when its contribution to economic development and scientific and technological co-operation is making great strides.
68.	Long before economic development became a major matter of international concern, the United Nations initiated efforts to reduce the economic gap between developed and developing countries. From the start the United States has supported that effort. It is an encouraging fact that during each of the last three years the per capita growth in production has finally achieved a higher rate in the less developed than in the developed world. Still, as the recent World Bank report showed, there are serious problems of income distribution, high rates of infant mortality, low rates of literacy, serious malnutrition and widespread ill health.  The United States intends to continue to devote serious efforts to solving such problems through the improved United Nations Development Program, and through other channels of economic assistance. 
69.	United Nations activities related to science and technology are also having an impact.
70.	The landmark United Nations Conference on the Human Environment has proposed a world monitoring of levels of pollution in water, air, earth and living beings, measuring levels of specific chemicals, such as hydrocarbons which poison the air of the world's cities. To launch this and other important programs without delay, we urge this Assembly to establish the secretariat and the proposed $100 million fund for the environment.
71.	The United Nations can also make a substantial contribution in the fight against drug traffic, particularly heroin traffic. A revised Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs will give the International Narcotics Control Board authority to reduce poppy cultivation and opium production in countries shown to be sources of that traffic. The United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control is helping States to improve their drug administrations, to train police and customs officials, to develop other means of livelihood for opium farmers, and to prevent and treat drug addiction. As President Nixon said last week, Every Government which wants to move against narcotics should know that it can count on our country for our wholehearted support and assistance in doing so'.
72.	Just last week the Secretary-General announced that 1974 will be the World Population Year and the time, of a major United Nations population conference. It is our hope that the conference will lead to the setting of concrete goals of reduced population growth.
73.	The General Assembly at this session will review the progress of its sea-bed Committee? in preparing for a conference on the law of the sea [item 36]. It is important for us to use this opportunity to help make the oceans an example of international co-operation rather than an area of future conflict.
74.	Such activities as pollution, narcotics, the sea-bed and population control-most of them connected with new applications of science and technology will increase in importance in the future. We believe that they must acquire a greater focus and priority in the United Nations.
75.	I have spoken today about some of the United Nations weaknesses as well as some of its strengths because I believe we must look at this Organization realistically so that we may contribute to its future prospects. In that spirit, the United States will continue to support the United Nations. We remain committed to making it stronger and more effective.
76.	During this session the United Nations will have an opportunity and an obligation to take action of vital importance to the international community. The United Nations must deal effectively with criminal acts of international terrorism which have so tragically touched the lives of people everywhere, without warning, without discrimination, without regard for the sanctity of human life. 
77.	Twenty-four years ago the United Nations, in its Universal Declaration of Human Rights, affirmed that every human being has the right to 'life, liberty, and the security of person'. Yet what is happening in the world today to that security?
78.	In Sweden, 90 people boarding an international flight are held hostage and held for ransom by Croatian terrorists.
79.	In London an Israeli diplomat is killed by a bomb sent through the mail. In New York colleagues in the United Nations narrowly avert a similar fate.
80.	In Cyprus 95 persons of many nationalities narrowly escape death on a Venezuelan plane when a bomb is discovered just in time.
81.	In New York shots are fired into the apartment of a member of the Soviet mission where children are playing.
82.	In Munich 11 Olympic athletes are kidnapped and murdered in a day of horror witnessed throughout the world.
83.	In Czechoslovakia a Czechoslovak pilot is killed and his plane hijacked and diverted to West Germany.
84.	In Israel 26 tourists, 16 of them American citizens, are slaughtered in an insane attack at an international airport.
85.	In this year alone 25 airliners from 13 countries have been successfully hijacked, and 26 other attempts have been frustrated. In this year alone 140 airplane passengers and crew have been killed-140 have been killed-and 97 wounded in acts of terrorism. In five years 27 diplomats from 11 countries have been kidnapped and three assassinated. In New York, Arab and other missions have been threatened with violence.
86.	Is there anyone here in this Assembly who has not had the occasion, as he has journeyed by plane from around the globe, to be concerned about his own personal safety? Is there any one of you here who has not wondered what terrorist might strike next, or where he might strike?
87.	The issue is not an issue of war-not war between States, not civil war or revolutionary war. The issue is not the strivings of people to achieve self-determination and independence. Rather, it is whether millions of air travelers can continue to fly in safety each year. It is whether a person who opens his mail can open it without fear of being blown up. It is whether diplomats can safely carry out their duties. It is whether international meetings, like the Olympics, like this General Assembly, can proceed without the ever-present threat of violence. In short, the issue is whether the vulnerable lines of international communications the airways and the mails, diplomatic discourse and international meetings can continue, without occupation, to bring nations and peoples together. All who have a stake in this have a stake in decisive action to suppress these demented acts of terrorism.
88.	We are all aware that, aside from the psychotic and the purely felonious, many criminal acts of terrorism derive from political origins. We all recognize that issues such as self-determination must continue to be addressed seriously by the international community. But political passion, however deeply held, cannot be a justification for criminal violence against innocent persons. Certainly the terrorist acts I have cited are totally unacceptable attacks against the very fabric of international order. They must be universally condemned, whether we consider the cause the terrorists invoke noble or ignoble, legitimate or illegitimate.
89.	We must take effective steps to prevent the hijacking of international civil aircraft.
90.	We must take effective steps to prevent murderous attacks and the kidnapping of diplomats.
91.	We must take effective steps to prevent terrorists from sending bombs through the mails, or murdering innocent civilians. Just a few hours ago, I am pleased to note, the International Criminal Police Organization [INTERPOL], by a vote of 58 to none, condemned such acts and decided to gear up its machinery to help cope with this very difficult problem.
92.	The United States welcomes the initiative the Secretary-General has taken to place this matter on the agenda [A/8791 and Add.l]. Two years ago, before the problem had reached its present dimensions, the General Assembly took the first step, the step that must guide us now. In the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolution 2625 (XXV), annex], which so strongly-keep this in mind reaffirmed the right of self-determination, the General Assembly also unanimously declared that each nation has a duty to refrain from assisting or in any way participating in
"... terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in organized activities within its territory directed towards the commission of such acts..."
93.	The time has come to make that obligation, which this General Assembly solemnly undertook, more specific and more meaningful. In the past two years the international community has taken certain steps in the field of hijacking. Conventions have been concluded prescribing severe penalties for the hijacking and sabotage of aircraft and requiring States to extradite or prosecute hijackers and saboteurs. We urge all States which have not ratified these conventions to do so.
94.	We are now faced with an urgent need to deter and punish international crimes of violence not only in the air but throughout our societies. The United States urges this Assembly to act, and act at once, to meet this challenge.
95.	First, the draft treaty to prosecute or extradite those who attack or kidnap diplomats or officials of foreign governments or international organizations should be completed and opened for signature at this session of the Assembly. The draft articles on the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic agents and other internationally protected persons are already before the Assembly in the report of the International Law Commission [A/8710/Rev.l, chap. II, sect. C]. 
96.	Second, a treaty providing for suspension of all air service to countries which fail to punish or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft should be promptly completed and opened for signature. We repeat that such a treaty should provide for the suspension of all air service to countries which fail to prosecute or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft. It is our view that a nation which provides a safe haven for hijackers should be outlawed by the international community. A draft of a treaty to do this has already been considered by a sub-committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization. To achieve early action, the process of deliberation should be accelerated and a diplomatic conference to complete the treaty should be called without delay.
97.	Third, a new treaty on the export of international terrorism should be concluded and opened for signature as soon as possible. It should include universal condemnation of, and require the prosecution or extradition of, persons who kill, seriously injure or kidnap innocent civilians in a foreign State for the purpose of harming or forcing concessions from a State or from an international organization. To complete such a treaty, we believe a diplomatic conference should be convened as soon as possible. The United States Government is today circulating the first draft of such a treaty.  We urge all governments to give it their earnest consideration. We refer to this as a first draft, because we are sure that many suggestions for changes will be made. We are perfectly flexible on the form of the treaty, but we think this is a subject that deserves our earnest attention.
98.	We have also embodied these various proposals in a draft resolution which we submitted to the Secretariat this morning for distribution. 
99.	These actions would mark a major advance in the struggle against international terrorism. Surely, it is in the collective interest of every nation represented in this hall to arrest the growing assault on international order with which we are all faced. Let this General Assembly be the driving force for the specific and vigorous steps that are required. Let it prove that the United Nations can meet this test. Let it show people everywhere that this Organization, here, now, is capable of the concrete action necessary to bring us closer to a world free of violence-the kind of world which is the great goal of the United Nations Charter.
Mr. President, I am glad to have the opportunity today of extending to you, on behalf of the South African delegation, my congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly. At the same time, I should like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Malik of Indonesia, who so successfully guided our deliberations during the twenty- sixth session of the Assembly.
2.	May I also pay my respects to our new Secretary-General and wish him every success in the discharge of his heavy responsibilities?
3.	Change is inevitable, and nowhere is this more true than in the field of international relations. We contemplate today a world different from the world that existed at the time of the last session of the General Assembly, for the past year has witnessed changes of more than ordinary significance, including the evolution of what may be termed a new relationship among the major Powers. It is true that the legacy of the Second World War, the polarization of the nations of the world into different power blocs, is still with us today more than a quarter of a century later. But recently, important developments have begun to ease at least some of the tensions of the past.
4.	These developments have followed a series of initiatives on the part of several of the major Powers, leading, it would seem, to a degree of reconciliation and a lessening of animosity between some of them. We find ourselves in a new situation, and axiomatically a new situation brings with it the prospect of new opportunities. There is, in particular, the promise of better understanding and theft- fore of a more peaceful world.
5.	We in South Africa hope that this promise will be realized. We welcome any development which tends to lessen international tension and which leans in the direction of defusing, rather than accentuating, international confrontation-confrontation which in this day and age could lead to catastrophe for the world. We welcome the approach of the major Powers which, after all these years, are moving increasingly, albeit cautiously, from a posture of mutual recrimination towards one of negotiation. We are glad that the negotiations which have already taken place provide support for the concept of the peaceful settlement of disputes between nations, large and small.
6.	What conclusions are to be drawn by an onlooker from these developments? In the first place, it is striking that, although the internal political and social systems of the major Powers are often widely divergent, this has not deterred them from reaching an accommodation with one another on the issues which have hitherto divided them. None has found it necessary to change its own system or to try to impose such an adjustment on others. It has, in fact, been specifically stated in communiques and conference documentation that essential differences in ideology, social systems and even foreign policies should be no bar to the conduct of relations between States, based on such universal principles as respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, non-aggression against States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. It was also recognized that international disputes should be settled without resort to the threat or use of force.
7.	In the second place we should note that, despite the significance of the recent developments to which I have referred, the progress so far made is unfortunately only marginal in comparison with the awesome magnitude and complexity of the problems that still remain. These problems, which vitally affect not only the larger nations but every nation in the world, include such issues as economic development, the preservation of our global environment, famine and over-population, disarmament, and so on. Any advance in these spheres is encouraging and it is indeed gratifying to acknowledge in passing that a measure of progress has this year been recorded in some of them. It is regrettable, however, that even on such cardinal matters as the environment and economic development, political considerations, for reasons frequently not even remotely relevant to the central issue, are allowed to intrude into the proceedings.
A/PV.2046
8.	How are the smaller nations affected by the new fluidity in international relations? It is clear that the developments in the past year or two involving the major Powers have acted as a catalyst for the reassessment of many existing political situations. No country can wisely disregard them altogether. It seems to me, furthermore, that the smaller Powers now have an incentive to show that 
they, too, can relax tension among themselves. The lesson is that consultation and negotiation are more rewarding for all the parties concerned than confrontation leading to possible conflict, destruction and suffering; the lesson is that differences in internal social systems are no deterrent to accommodation between the parties; the lesson, furthermore, is that an essential prerequisite to a climate of mutua1 trust and confidence, leading to the settlement of diffe  ences, is acceptance and implementation of the principles of non-aggression, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States and peaceful coexistence. It is my hope that the smaller States will heed this lesson, strive for cooperation and thus lay the basis for the progress and advancement of their peoples.
9.	In the face of the great problems with which the world as a whole is confronted, and with particular reference to me immense task of development which faces the smaller developing countries, none of us can afford the luxury of international bickering and dispute, which distract our attention from the fundamental problems and detract from our ability to solve them.
10.	Let us in this regard briefly consider the record of the year which has just gone by. We find that progress has in fact been erratic. In some areas improvement has been registered; in others, however, an atmosphere of armed hostility survives in the aftermath of a regional war; elsewhere we have witnessed military coups d'etat, assassination attempts, massive loss of life in communal conflicts, hijacking and terrorism in its different manifestations. Only some of these activities have received the attention of this Organization. This is the darker side of the picture, but I mention it because these are activities which gravely undermine international order and progress, and history will harshly judge the international community and this Organization if they continue unchecked. In the economic and social fields progress has also been uneven and the world has had to live through a further period of financial crisis and instability. It is clear that progress will not come easily.
11.	Against this background of shifting international attitudes and uneven accomplishment, may I sketch some of the principles governing South Africa's approach to international intercourse. As a starting-point, let me reiterate that we fully subscribe to the principle of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. We shall continue to apply this principle in the conduct of our relations with our neighbors in southern Africa, where the principle has most relevance for us. We have given solemn undertakings in this regard. Our aim is to exist peacefully with each of them to out mutual advantage. We have no aggressive intentions or expansionist ambitions.
12.	We believe also in the peaceful settlement of disputes, which is the fundamental message of the Charter, and we reject the use of violence and force as a means to an end. Instead we favor dialog and negotiation, contact and communication. We can point in this regard to our contacts with the Secretary-General on the future of South West Africa. We remain ready to enter into dialog with anyone who reciprocates our genuine interest therein. Let me make it clear once again today that we are prepared to discuss even South Africa's internal policies in the course of such a dialog. My country practices and lives dialog and sees in it a positive approach to world problems and an effective way of promoting peaceful coexistence and world harmony.
13.	Accordingly we have on several occasions shown our readiness to seek solutions to current problems within this framework. I am convinced that the development of dialog between South Africa and African nations can lead only to improved relations to the benefit of all. There is already evidence that this is so. I may mention in this regard, for example, the historic state visit of the President- for-life of Malawi to South Africa during 1971, which was followed by an equally successful return visit by the South African State President earlier this year. We believe that reciprocal visits of this nature, conducted at all levels, are important from the point of view of breaking down prejudices and increasing understanding.
14.	Then there is the question of internal dialog. It has been asserted in some quarters that South Africa should conduct a dialog with its own people before attempting to engage in a dialog with independent States, particularly those of Africa. This assertion appears to be based, as in the case of so many attitudes towards South Africa, on a fundamental misconception of the situation. There is, in fact, a continuing dialog with the various peoples in South Africa, which has been and is being conducted at all levels, from the lowest to the highest. The self-governing nations emerging in South Africa are producing leaders and representatives who are empowered by their own people to conduct a dialog at the highest level with the South African Government and this they have been doing. Ministers and officials of my Government are in constant touch with ministers and their officials in the homelands, all of which enjoy some form of self-government. Last year the South African Prime Minister himself conferred with leaders of all the different peoples of the Republic, some of which, namely the Xhosas and the Zulus, total as many as 4 million each, and these meetings have continued this year. Moreover, these leaders travel overseas extensively and exchange views and ideas with a wide cross-section of world opinion. What is all this, if it is not dialogue in the truest sense of the word?
15.	It is a strange phenomenon that dialogue in any form should be discouraged in this Organization. The Organization, whose raison d'etre is the maintenance of peace in the world, is the largest and most universal forum of the community of nations for the exchange of points of view. Implicit in the concept of the United Nations is that disputes are better settled by words than by force. It is therefore inexplicable and unforgiveable that the membership should actively or even obliquely support in any way programmes of force, violence and terror, while at the same time disavowing dialogue. We hope that all Members will adopt a positive approach to dialogue and that dialogue itself will not become a source of discord among the nations of the world. It would be tragic if it were to be used by some for divisive purposes to split us into opposing groups or blocs.
16.	The repudiation of dialogue leads to reliance upon uglier means of settling differences, none more ugly and abhorrent than terrorism. Recent incidents of terrorism have horrified the world. But terrorism is not new. It has existed for years. During the past decade or more, indiscriminate terrorism has spread to virtually every corner of the globe, bringing in its wake suffering, destruction and death. The terrorist outrages committed at Munich and elsewhere have been widely condemned, here and elsewhere. This is very proper, but it is not enough. Terrorism is a universal evil which must be stamped out everywhere. There can be no differentiation between types of terrorism. In all its forms it is a disease which respects no frontier. None that ignores it abroad is immune to it at home.
17.	This Organization in particular must be consistent. It cannot shirk its duty and discard its Charter in regard to terrorism. We must speak with one ',oice on this scourge, without equivocation, because terrorism, no matter where it may erupt or what its current guise, cannot shed its essential characteristics: it is beyond the pale of order, of law, of decency, of society and of humanity. We cannot for selfish or regional reasons move to stamp it out in one form or in one region, while encouraging it in another. It is obvious that this merely guarantees its survival and its spread. And yet, the records of this Assembly abound in expressions serving as encouragement to those committed to violence as a means of achieving their political objectives. Furthermore, at the very time of the Munich outrage, plans were openly being laid for stepping up terrorism in Africa. Terrorism will survive so long as this and other Organizations continue not only to condone the use of force and violence as a means to an end but, in certain circumstances, to support and even to subsidize it.
18.	We deplore this attitude. South Africa cannot and will not compromise on the issue of terrorism. We have not hesitated to take drastic action against it in the past, and we shall fight it with all means at our disposal in the future. I much regret, I might add, that even while the Secretary- General and the South African Government are engaged in discussions on the future of South West Africa, with progress already registered, some individuals and organizations, and even some Governments represented here, should still openly advocate the use of force and violence in that Territory.
19.	So far as the contacts between the Secretary-General and my Government are concerned, this is obviously not the opportune moment for me to speak on them at any length. There is no denying that the gap to be bridged is wide and deep, and it cannot be expected that a solution will be found overnight.. Time, perseverance and patience will clearly be required. Nevertheless, we sincerely hope that goodwill, mutual trust and understanding will prevail on all sides and that in this atmosphere progress will be possible. I want again to reaffirm that, so far as South West Africa is concerned, the South African Government is firmly committed to the principle of self-determination and independence with all that this implies, and we shall continue to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the search for a solution.
20.	.In the meantime, South Africa is continuing to assist in the development of the Territory and the advancement of its peoples in all spheres so that they may achieve the declared goal of self-determination and independence as rapidly as possible. During the last two generations we have made a considerable contribution to the Territory's development. I may also mention that, by virtue of South African legislation, all revenue collected in South West Africa, including taxation on foreign investments, is applied there exclusively for the benefit of all the inhabitants. In addition, South Africa itself annually contributes directly and indirectly a substantial amount to the Territory's development. In 1972 this additional contribution by the south African Government, on current account alone, is estimated at $80 million, an amount which very nearly equals South West Africa's own estimated revenue receipts. We shall be more than prepared to continue to assist the peoples of the Territory after independence, if that is what they desire; and we are in a good position to do so, because of our close association with South West Africa over many years, our geographic proximity and our links in numerous fields; but it will be clear that our assistance then cannot be on the same scale as it is today. Even now the growing needs of the indigenous peoples can hardly be met from local and South African resources combined.
21.	After independence, therefore, as in the case of most newly independent States, they will inevitably continue to look beyond their borders for assistance.
22.	In all the circumstances, we simply cannot understand the motives of those who discourage new foreign investment or call for the cessation of existing foreign investment in South West Africa. It cannot be in the interest of the peoples of the Territory to deprive them of the contribution to their welfare which overseas investors make in the context of their business operations there, for it is the inhabitants themselves who gain from such investments. And it must surely be clear that, the closer we move in the direction of self-determination and independence, the more important foreign investment becomes in developing the essential economic launching-pad which new States need in order to get off to a sound start. An attempt to retard the economic growth of the Territory simply means a prolongation of its economic dependence upon others. I would ask those discouraging, or advocating a withdrawal of, investments in South West Africa at least to take account of the wishes of the inhabitants of the Territory, and to cease arrogating to themselves exclusively the privilege of deciding what is in their best interests.
23.	From what I have said today, it should be clear that South Africa has adopted an approach to its problems and its relations with other countries which is not out of tune with the current trend of negotiation and detente now influencing international relations. This applies both to the conduct of South Africa's internal affairs and to the wider international sphere.
24.	I have in mind, in this regard, relations, with our neighbors as well as with the United Nations. We subscribe to this policy because we are convinced that, provided our efforts are not undermined by external influences, it will promote peace in our part of the world.
25.	It should not be necessary to commend a similar approach to Members of this Organization, since that approach is implicit in the Charter. But a return to the Charter in this respect might lead the Organization to higher levels of achievement in the pursuit of its principal objective: international peace A number of important changes have taken place in the world situation since the twenty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly. A series of new victories has been achieved by the Asian, African and Latin American peoples in their struggle to win and safeguard national independence. Countries of the third world are getting united on a wider scale to oppose the super-Power policies of aggression, expansion and war; they are playing an ever greater role in international affairs. Meanwhile, some important events have taken place in international relations. In the East, the leaders of China and the United States have held talks after more than 20 years' suspension of relations between the two countries. They have made clear the differences of principle between the two sides and agreed that countries, regardless of their social systems, should handle their relations on the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, non- aggression against other States, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence, and that international disputes should be settled on this basis, without resorting to the use or threat of force. Recently, Prime Minister Tanaka of Japan paid a visit to China, and the two sides have reached an important agreement on the normalization of the relations between China and Japan, thus realizing the long-standing aspirations of the two peoples and opening up a new chapter in the relations between the two countries. In the West, the Soviet Union and the United States held summit talks and signed a number of bilateral agreements on co-operation in the fields of science and technology, culture, education and health. The European Economic Community has grown and expanded. In the Middle East, far-reaching progress has been made in the Arab nation's struggle to free itself from super-Power control. The struggle of the people of various countries and the changes in international relations have helped in varying degrees to promote the relaxation of international tension.
141.	However, it cannot but be noted that there is no essential change in the situation in which a super-Power is pushing expansionism by all means in contending for world hegemony. The acute and complicated contradictions and struggles between imperialism on the one hand and the oppressed nations and peoples on the other have not abated.
142.	To this day, the United States war of aggression against Indochina is still going on. Because of the meddling by the Soviet Union, the turmoil on the South Asian subcontinent has failed to subside. The stalemate of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East remains. In Europe, with the two military blocs confronting each other, there is no genuine security and cannot be any. Colonialism of different forms persists in many parts of the world. The sovereignty and independence of many small and medium- sized countries are still being infringed and their national resources plundered. Twenty-seven years have elapsed since the end of the Second World War. There are still foreign military bases of various kinds and large numbers of foreign troops on the territories of many countries. The arms race between the two super-Powers is being stepped up unceasingly, seriously menacing the independence and security of the peoples of the world. The whole Western world is in the grip of financial and monetary crises, which have aggravated its various contradictions. In these circumstances, how can the world not be in turmoil? The world is still in the process of great turbulence, great division and great realignment. The struggle between aggression and anti-aggression, interference and anti-interference, subversion and anti-subversion, control and anti- control is bound to continue for a long time.
143.	The Chinese delegation holds that the people of all countries must not be deluded by certain temporary and superficial phenomena of detente at the present time and develop a false sense of security. While striving for world peace and the progress of mankind, we must maintain sufficient vigilance and make necessary preparations against the danger of new wars of aggression any imperialism may launch.
144.	To end the war in Indochina as soon as possible is the most urgent matter for easing the tension in the Far East. At present, the people of the whole world, including the American people, strongly condemn the United States Government for its wanton bombing, mining and blockading of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and resolutely demand that it immediately stop all its acts of aggression against Viet-Nam and the whole of Indochina and withdraw all the armed forces of the United States and its followers, so that the peoples of the three Indochinese countries may solve their own problems independently, free from any foreign interference. Fair and reasonable ways for the peaceful settlement of the Viet-Nam and Indochina question have been put forward in the seven- point proposal of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the elaboration on its two key points and in the Joint Declaration of the Summit Conference of the IndoChinese peoples in April 1970. Of late, the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam issued a statement on 11 September demanding that the United States cease its policy of "VietNamizing" the war and supporting the Saigon puppet regime, and pointing out that a solution to the problem of South Viet-Nam must proceed from the actual situation in South Viet-Nam, in which there exist two administrations and two armies as well as other political forces, and stating that a provisional government of national concord composed of three equal segments must be formed to take charge of affairs in the period of transition. This proposal is fair and reasonable. It shows that the VietNamese side has no intention of imposing a Communist regime on South VietNam. Rejection of this proposal precisely bespeaks the attempt to continue to impose the Nguyen Van Thieu puppet regime on the South VietNamese people. The Chinese Government fully sup-ports the just stand of the VietNamese people and of the three IndoChinese peoples.
145.	The three IndoChinese countries are close neighbors of China, and the three Indochinese peoples are the Chinese people's brothers. We are duty bound to support them in their just struggle against foreign aggression, and we will never interfere in their internal affairs. On behalf of the Chinese Government, I once again solemnly declare from this rostrum: so long as the war in IndoChina goes on in whatever form, the Chinese Government and people, not flinching from the greatest national sacrifice, will firmly support the three IndoChinese peoples in fighting to the end.
146.	It is necessary to point out here that the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia, under the leadership of Samdech Norodom Sihanouk, Head of State of Cambodia, is the sole legal representative of the Khmer people and effectively controls nearly 90 per cent of Cambodian territory. The Lon Nol regime is imposed on the Khmer people by foreign forces, and it is illegal from the very beginning. The representatives of the Lon Nol clique have no right to occupy Cambodia's seat in the United Nations. More and more countries in the world have recognized this reality and truth. The Chinese delegation holds that the United Nations should rectify the present unreasonable and illegal state of affairs and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia its lawful rights.
147.	On 4 July this year, initiated and promoted by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, North and South Korea reached agreement on the principles and steps for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, thus strengthening the confidence of the 40 million and more Korean people, who have been divided for 27 years, in the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland. The Chinese Government and people warmly welcome this agreement. Nineteen years have elapsed since the armistice in Korea. The Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew from Korea as early as 1958. But in South Korea there still remain a so-called "United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea" and a so-called "United Nations Command". This is an anachronism. The combination of the two implies a threat to North Korea. This is an underlying factor making for the continuation of tension on the Korean peninsula. Now, North and South Korea have agreed to achieve gradually the reunification of Korea independently and by peaceful means without reliance upon foreign forces or interference by them. Why should the United Nations keep these two stumbling blocks in front of the Korean people? The General Assembly should discuss the proposed item "Creation of favorable conditions to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea" [A/8752 and Add.1-10] and adopt a pertinent resolution to remove these two stumbling blocks. It is regrettable, however, that the discussion of this fair and reasonable proposal has been deferred to next year. To dodge a problem is no solution. It is argued that the discussion should be postponed to next year because North and South Korea are now in contact. This argument is untenable. One may ask, will there be no more contacts between North and South Korea next year? This is obviously a pretext. A postponement is neither in the interests of the Korean people nor conducive to relaxation of tension on the Korean peninsula. We hope that the countries concerned will reconsider their stand.
148.	Now I wish to speak on the question of the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent. We all remember that last December, in this very hall, the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session [2003rd meeting] adopted by the overwhelming majority of 104 votes a resolution calling for cease-fire and troop withdrawal by India and Pakistan [resolution 2793 (XXVI)]. Subsequently, the Security Council also adopted, by 13 votes in favor and 2 abstentions, resolution 307 (1971) which demands a ceasefire, troop withdrawal and release of prisoners of war by all those concerned. However, while the relevant resolutions of the United Nations were not yet implemented, the Soviet Government and its followers raised at the Security Council last August the question of the admission of "Bangladesh" into the United Nations.  In disregard of the reasonable demand of many countries to postpone the consideration of the question, they insisted on a vote to compel China to use the veto. China's stand for postponing the consideration of this question does not mean that we are fundamentally opposed to the admission of "Bangladesh" into the United Nations. China cherishes friendly sentiments for the people of East Bengal and has no prejudice against Mr. Mujibur Rahman. We stand for postponing the consideration of this question, in order to promote a reconciliation among the parties concerned and the implementation of the United Nations resolutions, which are the very immediate concern. However, the Soviet Government has hurriedly pressed for the admission of "Bangladesh" to the United Nations. This is definitely not aimed at helping "Bangladesh", but at forcing China to use the veto, maintaining and aggravating the tensions among the parties concerned on the subcontinent and whitewashing its foul act of supporting the Indian Government in dismembering Pakistan last year. But its attempt will not succeed. If it had been national self-determination, it should have been the people of East Bengal solving their problems by themselves. Why should Indian troops have invaded East Pakistan? And why should the 90,000 and more Pakistani war prisoners and civilians have been taken to India?
149.	After the admission of "Bangladesh" has been vetoed, certain people are trying to bypass the Security Council and refer the question to the General Assembly for discussion. This is clearly done with ulterior motives. This will in no way help promote a reconciliation among the parties concerned on the subcontinent, nor will it reflect honor on the country inciting such a move. China stands firm on principles. China considers that the question of whether or not reasonable United Nations resolutions supported by the overwhelming majority of its Members are implemented is a matter of principle affecting what direction the United Nations is heading for. And on matters of principle China will never retreat.
150.	The present situation of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East is solely created by the two super-Powers for their respective interests. Taking advantage of this situation, these two super-Powers are using Arab countries' territories and sovereignty and the Palestinian people's right to existence as so many stakes with which to strike political deals. The United States is openly supporting the aggression by Israeli Zionism. The other super-Power claims to "support and assist" the Arab people in their struggle against aggression. Has it supported and assisted them? It has indeed sold them no small amount of weapons. But strangely, the weapons supplied are not allowed to be used. Is this not asking people to buy scrap iron? Moreover, it demands privileges and bases, and even attempts to subvert their Government. What kind of "friend" is this? It is more dangerous than an open enemy.
151.	However, recent developments show that the heroic Arab people will not allow others to ride on their backs and lord it over them for long. They have taken determined actions to shake off super-Power domination. This commands admiration. Do not believe the sensational nonsense deliberately spread by a super-Power that no counter-attack should be made against Israel's armed aggression for that would spark a world war. That is meant to scare people. It has been borne out repeatedly by the history of the 20 years and more since the Second World War. We believe that, so long as they strengthen their unity and persevere in their struggle, the Arab countries subjected to aggression are fully capable of recovering their sacred territories and the injured Palestinian people of regaining their national rights.
152.	The Chinese Government has always opposed assassination and the hijacking of individuals as a means of waging political struggles and is also opposed to adventurist acts of terrorism by individuals or by a handful of people divorced from the masses, because they are harmful to the development of the cause of national liberation and people's revolution. But we strongly condemn Israel for the recent barbarous aggression and massacres it has committed against Lebanon, Syria and other Arab countries on the pretext of the "Munich incident". The Chinese people will always stand together with the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their just struggle against aggression.
153.	The situation in the Mediterranean is closely related to that in the Middle East and Europe. In contending for hegemony, the two super-Powers have dispatched large numbers of war vessels to the Mediterranean and set up many military bases there, posing a threat to the security of the countries around the sea. Now more and more Mediterranean countries have raised their voices for "a Mediterranean of the Mediterranean countries", and demanded the withdrawal of foreign fleets from the Mediterranean. Their demand is entirely just and the Chinese Government and people firmly support it.
154.	It is fully understandable that the peoples of the European countries, who have gone through two world wars, are all concerned for the peace and security of Europe. Twenty-seven years have passed since the end of the Second World War, and yet many European countries are still under the military control of one super-Power or the other, with large numbers of foreign troops stationed on their territories. Making use of the confrontation of the two military blocs, each of the two super-Powers is trying hard to keep its allies under control and undermine the opposite side. In these circumstances, how can one speak of genuine peace and security for the people of the European countries? What calls for attention is the fact that there are now some people who, capitalizing on the European people's eager desire for peace, are trying hard by various tactics to cover up the reality that European peace and security are still under threat, and to create the false impression of a European detente and "all quiet on the western front", so as to attain their ulterior purposes. The fact that a super-Power could, when it considered it necessary, launch a surprise attack in order to occupy an ally with massive troops shows that such a "military alliance" is no guarantee of peace at all. Security is out of the question for any country when it is under virtual occupation.
155.	We hold that, in order truly to ensure peace and security for Europe, it is necessary to oppose firmly aggression, interference, subversion and control by the super-Powers, to disband military blocs, to withdraw foreign armed forces and to bring about peaceful coexistence between the European countries on the basis of respect for independence and sovereignty, mutual non- aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and equality and mutual benefit. Otherwise, the so-called; European security conference can only be another name for the division of spheres of influence between the two super-Powers by making use of military blocs. Such a conference would better be called "the European insecurity conference" rather than "the European security conference". An increasing number of countries are demanding that all the European countries should take part as equals in the European security conference and its preparations with equal powers and opposing the holding of the conference as between two blocs. They especially oppose the two big Powers monopolizing everything behind the backs of the other countries and manipulating the destiny of their people. This is an expression of the profound aspirations of the European people. The Chinese Government and people resolutely support the people of the European countries in all their efforts to oppose the power politics and hegemony practiced by the super-Powers.
156.	In Africa, particularly in southern Africa, the mass movements against white colonialist rule, racial discrimination and apartheid and for national liberation have made great new progress, marking a further enhancement of the political consciousness of the African people. The people in southern Africa and other regions which have not yet achieved independence are increasingly aware that the only way to overthrow white colonialist rule and win national liberation is to rely mainly on their own efforts, fully arousing and organizing the masses and waging an unyielding and valiant struggle. It is necessary to seek external assistance, but more and more facts have proved that it is impossible to put an end to colonialist rule by relying on other people. The Chinese Government and people resolutely support the heroic people of Mozambique, Angola, Guinea (Bissau), Azania, Zimbabwe, Namibia and Spanish Sahara. Their struggles are just, and so long as they carry on perseveringly, fear neither hardship nor sacrifice and advance wave upon wave, they will surely, with the sympathy and support of the peoples of Africa and the whole world, win final victory.
157.	As a developing country, China, from its own experience, fully sympathizes with the deep aspirations of the Asian, African and Latin American countries for the defense of their national independence, the protection of their resources and the development of their national economy. We resolutely support the Latin American countries in their struggle to defend their 200-nautical-mile maritime rights. We resolutely support the petroleum and other raw material exporting countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America in their struggle against plunder by foreign forces. We resolutely support the developing countries in their struggle to prevent imperialist countries shifting their economic crisis on to them. We resolutely support the small and medium-sized countries in their struggle against big Powers plundering their fishery resources.
158.	We hold that, in order to change the backward state of their economy, the developing countries should first of all rely on themselves; that is, they should rely mainly on their own efforts and take foreign aid as an auxiliary. The just struggles of the people of all countries support each other. Those countries which have already won liberation are all the more duty-bound to support and assist those countries subjected to oppression and aggression. But now some people are using aid as a means for controlling other countries and expanding their own spheres of influence.
When they give something to other countries, they assume the airs of a benefactor and demand all sorts of privileges. They send to the recipient countries experts and advisers who behave as tyrants, ordering people about and lording it over them. How could this be called aid?
159.	We hold that all countries which are sincere in providing aid to others, including multilateral aid through the United Nations, should help the recipient countries and not exploit them. Their loans should be interest-free or, at least, low in interest. They must not press for repayment but should allow its postponement. When providing a loan or other forms of aid, they should strictly respect the sovereignty of the recipient countries, attach no conditions and ask for no privileges. The purpose of providing aid to other countries should be to help the recipient countries stand on their own feet and to develop an independent national economy. They must not reduce the recipient countries to dependence and subordination in the name of "economic aid" or "the international division of labor", still less place them under their control on the pretext of "aid". China, too, received some foreign aid in the past and had direct experience in this regard. Therefore, today when we provide aid to other countries, we endeavor to act on the above-mentioned principles. Of course, our capabilities in this respect are limited and the aid we can give is not much. But we hold that the above-mentioned principles should be propagated and applied universally.
160.	Now I wish to speak on the question of disarmament. Not long ago some agreements on the limitation of strategic armaments were reached by the Soviet Union and the United States in high-level talks. There is no need for us to comment on these agreements if they are regarded merely as bilateral affairs between the Soviet Union and the United States. But if they are being blown up as tremendous achievements on the road of reducing the threat of nuclear war, we cannot agree. These agreements only stipulate some limitation on the quantity of certain categories of nuclear weapons in the possession of the Soviet Union and the United States, but impose no limitation at all on their quality, nor do they mention a single word about the destruction of nuclear weapons. This can by no means be regarded as a step towards nuclear disarmament. On the contrary, this marks the beginning of a new stage in the Soviet-United States nuclear arms race. Before the ink on the agreement had dried, the one hastened to test new-type nuclear weapons and the other expressed its intention to make a big increase immediately in its military expenditure. How can this be described as reducing the threat of a nuclear war? We hold that no fond illusion should be cherished about these agreements. In 1921, the major naval Powers of the time prescribed a limitation on their respective total tonnages of capital ships, and the limitation was reaffirmed in 1930. Everybody knows what happened in the end. It is not without meaning to recall this historical case today.
161.	Moreover, the Soviet Union and the United States have stated in the document on the basic principles of relations between them  that they have a special responsibility to avert conflicts which would serve to increase international tensions, and they have recognized each other's security interests based on the principle of equality. What special responsibility and what equal security interests? According to Khruschev's "theory", do they not stand for Soviet-United States collaboration for world domination? Of course, one can talk like that, but it would not be so easy to have it realized.
162.	As everyone knows, war is the continuation of politics. The invention and the development of nuclear weapons have not changed, nor can they change, this truth. Although no new world war has occurred since the Second World War, local wars of various types have never ceased. Why? Because imperialism resorts to armed force in carrying out aggression and expansion. Where there is oppression there is resistance, and where there is aggression there is struggle against aggression. This is inevitable so long as imperialism exists. But now the Soviet Government asserts that in a nuclear age there is no other way than that of peaceful coexistence among States, which presupposes, above all, the renunciation' of the use of force in international relations, that is, the non-use of both conventional and nuclear weapons. It has even spread the alarmist theory that the destructive power of even conventional warfare has by now increased so greatly that the large-scale use of conventional weapons can lead to the annihilation of entire nations. But the world will be safe once there is a resolution on the non-use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. This is a sheer hoax. As a matter of fact, the Soviet Government does not believe in its own theory. Its practice in the Middle East, where it gave weapons to Arab countries but forbade the use of them, does smack a little of this "theory". Yet, in the Indo-Pakistan war last year, it gave undisguised support to the Indian Government in its armed aggression against Pakistan. What kind of non-use of force is this?
163.	People condemn war and consider it a barbarous way of settling disputes among mankind. But we are soberly aware that war is inevitable so long as society is divided into classes and the exploitation of man by man still exists. There are two categories of wars, just and unjust. We support just wars and oppose unjust wars. If a socialist still wants to be a socialist, he should not oppose all wars indiscriminately. The non-use of force in international relations can only be conditional, and not unconditional. The condition is to realize peaceful coexistence through mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, and equality and mutual benefit. And in order to realize this, it is imperative to oppose the policies of aggression and expansion of any imperialism. When imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism of various descriptions are still using force to enslave, commit aggression against, control and threaten a majority of the countries of the world, it is betrayal to the people of the world to advocate non-use of force in international relations indiscriminatingly, without regard to conditions and in an absolute way. If one still has a grain of socialism in him, why does he not produce something presentable for instance, opposition to aggression in international relations, and especially aggression backed by nuclear weapons? Why should he, on the contrary, choose to produce such shabby stuff as renunciation of the use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons? In that way, does he not allow himself to be seen through right away?
164.	Permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons this sounds so nice and looks so much like China's proposition, but in fact it is completely different. We say that, as the first step towards the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, agreement should first be reached on the non-use of nuclear weapons. And we have publicly declared that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons. This fully shows that China is developing nuclear weapons for defensive purposes and with the aim of breaking the nuclear monopoly and proceeding from there to eliminate nuclear weapons. If the Soviet Union entertains the same defensive purposes as it has claimed, why does the Soviet representative not dare to come up to this rostrum and make a similar declaration? How can it make people believe its big talk in favor of the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons to be sincere when it, while mouthing the word "prohibition", is constantly brandishing its nuclear weapons, obdurately opposing the possession and development of nuclear weapons by countries with few or no nuclear weapons, feverishly improving and developing its own nuclear weapons and deploying them at the gates of other countries? It asserts that the renunciation of the use of force and prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would be effective only when the two are linked together. In actuality, this is demanding that the people of the world give up their armed struggle against aggression; otherwise, nuclear weapons will be used against them. Is this not its plain logic? Big talk is useless. The proposal of the Soviet Government, no matter how much it is couched in diplomatic language, has the real intent of making all oppressed nations and peoples tamely submit to the nuclear threat of the one or two super-Powers. But they have grossly underestimated the political consciousness of the people of the world.
165.	In order truly to do away with nuclear threats, it is necessary to completely prohibit and thoroughly destroy nuclear weapons. Yet the Soviet. Government dares neither to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons nor to touch on the question of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, but advocates the cessation of all nuclear tests. Why? As everyone knows, the Soviet Union has made hundreds of nuclear tests. When it had made enough tests in the atmosphere, it proposed the partial ban on nuclear tests. Now when it has made enough underground tests, it calls for a ban on all nuclear tests. Actually this means that the Soviet Union could make any kind of tests when it had the need, and that when it no longer has the need the others are not permitted to make any test. This is another trap blatantly designed to maintain its nuclear monopoly, following the partial nuclear test-ban treaty and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII)]. As a Chinese saying goes, "The magistrates are allowed to burn down houses, while the common people are forbidden even to light lamps." China absolutely will not fall into this trap. At no time and in no circumstances will China recognize such a right for the Soviet Union or any other nuclear Power. No one but those Powers alone are permitted to develop nuclear weapons; they may threaten others but others are not allowed to exercise the right of self-defense. Can there be such reason on earth? At present, a mere cessation of all nuclear tests without complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons can only hinder countries with few or no nuclear weapons from developing their nuclear capabilities for self-defense but will not affect in the least the nuclear hegemony of the super-Powers. The real purpose of the proposal of the Soviet Government is to maintain its nuclear monopoly and nuclear superiority by capitalizing on many countries' legitimate desire for peace, so that it can have a free hand to carry out its nuclear threat and nuclear blackmail against countries with few or no nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapons are something which people can neither eat nor wear. China is a developing country and certainly does not want to spend one penny more than necessary on such stuff. China is making nuclear tests under compulsion. Its nuclear tests are taking place in its deep interior, and their number is limited. China is ready at any time to stop all its nuclear tests, but only on the day the nuclear weapons of the nuclear super-Powers and all nuclear countries are completely prohibited and thoroughly destroyed, and not before.
166.	On the question of convening a world disarmament conference, we have explained the position and views of the Chinese Government at the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly [1983rd and 2022nd meetings]. We cannot agree to the Soviet position on the "world disarmament conference" as set forth in the Soviet Foreign Minister's letter of 14 August this year [A/8757] to the United Nations Secretary-General. The "world disarmament conference" as proposed by the Soviet Union has neither the necessary requisites nor a clear aim. It would in fact be an "empty-talk club" which would indulge in far-ranging rambling discourse without solving any practical problem. To hold such a conference would only serve to hoodwink and lull the people of the world. It is better not to hold it.
167.	The actual situation in the world today is this. The two super-Powers are maintaining military bases of various kinds, including nuclear bases, and stationing large numbers of their armed forces, including nuclear-missile forces, in many countries; their airplanes, warships and submarines, including those carrying nuclear weapons, are flying and plying everywhere; and they have up to now refused to undertake not to be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly not to use them against non-nuclear countries. To varying degrees, all the countries in the world with no nuclear weapons and those with few nuclear weapons are exposed to their threat. The most urgent question today is the withdrawal of foreign armed forces, rather than the reduction of armaments. Let the two super-Powers withdraw all their armed forces, both conventional and nuclear, back to their own countries. If they do not even want to effect a withdrawal, how can one believe that they are willing to make an arms reduction?
168.	The cry for general and complete disarmament has been going on for more than a dozen years. But the result is general and complete arms expansion by the two superPowers, while all the small and medium-sized countries of the world are in a position of defense inadequacy. This hoax should not be allowed to continue. In order that a world disarmament conference will make a true start and carry on fruitfully instead of becoming a bout of deceptive empty talk, it is imperative to create the necessary conditions for the convening of such a conference, namely, all nuclear countries, particularly the Soviet Union and the United States which possess the greatest amount of nuclear weapons, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, and that they not only will not use nuclear weapons against each other, but, more importantly, will not use them against the non-nuclear countries, and they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible to create the necessary conditions for all the countries, irrespective of their size; to discuss and solve on an equal footing the important questions of complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and the reduction of conventional weapons.
169.	Since the beginning of this year, the United Nations and its Security Council have done much work thanks to the joint efforts made by the overwhelming majority of the Member States. What merits special mention is that the Security Council held special meetings in Africa on African questions. This was an unprecedented action taken at the demand of many African countries. The meetings adopted a number of useful resolutions on some African questions. At the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, held in the capital of Chile, many developing countries forcefully exposed the situation in which certain developed countries, by trade, tariff, monetary and other means, are monopolizing international markets, shifting their economic crisis onto, and stepping up the plunder and exploitation of, other countries, thus aggravating the irrational international phenomenon of "the rich becoming richer and the poor poorer". The developing countries strongly demanded that this state of affairs must be changed. At the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment held in the capital of Sweden, many countries of the third world strongly condemned imperialism for carrying out policies of aggression and war and put forward a number of sound views and reasonable opinions on the question of conserving and improving the human environment. At the sessions of the sea-bed Committee, many countries of the third world carried out resolute struggles to safeguard their own natural resources and upheld the just position that each country has the right to determine the scope of its own territorial sea and jurisdiction. At all these meetings and conferences, many countries of the third world showed their firm determination to oppose imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism and played important roles.
170.	However, we cannot but point out with regret that owing to obstructions by the one or two super-Powers the United Nations has remained weak and ineffective in dealing with many major international issues. Some correct resolutions adopted by the United Nations remain unimplemented due to hindrance by one or two big Powers. Many organs and agencies of the United Nations are still dominated by a small number of countries and fail to reflect the demands and opinions of the great number of countries of the third world. In the United Nations there still prevails the very serious phenomenon of discussions without a decision and decisions without implementation. All this should be corrected speedily.
171.	Here I wish to deal with the Chinese Government's views on the review of the United Nations Charter. As is known to all, the United Nations Charter was drawn up near the end of the Second World War and it was a product of the historical conditions prevailing at the time. However, history is making advances and things are developing. In some respects the Charter formulated 27 years ago obviously cannot meet the tremendous change that has occurred in the international situation and in the United Nations. There were 51 original Members at the founding of the United Nations. Since then more than 80 countries have joined the United Nations, most of which are newly independent countries. It is understandable that there is a demand for the United Nations Charter to reflect fully the present state of affairs in the world. We maintain that on the basis of upholding the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter careful consideration should be given to the views of various countries for necessary revisions of the Charter so as truly to give effect to the principle that all Member States, big or small, are equal. Of course, we likewise consider that the revision of the Charter is a serious and important question, and we are ready to join you all in serious explorations.
172.	The world is at the cross-roads, and so is the United Nations. If the United Nations is to regain its prestige and play its due role, it must conform to the trend of the world, truly express the just demands of large numbers of its Members and the people of the world, act strictly in accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and free itself from manipulation and control by the big Powers. It must be trustworthy in word and resolute in deed. Otherwise, it would be very difficult for the United Nations to avoid eventually taking the old path of the League of Nations. The Chinese delegation is ready to work together with the delegations of all countries which love peace and uphold justice to make the United Nations truly capable of playing a role in safeguarding international peace and promoting the cause of the progress of mankind.
The first word I should like to mention as I mount this rostrum for the fifth time is hope, a difficult virtue. I am encouraged to do so, Mr. President, by your accession to this high office, which was distinguished last year by the prestige of Mr. Adam Malik. I am thinking of the ties which have linked my country to yours for almost six centuries, ties which, if such a thing is possible, will be strengthened still further by Mr., Gierek's forthcoming visit to France. I also have in mind the important lesson of perseverance that Poland has continually lavished on Europe and the world. But the virtue of hope has also been called to mind by the praises earned in a matter of months by our new Secretary- General-a worthy successor to the man who, for the sake of the United Nations, pushed himself to the very limit of his strength. We all knew that Kurt Waldheim excelled in every intellectual quality. Today we all know that he is no less distinguished by his strength of character. He is not a man to shun the new duties which loom in his path, and so it is to him that I would first address myself.
61.	France immediately and unconditionally condemned "the acts of terrorism and reprisals which are increasing the numbers of innocent victims", to quote the exact terms of the communique that my friend Mr. Schmelzer, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, read on 12 September on behalf of the Conference of the 10 European Ministers of Foreign Affairs who were meeting near Rome. My country therefore shares the anguish of the Secretary- General and endorses his initiative, which we feel sets an example in two respects: first of all, because it aims at breaking the merciless chain of indiscriminate violence, and secondly, because the man who took this initiative intends to grapple not only with the most tragic consequences but also with the deep-seated causes of the problem, as the most authoritative voice in France again requested him to do some days ago in connexion with the Palestinian problem; that "human and therefore political problem". I am in particular happy that the Assembly has decided to include on its agenda the examination of the problem of international terrorism as a whole and that it has entrusted this task to its Sixth Committee, which will, I am sure, approach this urgent and painful issue with all the attention and to recall the word used a few moments ago by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lebanon from this same rostrum-objectivity that it requires. Mr. Waldheim has, moreover, already proved this. No obstacle deters him when it is a question of implementing Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
62.	Why should the spokesman for an old European country feel today despite all the preoccupations he and every one of us has  that hope prevails over his distress of mind? It is because this year has seen two events which are grounds for certainty: first of all, Europe is moving ahead; secondly, such a forward movement brings us nearer our common goal, namely, closer co-operation and better understanding with all peoples. If I ask your permission to link this central idea, like a conducting wire, to certain major issues which require our reflection, it is because I am speaking on behalf of a country which, as I say again deliberately, has allies but neither has nor wants enemies.
63.	So let us turn our attention to Europe, towards the whole of Europe, where we shall find grounds for reassurance.
64.	It was on 3 June 1972 that the Treaties of Moscow^ and Warsaw  were ratified. It was on 3 June 1972, at the same moment, that the final protocol of the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin was signed by Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Mr. Gromyko, Mr. Rogers and myself. This protocol implemented an agreement which has been supplemented by arrangements concluded by all the German authorities. The negotiations were difficult, but none of the parties imposed its point of view on the others. On the contrary, the balance achieved between the reciprocal concessions was an example worth following and could only serve to strengthen equilibrium in Europe.
65.	May the same spirit inspire the negotiators who are now striving to define relations between the two German States. The success of their efforts matters all the more for this Assembly because one of their objectives is to permit these two States to present themselves together before our Organization. When the time comes-and the sooner the better-the four Powers which will continue to have special duties vis-a-vis Germany and Berlin will undoubtedly be the first to want to support these two candidates for admission to the United Nations. We have become even more aware since China has joined us that the United Nations has a universal mission.
66.	One year ago [1942nd meeting] I said of the European Economic Community that it was in the process of being enlarged. On 1 January the Community will group together some 250 million Europeans. Meanwhile, owing to the success of the negotiations with countries which are members of the European Free Trade Association and are not applying for membership, a vast network of agreements will link the Community to the whole of Western Europe. In a month's time in Paris the Heads of State or Government of member countries of the Community will meet, as was said recently in the course of a Franco-Italian meeting by my colleague and friend, Mr. Medici, not so much to congratulate themselves on such a success, but rather to take stock of the responsibilities incumbent upon them, responsibilities first of all towards their own people who do not want European economic integration to lose in depth what it is gaining in breadth. On the contrary, they want to expand into new fields, beginning with those of currency and the battle against inflation,
67.	With regard to the other industrialized countries, the Community should also be prepared, without ever abdicating its autonomy of decision, to encourage extensive and balanced development of trade on the basis of reciprocal advantage.
68.	But the French Government feels that it is particularly essential for the enlarged Community to define vis-a-vis the developing countries and, in the first instance, vis-a-vis the former associates of the Common Market, a policy no less generous than that practiced by the six members, a policy worthy of being called European. Lastly, there can be no development restricted to Western Europe. Consequently, while Western Europe is being built, the countries which comprise it are striving to strengthen their ties or to forge new ties with the nations which inhabit the eastern part of our continent.
69.	And here is the third reason for Europeans to regard 1972 as memorable despite certain inevitable disappointments: the conference on security and co-operation in Europe no longer looks like just a grand design. In two months, multilateral preparations for the conference will at last begin in Helsinki. We shall do everything possible to ensure that next year the conference itself will attain its true objective, an objective that is of interest and concern to all the countries represented here: to replace-for this is indeed the issue the confrontation of blocs with dialog between peoples.
70.	It took a thousand years of harsh and turbulent history for Europe to thus arrive at the beginnings of wisdom. The memory of the horrors of two world wars which began there help Europe today better to understand the price of peace and better to uphold the chances for it. The dangers through which democracy has passed in so many European countries, and to which it often succumbed, have put Europe in a better position today to weigh the price of freedom. The grandeur, but also the shadows, of its colonial past enable Europe the better to shun many forms of imperialism. Never has Europe, in its relative equilibrium, seemed better able to defend a certain ideal, which is none other than that of the United Nations: respect for international order and for the independence of each nation, the safeguard of human rights, and the rejection of everything that divides the world into rival hegemonies.
71.	Already many people are turning towards this Europe, which is rediscovering its universal mission, believing in it and expecting a great deal from it. It is time for Europe to realize this; by asserting itself, it is gradually creating its own responsibilities towards the international community. Europe must understand these new duties and not shirk them.
72.	Whatever the economic, political and social problems that face the members of the international community and which are echoed here, Europe must be prepared to make its own response.
73.	We felt this especially strongly at the last UNCTAD meeting in April and May in Santiago, Chile. This meeting was, on the economic level, one of the most keenly awaited events of 1972, and it was held, significantly, in one of the Latin American countries which are so dear to France and which are both strongly marked by European influence and confronted with all the difficulties of profound transformation. Can we not then say that if the Santiago meeting has had positive results it was to the extent that the developing countries found understanding and support from some European nations? But also, that if the results were disappointing it was because this great movement of solidarity is as yet only in its early stages?
74.	Some progress was made at the third session of UNCTAD and it is only fair to mention this. In particular, the significance of the joint conclusions which were reached on the need for complete and whole-hearted participation by the developing countries in trade and monetary negotiations in 1973 was widely appreciated. 
75.	In addition, I welcome, for example, the agreement on special measures in favor of the least developed among the developing countries.  The fact remains, however, that on two essential points primary commodities and aid the balance-sheet of UNCTAD did not meet our hopes.
76.	In the first case this lack of success and the meeting could have ended in total failure had the African-sponsored draft resolution on the financing of buffer stocks not been adopted was due to the overly abstract search for new formulas on the subject of outlets and prices. Rather than lingering over this debate on theory, would it not be wiser to examine, case by case, the situation of each commodity which is of particular concern to the developing countries in order to take specific measures to remedy the inadequate revenue which these countries receive from their exports?
77.	In this respect the current United Nations Cocoa Conference will put to the test our determination to arrive at a satisfactory solution. The same is true for aid. Must we really reopen discussion on the objectives decided on by common agreement? Would it not be preferable to concentrate our efforts on the means of attaining them? The real problem is whether we shall follow up our resolutions; in other words, whether our political determination matches our intentions. Underdevelopment is not of concern only to international experts; it is primarily our concern, but statesmen need to have the support of public opinion. UNCTAD, at least, has understood this. It is proposing that we have a world development information day. That resolution  will, I am sure, attract the attention of our Assembly.
78.	The need to make Europe's own voice heard; the difficulty in attaining this; progress-depending on the case-towards political co-operation among our Governments since it, as one of the prerequisites of world equilibrium, works in the interest of all peoples and for peace these are the three conclusions that we are compelled to draw when we look at the strife and disruption going on in the world.
79.	In the Middle East can we discern any reason to hope? I, for my part, see two reasons. The first is related to my dominant theme. We have seen emerging and then growing among members of the European Community a similarity of intentions, which has several times led to concerted action. The second shows to what extent the efforts of the European Community, when it affirms its own identity, coincide with those of the international community. The Secretary-General and his special representative do not allow themselves to be discouraged by stagnation, or by delays, or by apparently unchanging attitudes. Indeed, how could they give in to fatalism? How could we ourselves renounce our responsibilities? Has not the past year shown the futility of efforts undertaken outside the United Nations?
80.	We were guided by two clear and simple ideas from 22 November 1967 until 13 December 1971, two ideas on which a peace agreement may simultaneously be based: the occupied territories must be evacuated subject to minor rectifications; and all the States concerned must undertake to conform, under United Nations guarantees, to the rules which regulate peaceful relations among sovereign States. I should like today to give a new form to the appeal which, for the fourth time, I express from this rostrum with all the moral force that continuity gives my country's policy: does any people or country of the Middle East not understand that for its independence to be definitively ensured it must be sheltered from the interplay of outside scheming or rivalries? To this fundamental question there can only be a definitive and sure answer here, not elsewhere.
81.	Africa, too, needs the United Nations. Last year gave us proof of this. In southern Africa why did a sense of hope, still frail, follow a heightened sense of concern? Because the Africans themselves, gathered in the capital of Ethiopia, induced the Security Council to entrust the Secretary-General with a mission, which was to make contact. May this symbolic opportunity be seized. The stakes are far greater than the question of Namibia alone. If international ethics regains its proper place, and the spirit of the Charter along with it, we will no longer have to condemn, year after year, violations of human rights and of the principle of racial non-discrimination, stressing that they are all equally reprehensible, no matter who is the perpetrator and who the victim.
82.	If international morality and the spirit of the Charter regain their proper place, we will no longer have to deplore the fact that Africa's march towards development and unity is hindered by racial antagonisms, which at times cause much bloodshed without evoking sufficient reproach or horror. This ascent towards unity must continue. France regards it with an active goodwill, which extends to associations that are usefully balanced. But no vision of the future can exempt us from the duties inherited from the past. We intend to assume those duties in two ways: as Europeans and as-Frenchmen. As Europeans, true to the spirit and letter of the two Yaounde Conventions, we regard favorably ties of association between the English- speaking African States and our Community, on the sole but essential condition that the rights gained to date by the African countries, which already have ties of association, are preserved. As Frenchmen we are resolved to continue our efforts at co-operation, even if some aspects have to be changed, on the sole condition that our partners and friends continue to want it themselves.
83.	But Asia? Can it be said that the United Nations does not have a voice it can make heard there, or a specific role to play there? That idea might conceivably have been defended before China was seated here. At our last session we were awaiting its delegation with impatience. I have never better understood to what extent that haste was justified than when I had the privilege in the capital of a great people "older than history", in the words of General de Gaulle of greeting and listening to Chairman Mao Tsetung after long talks with the Head of the Chinese Government and the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I had never better understood how essential it was for China to be in our midst, since we want truly to make a patient and sincere effort to establish in Asia a peaceful order based on the reconciliation and coexistence of independent peoples.
84.	For that matter, we are already seeing some necessary dialogs taking place. For its part, Japan, which I have visited since our last session, is contributing to that, and we must thank it. The Koreans are now providing a good example for all of us who believe that, as we have long said, ideological differences can be overcome by peaceful means. That conviction explains why we felt a harsh anomaly in the sudden eruption of the Indian subcontinent. Today we have a twofold duty: to welcome the new State which has just been born and help it to bind up its wounds; then to encourage the warring parties of yesterday to follow to the end the path of reason and reconciliation on which there must be no turning back.
85.	But, above all, will the moment never come when our Organization can put into operation a vast effort of solidarity on behalf of peoples that are victims of the war in Indochina and that are all the more dear to us because they suffer so unjustly? These people of the four States of Indochina want to live in independence in a neutral and peaceful South-East Asia. France knows, of course, from experience how difficult it is to put an end to some conflicts; but I do not hesitate to say that the opportunity to bring to Indochina a peace whose political and military terms can be equally perceived is now at hand. I cannot believe that this opportunity will again be lost. No, I cannot believe that, six years after a certain address delivered in Phnom Penh which history has already proved right-a history which would have been less painful and less bloody if the voice of General de Gaulle had been better heeded.
86.	The survey I have just made leads me to a very natural conclusion: on the one hand, Europe is gradually becoming aware of itself and of the role it must play in serving world equilibrium, and thus peace; on the other hand, the more France realizes that truth, the more she believes that the mission of the United Nations is not only useful but irreplaceable.
87.	Why? We must ask ourselves that question very clearly, for the world has changed to such a degree since the birth of the Organization that it would be a mistake to be satisfied with the old justifications applicable to a time gone by, which preceded the entry into this Organization of most of the States represented here. I shall give my answer immediately: the respective tasks of the European Community and of the United Nations are indeed very different. The Community is an economic power par excellence whose political goals are based on its service to a certain type of civilization. The United Nations is essentially a moral force which cannot have a secular arm because its raison d'etre is to assemble, for the purpose of maintaining or restoring peace, governments representative of all systems, all doctrines, all regimes. But both have one essential thing in common: they tend to prevent the division of the world between two decision-making centers. Understand me well: the rejection of hegemonies, far from creating distrust or hostility towards the very great Powers, is the very prerequisite for a genuine and fruitful dialog. The same President of the French Republic who in a few weeks' time hopes to receive nine Heads of Government received Mr. Leonid Brezhnev in Paris and met with Mr. Nixon in the Azores. With Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Pompidou signed the declaration of 13 principles which makes Franco-Soviet co-operation exemplary and, as the President of the Republic has just said again, gives it capital importance. With Mr. Nixon he discussed the continuance of a friendship as old as the United States itself and ever strengthened by mutual frankness.
88.	The more relations improve between two very great Powers with which we maintain ties of co-operation or alliance, the more we gain, if peace gains therefrom. But, surely, no country among us, even the least powerful, intends to give up the right to choose and to guide its destiny itself.
89.	For that right to be preserved it must be kept from slipping almost from sight, as would happen if left to a natural course of events. That is why so many Mediterranean countries and I am thinking especially of Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia, which are so close to us are showing such concern to have continuous dialog with Europe, in a form still to be determined. The motives that prompt them to look towards Europe are, on the whole, the same as those which justify their attachment to the principles of the Charter.
90.	Such is the spirit in which we propose to participate in the major debates here, in particular those which concern the problems of over-armament and underdevelopment which, for that matter, are connected. But I intend to conclude on the essential thing, which is also the most threatened and challenged. I am aware that I speak on behalf of a country which has certainly not been irreproachable in the course of its lengthy history but which, nearly two centuries ago, proclaimed not the rights of Frenchmen but the rights of man.
91.	I mentioned a moment ago that one of the essential tasks of our Organization was to condemn racial discrimination in all its forms and to combat it by the most effective means, that is to say, means consistent with the principles of our Charter. In the same spirit, the French Government last year deposited the instruments of accession to the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX), annex] and this year submitted to parliament a law, which was unanimously adopted, on the elimination of all expressions of racism.
92.	France is participating actively, as members know, in the convention work of the United Nations on human rights. We have, in addition, been initiators in the work in which our Organization is currently engaged to draft an international instrument for the protection of journalists on perilous missions. We cannot be indifferent to the fate of those who, in their search for objectivity, sometimes knowingly placing their lives in danger and make an essential contribution to the knowledge of the modern world and to the emancipation of peoples. Often we feel, as I have said, the need for an appeal to public opinion, which alone can jolt people out of their apathy and hasten a solution to the most serious political crises. Is it impossible to hope that increased protection will be given to those who serve the public and serve truth? We hope that this year the Assembly will be sympathetic to our efforts.
93.	At its last session the General Assembly unanimously decided, in resolution 2860 (XXVI), that a Human Rights Day should be celebrated on 10 December 1973 to mark the twenty-fifth anniversary of the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
94.	It was in Paris that the Declaration was proclaimed on 10 December 1948, and France, true to its long tradition, intends solemnly to celebrate this anniversary.
95.	Assuredly, before the immensity of the problems that face the world and the urgency of certain decisions, this celebration will have mainly symbolic value, but the world of today has more need than ever of symbols-symbols strong enough to avenge justice and to comfort brotherhood.
Mr. President, I should like to start by echoing the congratulations which my colleagues have extended to you on your assumption of office as President of the twenty- seventh session of the General Assembly. It is a tribute to you and to your country.
99.	As this is the first time that I have addressed the Assembly since the election of the Secretary-General, I should like to take this opportunity also to salute him. He has proved in the last nine months our wisdom in electing him and he has brought to this Organization the same dedication and the same talents he gave to his own country as diplomat and Foreign Minister.
100.	There is an arresting phrase in the Preamble to the United Nations Charter. It bids us all "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". The United Nations was born from the death and destruction of two world wars in this century in which it was proved beyond any doubt that there is no longer any gain, economic or political, to be won from aggression. Those wars started in Europe. It is not therefore surprising that we have concluded in Western Europe that there is no future for any country in trying to achieve its economic or political aims by the use of force, and we are combining to remove the past rivalries in Europe and the causes of them. It is only when that lesson, which we have painfully learned, gains universal support that we shall have fulfilled the precept of this Charter which requires us to live as good neighbors. We long ago decided that collective action was necessary to meet any potential aggressor. We organized accordingly and, although at great cost, Western Europe has enjoyed physical security. As long as there is a threat we will sustain the necessary effort.
101.	But, in addition to defense, national leaders have two responsibilities which must run in harness. The first is to achieve for their people a continuing improvement in the standards of education and living and the second is to guide their country's policies so as to contribute to harmony in international society. Civilization for man can thrive only in a climate of peace.
102.	At this point of history, therefore, the public experiment in partnership being conducted by the enlarged European Community is of prime importance. Western Europe, late in the day but better late than never is putting into practice for the common good a philosophy which embraces full economic and political partnership. We are doing so for two overriding reasons: to outlaw the wars which have twice brought the continent to its knees and to enhance by a customs union the prosperity of the member States. We do not intend to lose our national identities but to merge our complementary personalities for the greater good of all. These developments must be of profound significance in the context of the wider world.
103.	Were the Community to confine its benefits to the compass of its own membership, it would be missing its opportunity in terms of the general health of the world community. An inbred and introvert community could indeed invite trade wars and stimulate selfishness. For the United Kingdom, a member of the Commonwealth of Nations, any form of narrow European isolation would be totally alien to our whole philosophy. But there is no question of any such thing. No one contemplates that in the European Community. The call for the policies of the good neighbor in the Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations finds an echo in the Preamble to the Treaty of Rome, where the purpose of the Community is stated thus: "Desirous of contributing by means of a common commercial policy to the progressive abolition of restrictions on international trade" and "intending to confirm the solidarity which bind Europe and overseas countries, and desiring to ensure the development of their prosperity, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations".8 So the Community has explicitly shown that it is pursuing the same objectives as the United Nations, a fact of undeniable importance when it is realized-as perhaps it seldom is that the Community conducts 41 per cent of the trade of the world and that Europe's contribution will be of great importance in the discussions of, for example, international monetary reform.
104.	In each of the last three years the total flow of resources from Britain multilateral and bilateral, private and public to developing countries to help them raise their standard of living has been over the target of 1 per cent of our gross national product. The existing members of the Community have already played a notable part in this international effort. But I believe that the European Community as a whole can make a much more effective contribution by co-ordinating the efforts of individual member States in a conscious, co-operative program for the development of the developing world. The deliberations of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development fUNCTAD/ in 1972, in which we were glad to play a leading part, serve to remind us how complete is our interdependence. We must find more satisfactory solutions to the problems to which UNCTAD has drawn such graphic attention. Europe, too, can make a telling contribution to solving the accumulating problems of the twentieth century, which may be grouped under the heading "the environment". I am glad to announce that, subject to parliamentary approval, the United Kingdom will contribute up to  2 million over a five-year period to the proposed United Nations Environment Fund, depending on the response made to the $100 million target.
105.	In all these ways, the enlarged European Community will pass the test of neighborliness which is set in the preamble to the United Nations Charter, in terms both of its own membership and of its future relationship with the rest of the world.
106.	Can we in Western Europe extend the area of confidence and hope, a theme to which Mr. Schumann, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of France, spoke yesterday [2041st meeting/ with eloquence and general acceptance? For that we shall need in Western Europe the active response of the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe when the conference on security and co-operation in Europe and negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions come to be staged.
107.	We must face the facts even when they are unpleasant. Since the last World War the confrontation over the years between the Warsaw Pact countries and those of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization led to an almost total loss of confidence. Western Europe had no desire for this, but the fact is that neighborliness, once confidence is broken, cannot be recreated in a day.
108.	Progress in detente has by any standard of tolerance been painfully slow. Nevertheless, there have been modest gains. The test-ban Treaty  holds; the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks have placed a limitation on anti-ballistic missiles; the treaties between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union and between the Federal Republic and Poland are a contribution to stability, as the Polish Foreign Minister has himself just declared; the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin can do much for the security and well-being of the city's inhabitants. This is a notable contrast to the days when Berlin was threatened by isolation and the need for an airlift. We should mark that contrast. Negotiations between the Federal Republic of Germany and its East German neighbor are at last making some progress. And in this improved climate, which I think most of the speakers have marked in this debate, a European security conference may be able to identify and to exploit other areas which can be used for the common benefit both of Western Europe and of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. It will not be easy. Where social and economic systems are so different and where the gulf is so wide between the Soviet interpretation of the free life and that which is practiced in the West, it is best to try for limited objectives. But we must, if life is to be tolerable, replace the negative conception of coexistence with a fabric of trust. We willingly put our hand to that task in Western Europe and look forward to this first meeting an event in itself on a common platform of countries that are members of the Warsaw Pact Organization and of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to be joined by the European neutrals. Mutual and balanced force reductions present a daunting problem because there are so many facets, military and geographical, which go to make up what is known as the balance of power in Europe, and indeed the balance of power in the world. So far it is a fact of life that it is the military balance on which the present peace rests, and that is likely to be so for some time to come. It will be our objective in all these discussions to find new approaches to neighborliness with the East, consistent with the physical security of our respective peoples.
109.	The Secretary-General, in the wise introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/'8701/ Add.l], has rightly drawn attention to the important signs of detente among the great Powers, signs which include the developments which I have just described. But the Secretary-General equally rightly pointed out the contrast between these signs and the persistence of conflict in several key areas of the world and the failure, both of the Governments concerned and of the international community, to find acceptable solutions to the underlying causes of the confrontation.
110.	Although there are signs of rapprochement in Europe and indeed in Asia, there remain historic areas of continuing hostility. The danger in these places is that deadlock will be tacitly accepted as the best for which anyone can hope. That is the last doctrine which this Assembly can accept. The Secretary-General's statements and actions since he assumed office bear witness to the fact that he has no patience with the passive acceptance of deadlock. To resolve the Middle East conflict we at the United Nations made a start by framing Security Council resolution 242 (1967). My Government continues to adhere firmly to that, resolution. It will be commonly conceded, I think, by all my colleagues who are here, that we will not arrive at any alternative framework which would command a comparable measure of consent. It is better, therefore, to stick to it. This resolution provides the essential basis of any just and durable settlement primarily because it acknowledges the essential requirements of the parties, first for withdrawal, and secondly for security.
111.	My Government has consistently supported the mission of Mr. Jarring, the Secretary-General's Special Representative appointed under the resolution. I very much hope that in the months ahead no opportunity will be missed to work towards an end of the present confrontation with the long-drawn-out misery of the refugees which it entails, and also the ever-present threat of war.
112.	In the last few months there has been a dramatic change. Egypt has dispensed with Soviet military support. It should be recognized that this step towards depolarization is an opportunity to resume the quest for a peaceful settlement. It may be fleeting, so it should be seized. Nor should we be deflected, from this aim by the cycle of violence and reprisal which has been given fresh impetus in recent weeks.
113.	Mr. Rogers, Secretary of State of the United States, drew our attention on Monday [2038th meeting] to many instances of the world-wide problem of terrorism and violence. This is a disease to which many of us in this Assembly have fallen victim. We have our own special problem of indiscriminate terrorism in Northern Ireland. In 1971 in this Assembly I drew urgent attention to our responsibilities for the climate in which the terrorist operated his beastly practice. I said: "Sooner or later, uncompromising confrontation leads to violence [1944th meeting, para. 86.] I also said, ". .. time works for the anarchist". [Ibid.] I then drew the attention of this Assembly of nations to the situation which seemed certain to develop, and here you will forgive me if I quote once more: "... anarchy superseding the law of nations and with it the inherent challenge to all governmental authority." [Ibid., para. 87.] This is exactly what is happening now. I continued with a quotation from my statement at the 1838th meeting: '"We must call on those who have taken up arms to lay them down ... even though they claim to be carrying them in the name of justice.' " [Ibid.]
114.	Now we are up against many situations in which terrorists are meting out destruction to the innocent in the name of some hideously distorted interpretation of justice. We have wasted time in these last two or three years. Terrorism must be stopped so that law and order in the world society will not be totally undermined-and we all know this in this Assembly.
115.	The Secretary-General was right to recommend this subject for inclusion in our agenda [A/8791 and Add.l], and I am glad that the Assembly has so included it [item 92]. This question must be vigorously pursued. We in Britain will support drastic measures to stop this rot, and we welcome the initiative of Mr. Rogers! I think we must recognize that the essence of the success of any action lies in the collective application of the remedies. It is only through the international community that effective measures can be taken to end the hideous cycle of terror and violence. That is the lesson all of us in this Assembly have to accept and to apply.
116.	There are certain practical steps we can all take. First, on the question of hijacking, States which have not yet become parties to the Conventions of The Hague  and Montreal  should move with all possible speed to do so. We should also do all we can to bring into effect further measures to close every haven to the hijacker and the saboteur. The United Kingdom, at the recent meeting of the Legal Committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization, has worked actively to that end. Secondly, there are three main areas in which we should make urgent progress in dealing with the problem of international terrorism. We must agree on further obligations which States should assume in regard to the prosecution and surrender of perpetrators of terrorist acts. We should decide on further controls which could be imposed to prevent the movement of terrorists from one country to another. We should do everything possible to increase co-operation among national police and security forces by encouraging the exchange of information and by taking other measures to prevent these acts and to apprehend their perpetrators. These and other measures should be considered without delay, but I repeat that action, to be effective, must be collective. We shall make our full contribution in the discussion that has already begun at this session of the General Assembly.
117.	The good-neighborliness to which we are summoned by the Preamble to our Charter applies to" us all without exception. It is not limited by geography or race. The Ugandan Government's action in expelling Ugandan Asians and confiscating their assets, without clear and unequivocal assurances of full and prompt compensation, illustrates the degradation to which intolerance can bring its disciples. This is an outrage against standards of human decency, in the face of which this Assembly cannot remain silent. These Asians have had their homes in Uganda, some of them for generations. They are now being ejected and stripped of most of their belongings and of their savings accumulated over many years. My Government, in spite of the fact that Britain is a small, overcrowded island, had made arrangements whereby Asians from East Africa holding British passports were coming into Britain in an orderly flow over the years. As far as Uganda is concerned, this agreed program has been thrown out of the window, and the Asians have been given a time limit of 90 days in which to leave. There are now only 42 days left. President Amin has said that if the Asians have not left before that deadline he will put them into "camps". We do not accept that that deadline has any justification in law or in morality. The Government of Uganda is responsible for the proper treatment of those who have lived in that country for many years, and putting them into "camps" is contrary to all accepted standards of civilized behavior. We have an obligation to take into Britain those who are British nationals and have nowhere else to go. We will keep our word, and we will keep the law. But the law is not everything. There are human problems, rights and feelings which should have equal consideration. The Ugandan Government should be called upon to change its policy and treat these people with humanity and not with contempt. Injustice must be condemned wherever it rears its ugly head, whether it is perpetrated by Europeans or Africans or Asians or whoever. Every country in the Assembly, therefore, should use its influence to insist that this injustice should end.
118.	I am making two direct and simple requests to you as members of the world community assembled here. The first is to show your good-neighborliness by sharing some of the practical problems of resettling these unhappy people. I am exceedingly grateful and pay a tribute to all those who have come forward with offers of help. The second is that you should all join in calling upon General Amin to extend his arbitrary and inhumane deadline of 90 days and to allow the Asians expelled to take their belongings with them. These are two simple, humane concepts. My delegation will today request that this question should be added to our agenda as an urgent and important item.  We ask that the Assembly debate this matter without delay and we are ready to submit a draft resolution-for this inhumanity which creates refugees is of international concern. I trust that it will be overwhelmingly accepted, because, should this Organization fail to do so, there is no one to whom any person, whatever the color of his skin, can turn for common justice. This is the basis of my appeal to all of you today.
119.	In conclusion, therefore, I believe that when we speak or write we should constantly remind ourselves of those words in the Preamble to this Charter: "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbors". Our minds admit the sense of this precept, but our acts fall far short of it. We must be vigilant and careful for our fellow men and act with urgency if we are to gain that peace with justice which all our people so intensely and insistently demand.
Mr. President, I offer you on behalf of India our most cordial congratulations on your election as the President of the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly. By electing you, the Member States have recognized your own skill and wisdom and have also honored the struggles and achievements of the Polish people. India has had close and friendly relations with Poland, and I wish to assure you of our fullest co-operation as you discharge your responsibilities.
47.	I should also like to pay a tribute to our outgoing President, Adam Malik, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, for the patience and devotion with which he guided our work during the last session.
48.	We recall the long years of dedicated service which U Thant gave to the United Nations arid for which he will always be remembered with affection and admiration. At the same time, we greet our Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim. His dynamism and his high sense of purpose had been recognized even before his election at the end of our last session. Since then his tireless efforts in the exercise of his duties have earned him high respect. We wish him continued success.
49.	In India, we are celebrating this year the twenty-fifth anniversary of our independence. As a result of the long struggle of our people, we became independent in the year 1947. In the years that followed, the freedom of most countries from colonial domination was achieved and a community of interest in justice and progress began to grown among the newly independent countries. In the quarter of a century that has since passed, we have had our share of difficulties and successes. Today we are more united and determined than we have ever been before in the last 25 years. Our faith in our democracy has become deeper, our goals for the betterment of our people are clearer, and our resolution to achieve them has become firmer. We realize that basically we must rely on our own values and resources in order to strengthen our economy and to accelerate the pace of our development. The bulk of the burden must fall on us as indeed it has fallen on us in the past. At the same time we believe that international co-operation is vitally necessary if humanity as a whole is to be freed from poverty and want. Our unfinished revolution in India will not be completed until full economic and social justice is assured for all our people. In this spirit, we seek nothing but co-operation and friendship with all, on a basis of equality.
50.	India adheres firmly to the policy of non-alignment and peaceful coexistence. This does not, and cannot, mean an exact middle position between any two extreme views on matters of international concern. India's policy of non-alignment is based on the need in the modern world to maximize the area of peace, reduce tension and ensure stability with justice. We believe in the sovereign parity of all nations; we accept the supremacy of none. Our friendship is open to all countries on the same terms. We trust in co-operation among equals, not in co-operation on the basis of domination by one country over another. This policy determines our attitude to all countries, and will continue to govern our relationship with our neighbors.
51.	The last year has been marked by significant detente among nations, big and small. The meetings of leaders in Moscow and Peking, the agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States, especially on the limitation of strategic arms, are helpful changes from the earlier and sterile, and at times dangerous, confrontations. In Europe many prospects for the reduction of tensions have opened up. Some of the recent events in Asia encourage the hope that our part of the world might also soon be moving towards greater understanding and co-operation. Our purpose in this improving situation will be to ensure that the momentum towards an ever-expanding area of understanding and accommodation is maintained.
52.	The world at large is rejecting more and more the concepts of spheres of influence, under the guise of balance of power and of domination of smaller Powers by the mightier ones. In this context the Secretary-General has noted in his thoughtful introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [Af8701jAdd. 1], that the idea of keeping peace and security through a concert of great Powers is outdated, if not outmoded. The current processes of detente can produce healthy and abiding results only when they do not ignore the interests of countries that are yet to participate in them. Non-aligned countries have long striven for such contacts and consultations as are now in fact taking place. At the same time they have repeatedly emphasized the risks to true independence if agreements are not concluded by broad-based consultations.
53.	A recent encouraging development has been the greater and more determined pursuit of bilateralism in the search for solutions to many international problems. In the past there were many instances when the interests of outside Powers prevented the settlement of problems which could have been achieved by mutual consultations among the parties directly concerned. Examples of this kind are not altogether absent in our time. Nevertheless, in areas as widely separated as Central Europe, North Africa, West Africa and Asia, agreements have been reached for solving a number of problems through the efforts of the countries directly concerned. The settlement of problems mutually and bilaterally can, we think, strengthen peace, security and independence.
54.	Looked at from this point of view, the recent developments in the relations between India and Pakistan mark a significant departure from past years, when hostility and suspicion were unfortunately the dominant features. Direct negotiations have provided a more dependable means by which we can settle and solve our problems to the benefit of the vast population of the region. In a sincere search for a durable peace and good-neighbourly relations, we opened negotiations with Pakistan last February which culminated in the Simla Agreement of 3 July 1972. The two Governments have agreed that all problems between them should be settled by peaceful means through mutual consultations.
55.	The President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India have pledged full support and expressed their complete determination for the faithful implementation of the Simla Agreement. For this purpose, further accords are to be arrived at by mutual consultation and discussion. The use of force has been totally abjured. They have also agreed that in Jammu and Kashmir the entire line of control as it existed at the time of ceasefire on 17 December 1971 will be respected by both sides. The two Governments have been taking steps to carry out this agreement and when some doubts and difficulties arose a few weeks ago, these too were resolved by direct negotiations. The military commanders have been meeting from time to time to work out the delineation of the line of control. Agreement on delineation has been arrived at practically everywhere except for a few small pockets where the total area involved is only a few square miles. We have offered to the Pakistan side to have joint inspection and survey, wherever necessary, in order to complete the delineation. We hope that the military commanders of the two sides will meet without any further delay to finalize delineation in the remaining small pockets by holding joint meetings, joint inspections and surveys whenever necessary. We hope that very shortly the entire line will be delineated. The completion of this task will, as already agreed, be followed by mutual withdrawal of troops. In the meantime, exchanges have been taking place of sick and wounded prisoners of war and of those civilians who came to be under the custody of India or Pakistan at the outbreak of hostilities on the western sector.
56.	There are naturally several problems arising out of the armed conflict, and the two Governments have agreed that these problems, as also other basic unresolved matters between the two countries, would be settled by mutual agreement. A series of meetings at various levels is envisaged to achieve this objective. The welcome accorded to the Simla Agreement by the international community will sustain the efforts of the two Governments and their leaders to work patiently towards a durable peace.
57.	The Simla Agreement is the first major fruitful step in the search for mutual understanding and co-operation between India and Pakistan. Its full and effective application should bring about conditions in both countries which will enable their peoples to utilize their resources and energies for the pressing task of advancing their welfare. The peoples of India and Pakistan have many common interests and aspirations and they would wish to live as good neighbors. The Simla Agreement has therefore been widely supported by the people of both the countries.
58.	The emergence of Bangladesh as a sovereign country is destined to be of vital importance in strengthening peace, stability, security and progress in the subcontinent. We welcome Bangladesh as an equal partner in this common task of the countries of the region. The heroism and fortitude of the people of Bangladesh will be an invaluable asset in the reconstruction of their country.
59.	We deeply regret that Bangladesh was not enabled to take its place at the opening of this session of the General Assembly. A country with 75 million people, it has been recognized by over 90 other sovereign States and has already found its rightful place in many international forums. The earliest admission of Bangladesh to the United Nations will further strengthen the United Nations system, will reinforce the principle of universality of our Organization, and will contribute to the more expeditious normalization of relations among the countries of the subcontinent and the achievement of peace and harmony in the area. We are convinced that this General Assembly can do much to bring this about, through reconsideration of Bangladesh's application by the Security Council.
60.	We sincerely hope that, in the shortest possible time, Pakistan and Bangladesh will be able to solve all the problems between them with understanding and as equal sovereign States.
61.	We view with deep satisfaction the fact that India's relations with other neighboring countries continue to grow in depth and so serve to help strengthen the forces of peace and progress in South Asia. The relations between China and India have not shown the necessary and expected improvement. On our part, we continue to be ready, as indeed we have indicated in the past, to resume normal relations with China and to improve them in our mutual interest and with mutual respect. Against the background of the normalization and detente that have taken place in Asia and in other parts of the world such an improvement in Sino-Indian relations is, in our opinion, all the more desirable.
62.	Naturally, I have taken a few minutes to explain at some length the significant developments on the Indian subcontinent, the state of our relations with some of our immediate neighbors, and the hopes for peace and progress they inspire. These issues are nearest to us. I must now deal briefly with some other vital international problems.
63.	The presence in this hall of 132 States should make us doubly conscious of the absence of representatives of many large areas of the world which are still under colonial rule. Nor can we ignore the fact that in several countries rampant racism is being preached and practiced. The solution of these problems will require a degree of awareness and co-operation which are unfortunately still lacking. The Indian delegation will do its utmost to work out, together with the others, all such practical means as the United Nations can pursue. We shall continue to support the struggle for independence being carried out by the people of all colonial Territories, including Namibia, Zimbabwe, Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau). We will not relax our efforts to eliminate racial discrimination, whenever and wherever it appears. The meetings of the Security Council last winter at Addis Ababa provided an opportunity for focusing attention on these problems. We look forward with interest to the outcome of the Secretary-General's efforts with regard to Namibia and to the more effective use of the Commissioner and the Council for Namibia.
64.	The situation that has now arisen in Uganda cannot but cause concern to all of us. The problems facing the Asians affected by the expulsion order are essentially humanitarian in character and can be solved only in a spirit of compassion and understanding. The people facing deportation should be afforded reasonable time to be able to wind up their affairs in an orderly manner and depart in safety. A vast majority of them have lived there for generations and they should be allowed to take with them their personal belongings and a reasonable amount of assets to enable them to restart their lives in other lands with some measure of hope and confidence. We hope that the Government of Uganda will respect these human considerations and do everything possible to discharge its responsibility towards the person and property of these unfortunate people and so lessen their hardship. Any help other countries can give in overcoming this problem will, of course, be most welcome; India, for its part, is doing all it can.
65.	We must ensure that our solidarity in the common struggle against racial discrimination and colonial domination is not undermined. Since we all agree that racial discrimination is an evil to be fought, we, all of us, cannot but oppose it, whatever form it may take.
66.	Tensions and frustrations continue to mount in the Middle East and indeed, as recent incidents have shown, are rising to unprecedented heights of senseless and savage reprisals and terror. The efforts of Ambassador Jarring and of our Secretary-General have not yet borne fruit and meanwhile Israel is persistently consolidating its position to the total detriment of Arab and Palestinian rights and interests. Israel has consistently obstructed all attempts at progress towards a peaceful solution of this problem as laid down in Security Council resolution 242(1967) and has created the situation, where threats to international peace and security are increasing daily and at times ominously. We would also ask why the permanent members of the Security Council have for months failed to meet in the face of this deteriorating situation and this grave problem.
67.	India stands firmly against interference by outside Powers aimed at preventing any people from determining its destiny or choosing its form of government in accordance with its own wishes. The tragedy in Viet-Nam is the prolonged denial, in the most brutal manner, of this basic right of the people. We cannot but strongly deplore and express dismay at the continued and ever-increasing bombardment and aerial bombing of innocent men, women and children, their cities, villages and homes, and the indiscriminate destruction of ports, industries, crops, forests and all other means of existence. We have consistently held and expressed the view for a long time that force and foreign military intervention cannot bring this problem to an end. This view is shared by a large and ever-increasing number of countries. Recent indications are that the United States of America has also come to accept this view. We believe that the seven-point proposal put forward by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South VietNam provides a reasonable basis for peaceful negotiations. The continuance of bombing with savage intensity in Indochina in these circumstances must command our utmost opposition.
68.	We regret the attitude of non-cooperation by Saigon, which holds out little hope of progress towards a peaceful settlement of this problem. The independence, integrity and non-alignment of the three States of Indochina are vital to the peace and progress of Asia. The Geneva accords  provided the framework within which these objectives could be achieved. The decision of the Saigon Government to refuse a visa to the Chairman of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in VietNam is in clear violation of its obligations.
69.	We are disappointed that the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament has not been able to finalize even limited measures during the past year's deliberations. Bearing in mind the link between the strengthening of international security, disarmament and economic development, we expect that the objectives of cessation and reversal of the arms race, especially in nuclear armaments, the elimination of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction and the achievement of general and complete disarmament under effective international control will be vigorously pursued. Our general views supporting the convening of a world disarmament conference, after adequate preparation and with the participation of all States, have been made known and we look forward to a constructive debate during this session.
70.	On the question of the strengthening of international security and related subjects, we are confident that our discussions will enable us to give effect, in a more practical and fruitful manner, to the ideas embodied in the Declaration itself [resolution 2734 (XXV)], with such further elaboration as may be necessary.
71.	The adoption of General Assembly resolution 2832 (XXVI), declaring the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace, is a welcome follow-up of the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security. The creation of zones of peace and co-operation, free from great-Power military rivalries and interventions, and the removal of bases conceived in that context, must be seen as part of legitimate regional efforts towards strengthening international security. My delegation would support the taking of further steps to give fuller meaning and substance to the Declaration and would co-operate with other delegations for this purpose.
72.	The United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held in Stockholm last June, has awakened hopes and fears at the same time. The prevention of pollution is a matter of common concern to the entire human race. But the developing countries cannot accept any line of reasoning which makes the prevention of pollution an excuse for slowing down growth in the poorer countries.
73.	Addressing the Conference, the Prime Minister of India pointed out that "Environment cannot be improved in conditions of poverty. Nor can poverty be eradicated without use of science and technology."
74.	To the bulk of the human population poverty continues to be a much bigger menace than pollution. The true lesson of the Stockholm Conference is that we must start the quest for a world without poverty and without pollution. We consider that the program should be formulated on a world-wide basis in order to assist countries to meet effectively the requirements of the growth of human settlements and to improve the quality of life in existing settlements by creating a human settlement development fund.
75.	The peaceful uses of the sea-bed and the utilization of " the vast and as yet untapped resources of the sea-bed in the interests of mankind remain a matter of importance to us. We cautiously hope that the preparatory work entrusted to the United Nations Committee on the sea-bed  will result in the early convening of a conference on the law of the sea.
76.	Recent developments in the world economy and in the monetary field have caused grave concern to us all and have pointed to the need for the establishing of a more durable and equitable world monetary system. Let us not forget that the world economy will not be restored to health by focusing only on the payments problems of the prosperous countries. Monetary, trade and development problems are all closely interrelated and the developing countries have a vital stake in all of them. The developing countries must therefore participate fully in any decision-making process affecting the future of the international monetary system, so that their legitimate interests may be fully safeguarded.
77.	Last week the International Monetary Fund at its annual meeting  showed some awareness of the problem by setting up a committee of Governors in which the developing countries have increased representation. We consider that the link between the special drawing rights and additional development finance, which we have always advocated and the need for which has now been widely realized, should be established soon.
78.	India participated, with great expectations, in the third session of UNCTAD, held in Santiago earlier this year.
The need for taking speedy follow-up action on the decisions taken at that conference cannot be over-emphasized. It may be too early to attempt a final evaluation of the results of the conference, but clearly many trade and allied issues of great concern to the developing countries have remained unresolved. Continued efforts from all sides are therefore necessary if the high hopes that were entertained in respect of that conference are to be realized.
79.	Two years ago my delegation had occasion to emphasize the great importance of the adoption by the General Assembly of an International Development Strategy for the 1970s. It cannot, however, be said with any degree of confidence that the commitments voluntarily assumed by the international community only a short time ago are being implemented with any vigor and vitality. If anything, there has been a slide-back in the fulfillment of the goals and objectives of the Decade, and the interests of the developing countries have been given only residual consideration. During the remaining years of this decade, therefore, it will be necessary for all of us to catch up with the time loss and to evolve effective and concrete pro-grammes of international co-operation in the economic field.
80.	At the same time, the continuous and well-coordinated review and appraisal of the implementation of the Development Strategy will need to be equally emphasized. We hope that the two newly established committees of the Economic and Social Council, the Committee on Review and Appraisal and the Committee on Science and Technology for Development, will be able to make an effective contribution in this field, in close co-ordination with the useful work already being done by UNCTAD and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization [UNIDOJ.
81.	Our agenda has nearly a hundred items on it, and I have commented on only a limited number of issues. However, we are conscious that many other problems, whether or not they are included in our agenda, create anxieties and difficulties in many parts of the world. The Secretary-General, in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/8701lAdd.l], has given his views on salient aspects of the international scene as it is today, and on the perspective for the future.
82.	In order to complete my presentation I should like to touch upon the Indian experience over the last year or so.
83.	As I said here 12 months ago [1940th meeting], the year 1971 opened for us with great hopes and yet throughout the year we faced endless, and at times nearly insurmountable, difficulties. Confronted with the most appalling difficulties and human tragedies, the Indian people showed remarkable unity and determination. Within three months of the cease-fire nearly ail of the 10 million refugees had gone back to their homes in newly independent Bangladesh. Despite our limited resources we have co-operated fully with Bangladesh in the Herculean task of relief and reconstruction.
84.	The Indian people are now engaged in increasing their agricultural and industrial production. The Government of India has introduced programs in order to achieve greater social justice and more satisfying human values for the Indian people as a whole. In that great experiment the Government and people of India look to the United Nations as a continuous source of inspiration and a vast field of co-operation.
85.	Yet our Organization is constantly being enfeebled, if not undermined, in a number of ways. Some seek in it partisan support; others make an issue of money and finance; still others try to use it to underwrite their domestic policies. All of these may appear to some to be legitimate, but developing countries such as India look upon this Organization as a bastion where international peace and justice can be protected and where progress can be assured. For that purpose the great principles of the Charter cannot be pursued selectively: they should be taken in their totality, and applied realistically in a given situation. U Thant has already drawn attention to this problem, and we are anxious that in the coming years it should be possible to work out a viable system in which the seeming contradiction in Charter principles would no longer prove to be a hindrance to solving several international problems of our time.
86.	Such a step, taken together with the more massive and co-operative utilization of modern science and technology, may well fulfill the dream for which this Organization was established. There is a need for vigilance and study to decide how we can make our Organization more representative, more effective and more responsive to the multitude of needs of people all over the world.
87.	Finally, I would simply say that in spite of many setbacks and disappointments the millions and millions of people of India look to this Organization with faith and hope, and wish that this session of the Assembly may take yet another step, however modest, towards achieving the goal of peace, justice and progress.
Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly for this session, and 1 wish Secretary-General Waldheim well as he embarks on his heavy responsibilities.
65.	There is much violence in the international air, and the atmosphere of it can be felt in this very hall. But we should not forget that the past year has been fruitful for international conciliation. The main theme has been the victory of dialog. Complexes and taboos which had prevented contact between adversaries have almost everywhere been overcome. We read of meetings and agreements between the United States and the People's Republic of China; between West and East Germany; between the Federal Republic of Germany and Poland; between North and South Korea; between the United States and the Soviet Union; between the United States and North Viet-Nam; between the rivals of yesterday who are the partners of today in the European community; and even between India and Pakistan on the very morrow of their armed clash.
66.	How improbable all this would have seemed a short time ago! There is a new spirit in international relations. The polemical and rhetorical mood which dominated the past two decades has given way to a strong instinct for conciliation. Hie question that preoccupies nations today is not how they fell into conflict in the past, but how they can live side by side, together, in the future.
67.	If we look more deeply into the successes of diplomacy in the past year, we find a strong similarity in the conditions under which they were achieved. These successes have all been secured by direct settlement. They have all been the result of laborious and reticent preparation. They have all been the product of agreement, not of external adjudication. In every single case the pursuit of agreement has had to take place outside the United Nations frame-work.
68.	This is of course a significant reflection on the institutional condition of this Organization. It justifies a long hard look at its techniques, its procedures and its atmosphere, which have clearly not been congenial to the craftsmanship of peace. The plain fact is that strident public debate is not a good method of peacemaking but a poor substitute for it. An annual exercise in polemics with preordained voting results either paralyzes conciliation or delays its commencement.
69.	I said here last year [1946th meeting] that the Middle East was the only area in which the parties to a conflict were not engaged in a dialog to bring it to an end. That is still the situation. Those who will have to live together side by side in our region have still not come face to face at a table of negotiation. This is a primary source of deadlock. In all other international disputes the breakthrough has come on the level of communication, and not through substantive commitments ahead of negotiation. The very decision of governments to make contact with each other creates a dynamic of its own. It transforms the context of their relationships and leads to mutual adjustment of their positions and thereafter towards binding agreements.
70.	Despite this central disappointment, the Middle Eastern scene has not become darker in the past year. The cease-fire has been maintained. There seems to be less feasibility for full-scale hostilities. Despite deplorable slogans about "inevitable struggle", it is clear that resumed fighting would serve no interest and advance no settlement. The retirement of Soviet forces and equipment from Egypt has stripped the conflict of its dangerous global dimension. Powers outside the Middle East cannot solve our region's problems; they have not fought its wars and they will not build its peace. The idea of a settlement imposed from outside has become visibly weaker. It is explicitly rejected by some of the Powers; and the summit meeting between the leaders of the United States of America and the Soviet Union in May 1972 revealed what an illusory prospect it is. Once it becomes generally understood that a military solution is not feasible and that an imposed solution is excluded by the international realities of our times, a negotiated peace will emerge as the only valid alternative. The central aim of our policy is to create this consciousness: we aspire to break out of deadlock into a new vision and a new hope.
71.	The developments in Egypt during July 1972 made it natural for the Israeli Government to restate its positions on a negotiated peace. Our ambition is to see an end of belligerency and conflict and to advance towards a peaceful future. Negotiation is not an act of "humiliation" or "surrender" for anybody, as some Arab leaders have said. It is a supreme assertion of national sovereignty and of international responsibility. Courage in leadership does not belong to the battlefield alone; it can be put to the service of conciliation and peace.
72.	In maintaining the cease-fire positions until peace is obtained, we do not seek to perpetuate the cease-fire lines or to freeze the existing situation for ever. Our proposals for permanent boundaries to be established for the first time between Israel and its Arab neighbors will be determined by the need to ensure security and to prevent new wars such as that which arose from the fragile and vulnerable armistice lines of 1967. The construction of a stable peace and security between Israel and Egypt requires a precise, detailed negotiation on territorial delimitation.
73.	The deadlock on the over-all settlement in this sector arises from the fact that Egypt has so far refused to begin negotiation unless its position on the final outcome is conceded in advance. There is no valid precedent for such an approach. Negotiation creates the final result; the final result does not create negotiation. We seek no binding commitments from Egypt in advance on matters that are subject to negotiation. We have not sought to determine the final peace boundary, and we have drawn no alternative maps.
74.	It is unlikely that a transition from complete deadlock to complete peace can be made in one stage. Accordingly, the Israeli Government through its Prime Minister reiterated on 27 July this year its readiness to negotiate a special Suez Canal agreement. Such an accord would be a contribution and a stimulus to an over-all peace. We would consider such an arrangement as a temporary solution and as a step towards peace. In the atmosphere of confidence created by such an agreement, a momentum for further accords would be generated.
75.	It is far-fetched to assert that the positions which I have briefly outlined today offer Arab Governments no possibility of honorable and meaningful negotiation. These principles correspond to the norms of international conciliation. What is required is the application to the
Middle East of the spirit and method that have had successful results elsewhere.
76.	The lack of Egyptian response so far to Israel's willingness to negotiate a temporary Suez agreement has long been an obstacle to progress. So, too, is the deadlock created by Cairo's insistence on determining the boundary and withdrawal issues before and without negotiation. In addition, a new massive barrier to peace has arisen through the resurgence of the Arab terrorist outrages which have sent a shock of revulsion through the civilized world.
77.	The story seems unending. Only a few hours ago, the heroes of the Arab liberation movement handed a transistor radio to a woman passenger about to embark on an airliner from Paris to Israel, with hundreds of passengers. It contained a heavy explosive charge. The passenger showed the vigilance necessary to transmit it to the security authorities. The moral qualities of this terrorism come to expression here.
78.	When the Secretary-General decided to request the inclusion in the agenda of an item on international terrorism [A/8791 and Add.l], he was giving a correct and perceptive interpretation of his rights and duties under the Charter. Organized groups of terrorists, for whom violence is both a means and an end, are threatening the texture of international life. Innocent civilians live in fear of attack by murder squads from abroad. The airlines work in an atmosphere of vulnerability. The international mails are violated by the assaults of cowardly men whose malice knows no compassion and no restraint.
79.	There are many forms and varieties of terrorist violence. They spread like a contagious germ. They respond to destructive and nihilist impulses that have taken root in contemporary culture. And the ultimate arrogance of the terrorists is not that they perform their outrages, but that they then ask for understanding and endorsement. They base their assault on the proposition that all restraints, civilities, immunities and human solidarities must be sacrificed to what they unilaterally proclaim to be their "rights". When they endanger the principles of international order, such as the sovereignty of States, the legal systems of free societies, the universal freedom of the air, the physical safety of men and women who handle the international mail, then the United Nations would lose all credit and repute if its Secretary-General were not to focus its attention and conscience on the approaching abyss.
80.	It is disquieting that the inclusion of the item in the agenda was so strongly opposed that it was nearly lost. Civilized mankind should take a keen look at the Governments which opposed the inclusion of the item or advocated its long postponement. The truth is that their Organization came within a few votes of moral death last week. And the Foreign Minister of Brazil was perfectly right in deploring the General Assembly's failure to endorse the wording of the item as recommended by the General Committee [2038th meeting]. Once the deliberate and unprovoked murder of unarmed civilians is justified by reference to the murderers' "motives" or "frustrations", we might as well include murder amongst the legitimate indulgences of a permissive society and wipe the sixth commandment off the tablet of man's ethical history.
81.	The Israeli delegation will support the draft resolution presented by the United States [A/C.6/L.851] and will give careful study in an affirmative spirit to the text proposed for an international convention against terrorism [A/C.6/ L.850].
82.	But while the problem has its international aspects, especially in aviation and in police security, much depends on the willingness of individual Governments to take measures of prevention on their own soil. The terrorists are particularly active on the territory of free democratic States in which tolerance and hospitality are cherished values. It thus becomes painfully necessary for such States to develop habits of sharp detection and action which are, in a sense, contrary to their easy temperament. But a free society cannot long survive if it fails to defend itself against those who would destroy its freedom and menace its survival by illicit violence. Similarly, many a government must face a moment of agonizing truth when it is called upon to judge the results of giving the terrorists what they want under the threat of dreadful blackmail. To withstand hijackers and kidnappers requires very strong nerves. A compromise convenient for the short term will usually have the effect of giving terrorism a new lease of strength, thereby endangering more victims than are immediately at stake.
83.	In addition to the need for international and national action there is an important area for regional co-operation. The terrorists have made the liberal societies of Western Europe the main arena of their activities. It is here that the majority of outrages against vulnerable aircraft and civilian establishments have taken place. We attach importance and interest to the discussion initiated by the Federal Republic of Germany at the Council of the European Community a few weeks ago regarding measures to combat international terrorism.
84.	My Government has considered certain specific concrete proposals for international, regional and national measures to combat terrorism and we shall bring them forward at the appropriate Committee stage.
85.	It is of course right and inevitable that the item on our agenda [item 92] should be drafted in universal terms. It would, however, be mere pretense to lose sight of the fact that the most rampant terrorism today is that which has its root in Arab hostility to Israel. It was after all the ghastly crime at Munich that gave the incentive for the debate which the General Assembly has decided to hold.
86.	In this context I come to discuss the methods used by Arab terrorist organizations; their political aims; and, above all, the crucial role of Arab Governments in creating and maintaining them.
87.	The original targets of Arab terrorism in the early 1950s were the lives and homes of Israelis on their own soil. The toll was heavy and constant. A bus load of passengers at Scorpion Pass; a group of farmers celebrating a wedding at Patish; a party of scholars on an archaeological expedition at Ramat Rachel; farmers in the collective villages of the Jordan Valley; fishermen on Lake Tiberias. These are random extracts from our nation's memory of bereavement. No other people has had to live all its days with a mark of interrogation hanging over its collective and individual security. A United Nations representative, General E. L. M. Burns of Canada, wrote then of these fedayeen activities that they were worthy of the Nazis. In those days murder was not regarded anywhere as a symptom of revolutionary "progress".
88.	The terrorist bands called the "fedayeen", which, thereafter, became the "Palestine Liberation Organization", developed their main activity in the 1950s and the early 1960s. In other words, they have absolutely nothing to do with the situation created by the 1967 war. Their object has been and is to destroy security of life for Israel, irrespective of what the armistice or cease-fire configuration is at any given time. After 1967 they transferred their violence from frontier areas to Israel's urban centers; shoppers in Mahne Yehuda Market in Jerusalem; housewives in a supermarket; students in a college cafeteria; passers-by in a crowded bus station-and on one horrifying morning a clearly marked school bus at Avivim in Northern Israel. As the mangled bodies of our children, still clutching toys and copybooks, were flown by helicopter to hospitals and morgues, there came across the frontier the gloating voice of Mr. George Habash, Commander of the so-called Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, announcing that it was wise to kill Israelis while they were still young. It is difficult to speak or hear of this morbid monster without a cold chill of revulsion. The essential point for these "liberators" is that their victims should be defenseless, vulnerable and unarmed. This is their chivalry.
89.	The rest is part of the recent experience and memory of everyone in this hall. Before the squalid butchery at Munich, the worst horror was at Lod Airport, where a group of depraved mercenaries from a distant land methodically slaughtered 26 civilian passengers-one of them was an eminent Israeli physicist, others were humble Puerto Rican pilgrims coming from the United States. Condemnation was world-wide; but alas it was not universal. Those who take their weekly instruction from the cultivated prose of Hassanein Heykal should ponder his commentary on the massacre at Lod. I quote from an article by him dated 9 June 1972:
"If there had been three Palestinians there instead of three Japanese I should have been enthusiastic about it, in spite of the fact that at the bottom of my heart I'm for the three Japanese."
90.	The Egyptian Prime Minister's reaction was less sophisticated and more simple, although it had a note of blasphemy. He invoked divine blessing on the murderous example:
"I want to say that what happened at Lod Airport proves that we can, with Allah's help, achieve victory in our battle with Israel. This is the only reaction I have to this matter."
91.	In the history of revolutionary violence there is a constant clash between ends and means. But in the Arab terrorist movement, dedicated to enslavement and genocide, there is no such ambivalence. The aims which Arab terrorism serves are even worse than the means it employs. The means are murder and kidnapping. The aim is not to win freedom for the Arab nation, whose freedom is so
amply and lavishly assured, but to liquidate the national? liberation which the most ancient of nations has already achieved.
92.	There is no need of interpretation here. Quotation is enough. The Palestine terrorist organizations are not at all concerned with finding a solution for the problems of Palestinian Arabs within the framework of a Middle East of which Israel forms a part. This, in fact, is what they are fighting to prevent. The aim is much more radical. Let their leader, Yasser Arafat, speak for himself:
"Al Fatah started its activities in 1956 and its armed struggle in 1965. Its aim is the liquidation of the Zionist Israeli existence."
President El-Sadat is often very frank on this theme. On 2 June 1971 he told the Egyptian National Council:
"The Zionist conquest to which we are being subjected will not be terminated by the return of the occupied territories. This is a new Crusader war which will persist during our generation and through the coming one."
93.	A document called the Palestine Covenant was adopted by all the Palestine liberation groups at the sixth congress of the Palestinian National Council, which met in Cairo in September 1968. The Covenant lays down that the Palestine State is to be an Arab State, that it is to comprise the whole area west of the Jordan not part of it, and that only Jews who were living in Palestine before the "Zionist invasion" could be citizens. The rest -the vast majority- would be pressed to depart. So the aim of this terrorist movement is the liquidation of the solitary Israeli State for the purpose of establishing the nineteenth Arab State. A compact expression of this policy came from former Egyptian Foreign Minister Mahmoud Riad in a press conference in Paris on 1 October 1971, when he said: "I give complete support to the organizations and their program of wiping out the Jewish State."
94.	The concept of "politicide"-the extinction of the identity and personality of a State-is so unfamiliar, indeed unique, that it may be difficult for other Governments to grasp its significance. Israelis study this notion against the background of another unique experience, the memory of which no other people has ever shared. In the Hitler decade we learned that some things are too terrible to believe but that nothing in our people's history is too terrible to have happened.
95.	In questioning Israel's axiomatic right to security and independence, the terrorist organizations commit a disruptive heresy in the life of our age. They rise up in revolt against history, law, justice, humanity and peace. There are now 18 Arab States, with a population of 100 million, an area of 4-1/2 million square miles and unlimited wealth and opportunity. Facing them alone on the scales of equity is the small State of Israel. There is, therefore, only one nation which stands or falls in history by the way in which this conflict is resolved. By-its solitude and uniqueness, Israel's secure existence is the overriding moral imperative in this dispute. The moral quality of the Arab terrorist organizations is determined not only by their brutal acts but by the destructive vision which inspires them. Their
close links with neo-Nazi and anti-Semitic organizations are in full harmony with their inner nature.
96.	I have said that the resurgence of Arab terrorism is a massive obstacle or the road to peace. This is not only a reflection on the psychological atmosphere. *t is true that a condition of hate, fear, bloodshed and bereavement works against the prospect of a conciliatory effort, which would be difficult enough in any case. What is no less grave is tha we find it impossible to accept the distinction between these organizations and the Arab Governments which are our destined partners in the peace effort. The support given by those Governments to the organizations undermines the credibility of their peaceful professions and even the professions are few and far between.
97.	Egyptian support for the terrorists finds expression in the press, radio and television. The terrorist leaders see Cairo as the center at which they co-ordinate matters of common concern with the League of Arab States. Egypt serves as the center where the heads of the terrorist movements meet the representatives of the various Arab countries passing through Cairo. Not a week passes without a central Egyptian personality meeting with a terrorist leader for co-ordination and co-operation. Cairo Radio gives a special program on Palestine in which terrorist activities are constantly praised. The special radio station broadcasting from Cairo, called "Saut Falastin", belongs entirely to the terrorists, who are free to broadcast what they like. The station broadcasts constant agitation and incitement against Israel and justifies every terrorist action.
98.	Egyptian support on the military level is very broad. On many occasions delegations of the organizations with Arafat at their head pay visits to Egyptian army camps in the rear and at the front. Arafat wears an Egyptian army decoration for valor.
99.	The terrorist organizations are permitted to carry on activity everywhere in the country to mobilize volunteers. Apart from their own independent mobilization machinery, they receive active support in this respect from the Libyan Embassy in Cairo, which openly signs up volunteers, pays them and sends them to Libya for training.
100.	Delegations from the various terrorist organizations receive information and instruction in Egyptian military bases. The Fatah stands apart from the rest and has special privileges in Egypt. Its members actually go through training together with Egyptian soldiers in the ranks of the Egyptian army. The "Ein Jalud" unit of the Palestine Liberation Army is commanded by an Egyptian officer. Egypt also helps the organizations with supplies of arms, ammunition and other military material.
101.	The crisis that broke out between Lebanon and the terrorists in June 1972 brought to the fore Egypt's role as guardian and protector of the organizations. Realizing that the terrorist movement might find itself obliged to quit Lebanese territory, the Egyptian President took action to forestall any Lebanese attempt to harm the terrorists. Mahmoud Riad, Secretary of the League of Arab States, was sent as a special mediator. President El-Sadat was not content with that. He sent his personal representative to Beirut in order to exert pressure on the Lebanese Government not to cancel the Cairo agreement of November 1969, which provided for the terrorists' presence in Lebanon.
102.	Egypt's leaders address the terrorist bodies at all their conferences. In any clash between the terrorists and their victims, the Government sponsors the terrorists' cause. In September 1970 a Pan American aircraft landed in Cairo, where the hijackers calmly blew it up in the sight of the authorities. When the Jordanian Defense Minister was murdered as a guest on Egyptian soil, his hosts allowed the murderers to go free.
103.	In Lebanon there are 5,000 terrorists, whose constant activity is undisturbed by the authorities. Under the Cairo agreement between Lebanon and the terrorist organizations, the Lebanese Government granted the terrorists legal recognition, freedom to organize and a base for activity against Israel. Beirut is the seat and center of terrorist planning and propaganda. It is from Beirut that groups set out with detailed plans to commit murder and hijackings and set off explosions in Europe and elsewhere. It was in Beirut and Baalbek that Kozo Okamoto received shelter and training for his assault on the airport at Lod.
104.	Syria was the first Arab State which supported terrorist activities from the outset. President Al-Assad said on 2 September 1971 in the weekly journal Al Mussawar that:
"... the fedayeen are to be found in more than one area of Syria, and they have absolute freedom of movement on the Syrian front. Moreover,"-said President Al-Assad-"we encourage and stimulate them and often we complain that they are not sufficiently active . . .".
105.	Libyan support for terrorist assaults in the Middle East and Europe needs no documentation. President Qaddafi's admiration of the Munich murderers was rhapsodic and explicit.
106.	Whatever the position may be with other terrorist groups, there is no truth or value in a discussion of Arab terrorism which does not face the fact that it is a recognized arm of Arab Governments in a policy of war against Israel. These organizations could not exist, still less function, without the shelter, support, endorsement, financial aid, arms, training facilities and territorial bases supplied by certain Arab States. All the activities of these organizations without exception violate the principles which the signatories of the Charter including Arab signatories-pledged themselves to defend. It is not an accident that the Governments which sponsor Arab terrorist organizations are unable to fulfill normal international obligations. The Arab Governments have not signed the Tokyo Convention;  they have not signed the Montreal Convention;? they have not responded to the Secretary-General's proposal for drawing the attention of the twenty-seventh session of this Assembly to the problem of international terrorism [A/8791 andAdd.lJ.
107.	Now. whether or not the General Assembly can take effective action in this matter, it does at least possess the capacity of accurate judgment. Such honorable words as "liberation", "resistance", "commando" have no application and have never before been applied to attempts to liquidate a lawful sovereignty, to compound the Nazi assault on Jewish survival and to wage a campaign of indiscriminate assault against civilians in the Middle East and elsewhere.
108.	The attitude of Arab Governments towards Arab terrorists is today a graver obstacle to peace than the admittedly disparate positions of the parties to the problems of withdrawal, boundaries, navigation, peace, etc. I say in all frankness: I cannot today believe that Egypt and Syria are willing, or that Lebanon is able, to make peace with Israel; and in that profound skepticism the attitude of those movements to terrorism plays the central role.
109.	The discussion must inevitably take us back to a consideration of the word "Palestine" that appears as the title of the terrorist organizations. Now, is it true that there is a distinct people deprived of self-determination, languishing in poverty, squalor and humiliation, dependent on organized violence as its sole prospect of redemption? Nothing could be further from the truth.
110.	There are some 2-3/4 million Palestine Arabs in the world today. Three quarters of them are in the original territory of Palestine, on both sides of the Jordan that is to say, under Jordanian rule or within the area at present under Israel's jurisdiction. The other quarter are in Kuwait, Lebanon, Syria and Saudi Arabia. Moreover, 1,300,000 Palestine Arabs now hold Jordanian citizenship, which has been available to them since 1950, when Jordan annexed the territories of the west bank with the consent of the Palestinian leaders.
111.	For the entire period of the armistice regime between 1949 and 1967 all Palestine Arabs-except a few hundred thousand who are citizens of Israel were living under Arab sovereignty and Arab flags. In other words, the question of their civic and political identity was a matter for determination by Arab Governments and authorities alone.
112.	The Kingdom of Jordan was a Palestinian State, in the double sense that a majority of its citizens were Palestinians and a majority of all the Palestinians in the world were citizens of that State.
113.	In a final peace settlement a new permanent boundary will be drawn between Israel and its eastern neighbor. Some hundreds of thousands of Palestine Arabs would in all conditions be a community within the State of Israel; this is normal. There is no such thing as 100 per cent self- determination, although the Arab nation comes closer to that figure than any other in history. Those Palestinian Arabs who will be outside Israel's permanent boundary once it is drawn will be free to determine their future in conjunction with the Arab Governments and peoples concerned.
114.	As recently as 8 September 1972, the Israeli Prime Minister made it plain that in her conception of a peace agreement there would have to be important modifications of the previous armistice lines in order to preserve security and to avoid new wars. But she added that it was not her conception that under such an agreement the vast majority of all the Palestine Arabs in the administered territories would have to fall within Israeli jurisdiction.
115.	It follows, therefore, that the political status of the Palestine Arabs would find its solution within a peace settlement. Now, here is the most drastic paradox of all: the "Palestine Liberation" organizations are the implacable opponents of an Arab peace with Israel. Yet nothing but peace with Israel can clarify the political and civil destiny of the Palestine Arabs in a manner compatible with Israel's sovereignty and security, with regional peace and with their own basic interests.
116.	In the meantime, this community is not languishing in despair and poverty: there is a new freedom of movement and contact. The national product of the Samaria-Judea-Gaza areas, administered by Israel since 1967, in which a million Arabs live, has nearly doubled since 1968. The per capita income has risen from 1 670 in 1968 to 1 1,100 in 1972. The agricultural product has tripled. There were less than 4,000 private vehicles in 1969; there are nearly 7,000 today. There were 3,000 television sets there in 1967; today there are 40,000. Fifty thousand workers find labor opportunities in the Israeli market, from which they bring back  1300 million a year. There is no unemployment. Wage levels have trebled since 1967. The value of exports from these territories has risen from  1220 million to  1305 million.
117.	Perhaps more significant than the language of statistics is the spectacle of human contact, commerce and exchange that brings hundreds of thousands of Israelis and hundreds of thousands of Palestine Arabs into a normal and fruitful communion the like of which never existed before.
118.	In the latter half of 1971, 200,000 Arabs from neighboring countries freely crossed the Jordan bridges towards Israel. It is not inconceivable that, when the agreed peace boundary is drawn, the relations between Israel and its eastern Arab neighbors could evolve across open boundaries into something like the community structure in parts of Western Europe today.
119.	So while Arab terrorists in Beirut and European capitals manufacture their bombs and plot their assassinations, the majority of the Palestinian Arabs are living solid lives enriched by a widening contact with their neighbors still clouded, of course, by a lack of political definition, but nevertheless alive with the hope and prospect of a peaceful regional future.
120.	There is, of course, hardship in every sector of Middle Eastern life. But there is not one single problem of the Palestinian Arabs that can be advanced towards a solution by the action of the terrorist groups. There is not one single legitimate interest of the Palestinian Arabs that would not come to reasonable satisfaction in a negotiated peace settlement between Israel and its neighbors. The terrorist groups are not only the enemies of law and order across the Middle East and in many parts of the world: they also alienate the Palestine Arabs from their true interest and their authentic vocation.
121.	The problem of curbing the terrorists is now our most urgent preoccupation. We are resolved to resist and weaken them in our region. We believe that national, regional and international action against Arab terrorism is an indispensable prelude to the fruitful exploration of peaceful prospects for the Middle East.
122.	I have spoken of psychological and human obstacles on the road to peace. Some of these obstacles could easiK be removed. I refer, for example, to the problem of prisoners of war.
123.	There are 10 Israeli prisoners of war in Egyptian hands; they have been there for two and a half to three years. On the other hand, Israel holds 61 Egyptian prisoners of war, most of whom have been in captivity for nearly three years. Syria has been holding three Israeli prisoners of war for the last two and a half years. Israel holds 45 Syrian prisoners of war. Israel also holds 10 Lebanese prisoners of war.
124.	With the cease-fire well into its third year we propose the mutual release and repatriation of all prisoners of war. The arithmetical advantage is overwhelmingly on the Arab side; but in the broader human sense everyone would gain.
125.	The Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 12 August 1949 lays down in article 118 that: "Prisoners of war shall be released and repatriated without delay after the cessation of active hostilities." This provision of the Geneva Convention is clear and definite. In accordance with it there should have been a release of prisoners when the cease-fire entered into force on 7 August 1970.
126.	Articles 109 and 110 of the Convention provide that prisoners of war who are seriously wounded or who are seriously sick must be sent back to their own country even before the cessation of active hostilities.
127.	It is reported that Egypt considers the six pilots amongst the Israeli prisoners that it has captured as being of greater importance than the 60 Egyptian prisoners held by Israel, who are mostly ordinary soldiers. But this is certainly not a humane approach to the problem. All prisoners of war, irrespective of rank, must be released in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Geneva Convention. A gesture of goodwill by Egypt and Syria on behalf of 115 Arabs and 13 Israeli prisoners would help diminish the acute lack of confidence which now obstructs any progress towards peace. What valid argument can there possibly be against this course?
128.	At the same time our Jewish destiny and responsibility inspire our concern for the plight of the small Jewish minority in Syria where 4,500 Jews are held as helpless hostages, forbidden to depart, discriminated against, humiliated, their movement restricted, essential services denied them, their property confiscated, and their livelihood in constant jeopardy.
129.	The plight of Syrian Jewry has been brought to the United Nations General Assembly and its Committees in the past. Two years ago committees to help the Jews of the Arab countries arose in 25 different countries in four continents, and an international committee came into existence. Some of the Arab countries responded to the humanitarian pressure of world public opinion and permitted the Jews who had remained in their territories to leave. Only Syria has persisted in its present position. Public opinion should not rest or remain silent until the imprisoned are released and the Jews of Syria permitted to reach safety.
130.	Year in and year out the problem of the Jewish community in the Soviet Union comes to the General Assembly and its Committees.
131.	The history of the Jews in Russia is a continuous chain of hardship and suffering from the days of the Tsars until the present time. Recently their urgent aspiration to emigrate to their historic homeland has broken through the barrier of silence. Thousands have reached Israel, where they have been received with a deep poignancy arising from a long separation. Many people of goodwill throughout the world saw in the emigration of these Jews, however few, a sign of broader tolerance and humane understanding.
132.	But there has now been a setback; while still permitting the emigration of thousands of Jews, the Soviet authorities have placed limitations on the freedom of movement of scores of thousands in disregard of their fundamental human rights. Many have been arrested just for wishing to go to Israel and have been sentenced to imprisonment. The Soviet information media publish calumnies, slanders and incitement against them.
133.	Many of those who register in the emigration offices are dismissed from employment and thus lose their livelihood. An open anti-Semitic campaign is being conducted, and in the period 1971-1972 alone, dozens of anti-Semitic books have been published in the Soviet Union, in addition to the anti-Jewish campaign conducted by the press and official media of information.
134.	And now as part of the attempt to dissuade Jews from submitting applications for exit permits to Israel, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics decided on 3 August to impose a special tax on Jews with higher education who wish to go to Israel. This effectively deprives thousands of people of any possibility and any hope ever to join their families and to realize their national aspiration. A scale has been established for each level of education, sometimes reaching $25,000 and more per person.
135.	It seems to us that the Soviet argument on the brain drain is not relevant or applicable here. The Soviet Union is not one of the needy developing countries, and Israel is not offering Jewish members of the scientific professions who come from the Soviet Union superior financial rewards. Israel is only able to give them a home, where they will feel as Jews who are not being discriminated against.
136.	Likewise irrelevant is the argument that graduates are obliged, as it were, to repay the cost of their education.
137.	The noted Soviet demographer, Urlanis, states in an article published on 26 July 1970 in Literaturnaya Gazeta that, in the conditions obtaining in the Soviet Union, the average university graduate repays by four years' work the State's investment in his training. The majority of scientists have thus already repaid that investment many times over by their creativity, their invention, their research and their professional work. The decree is not only a harassment of thousands of Jews, it is a serious infringement of intellectual freedom and scientific liberty. It creates the enslavement of scientists and intellectuals whose only crime is that they have studied and worked and contributed to the progress of their country, and today obey the call of their historic consciousness and wish to pursue their intellectual and social vocation elsewhere.
138.	Scientific personalities and institutions across the world have reacted with astonishment and indignation to this limitation of intellectual freedom. It is precisely because we wish to see a greater harmony between East and West, between the Soviet Union and the West, in all fields, including that of science, that we raise our voice in protest against this superfluous obstacle to international understanding.
139.	The General Assembly moves towards its agenda in an atmosphere of crisis for international institutions. There was never a time when a universal framework for international relations was more objectively necessary than today. Yet the concept of international organization is still surrounded by apathy and doubt. The United Nations should act with consistent purpose within the real limits of its capacity and strength. It should reinforce its role in international development in the light of the difficulties and dislocations revealed at the third session of UNCTAD in Santiago. It should take a careful course on the problems of the environment which were impressively brought to light at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm in June. We must not allow an exaggerated ecological alarmist to act as a brake on accelerated development: for poverty and backwardness in most of the world have a more polluting effect on the life of our age than the excesses of industrialization in a small part of it. We should complete it universality by the admission of Bangladesh to membership. And we must not discredit our protest against racial discrimination in the southern parts of Africa by a craven silence about the brutal and capricious persecution of Asians undertaken by the present ruler of Uganda. The distribution of tasks and responsibilities between sovereign Governments and international institutions requires a delicate exercise in understanding. The United Nations must become an instrument for solving conflicts, not an arena for waging them. It should take a diplomatic, not a parliamentary view. Its task is to provide and promote consensus and agreement, not to take refuge in illusions of enforcement or adjudication. If we temper ambition with restraint we may yet endow this Organization with a constructive purpose and enlarge its humane role in the history of our turbulent age.
Mr. President, New Zealand joins with the previous speakers in offering you its warmest congratulations on your election to the presidency. You have already brought efficiency and vigor to the conduct of our work. Like other speakers, I would like to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to my personal friend, Adam Malik, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, who presided so admirably over last year's arduous session.
174.	We meet this year oppressed by the tragic events of recent weeks. A new and horrible form of savagery has been visited upon a desperately vulnerable and unprepared world. Yet this year more than most has been marked by the promise of a new era of international peace and stability. For most of its life the United Nations has mirrored the mutual suspicions and hostilities that characterized the attitude of the super-Powers over that period. Now the easing of tension in the relationships among the great Powers is reflected in a growing pattern of reconciliation among the smaller Powers. The courageous initiative of President Nixon, the summit talks in Peking, Moscow, Warsaw and elsewhere and other vigorous moves towards detente, particularly by the two super-Powers, are in the best spirit of the Charter. As both a courtesy and a duty we should pay a tribute to all the Powers concerned for the prospect of a new peace which seems to lie ahead of us.
175.	Another development in international relationships that is welcome to New Zealand, as a country having a special interest in the European Economic Community, is the impending enlargement of that Community through the entry of the United Kingdom and other new members. We look forward to the emergence of a stronger, more outward-looking and united Western Europe. The trend towards reconciliation between the countries of Western and Eastern Europe is gathering momentum. The negotiation of non-aggression treaties between West Germany and Poland and between West Germany and the Soviet Union and the four-Power agreement on Berlin were welcome first steps in that direction. We strongly hope that the current negotiations between the two Germanys will end in an agreement that will permit us very soon to welcome both to membership in the United Nations,
176.	The changes in great-Power relationships have modified the policies of countries in the area of the world of most direct interest to New Zealand. I refer to Asia and the Pacific. We have been especially encouraged by the Simla meeting between the President of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India aimed at settling peacefully the differences between their two countries. The major problems, of course, are not yet solved; but the way has been opened for a durable settlement in the subcontinent under which the three countries of the region will be able to live together in peace. I would emphasize that New Zealand earnestly feels the need for such a settlement.
177.	Last year's crisis in East Pakistan caused human suffering on a vast and frightening scale. New Zealand, small though it is, has not hesitated to draw attention to the material and political needs which had to be met in order to end that tragic situation. The new State of Bangladesh has emerged from the chaos and suffering. However, independence alone and of itself cannot put an end to human misery. The reconstruction and development of Bangladesh represents an enormous task which the new Government cannot be expected to accomplish without massive external assistance. A great deal has already been done, both by the United Nations and by individual countries. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Indian Government, specifically, have successfully tackled a refugee operation larger than any ever before undertaken in the history of the world. The United Nations and non-governmental bodies have undertaken rehabilitation operations on an unprecedented scale and have thus averted more widespread suffering in the new nation. We in New Zealand have tried to help wherever we can to reduce the suffering in Bangladesh and to promote peace and stability among fellow members of the Commonwealth of Nations on the subcontinent. However, much more needs to be done. In such a vast undertaking it is essential that all partners have the full support and co-operation of the others. For this practical reason, New Zealand believes it is important that Bangladesh should be admitted to the United Nations as soon as possible.
178.	By a happy coincidence, the agreement between India and Pakistan was followed almost immediately by one between two other Asian neighbors, North and South Korea. That agreement opens the way for the deep and bitter hostilities of the past to be worked out by the Koreans themselves. In due course the Organization will no doubt have a role to play. At this juncture, however, we believe that the Assembly took a very wise decision when last week it deferred consideration of the Korean items [2036th meeting], thereby acknowledging that the two Koreas should have the opportunity, and should be encouraged, to come to terms with each other.
179.	The movement in Asia towards reconciliation has not so far been reflected in Indochina and VietNam, in Laos and in the Khmer Republic but it is not for want of effort on the part of South Vietnam and its friends. The United States has offered to withdraw all its forces in return for an internationally supervised cease-fire and the return of the American prisoners. The United States and South Viet-Nam together have offered to hold new elections in which the national liberation front can take its full part in organizing the elections and to have the elections internationally supervised. President Thieu of South Vietnam has offered to resign before the elections take place. My Government supports these proposals, which are directed towards obtaining a just and durable peace settlement in that part of the world.
180.	The encouragement that countries have had this year to seek a peaceful resolution of their differences has also been reflected in the Pacific region. New Zealand, Australia and a number of newly independent small nations of the South Pacific have been developing a very real spirit of community and co-operation. More recently the most outstanding evidence of this spirit has been the creation of what is known as the South Pacific Forum. In that Forum the government leaders of Fiji, Tonga, Western Samoa, Nauru, the Cook Islands, Australia and New Zealand have met together to discuss issues of practical interest to our Governments and peoples. As was mentioned by my Australian colleague yesterday, Papua New Guinea has been invited to observe the next meeting. The first Forum, held in Wellington in August last year, has been followed in 1972 by two further meetings, one in Canberra, Australia, and the other in Suva, Fiji. Talks have covered a very wide range of subjects. However, it is a measure of the Forum's concern with immediate practical issues that it has already established a South Pacific Bureau for Economic Co-operation. This is a serious effort to stimulate new thinking and create greater opportunities for the development of trade and economic advancement throughout that vast area of the Pacific Ocean, particularly in the south.
181.	There is scope for a much greater involvement by the United Nations in the economic progress of the developing countries and the newly independent countries of the South Pacific. Perhaps because of their geographical remoteness, the problems of these countries too have seemed remote to other countries. Yet only a very little more attention, as measured in the total United Nations effort, would do so much more for these small and isolated communities. For that reason we are very pleased that the Asian Development Bank has accepted the independent island nations of the South Pacific as members and that loans are already being made available to them. Also, the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East is becoming increasingly involved in the development of the island nations, as are the United Nations Development Program, UNICEF and the specialized agencies concerned. However, I repeat that there is still much more to be done in that area.
182.	Over the years, New Zealand has involved the United Nations in the process of decolonization as it applied to New Zealand's island Territories. Some years ago we invited the United Nations missions to observe the act of self- determination in the former Trust Territory of Western Samoa, and also in the Cook Islands. This year the Assembly will have a report from a visiting mission of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which at New Zealand's invitation visited the Non-Self-Governing Territory of Nive [A/8723/Rev. 1, chap. XVI, annex I]. That mission was under the able leadership of Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania. In my own Government's view, the report of the Committee is a very well-balanced, fair and, we believe, helpful document. We hope it will do more than enable the Assembly to consider the political issues to which the report itself was directed. It should also lead to a greater understanding of the special problems of survival and development faced by other very small dependent Territories.
183.	A minute ago I touched upon the remoteness of the problems of the South Pacific as seen by the rest of the world, and perhaps especially by the European countries. I draw attention now to the serious apprehension which exists in that vast area about the continuance of nuclear testing in the Pacific region.
184.	There is a regional concern because this year a further series of nuclear tests was conducted in the Tuamoto archipelago, and that is the fifth such series since 1967. My Government is aware that the problem of nuclear weapons testing is a global one and that nuclear tests are at present being conducted by four different nations. We also realize that nuclear testing is a part of the wider problem of the nuclear arms race. But I want to make it quite clear here today that the continuation of atmospheric nuclear testing in French Polynesia is deeply resented by the people of the whole of the South Pacific region and, indeed, of the North Pacific as well.
185.	At its meeting in Fiji earlier this month, the South Pacific Forum that I spoke of earlier unanimously expressed its deep concern that the French Government, in conducting its latest nuclear tests, should have failed to recognize the wishes of the people of the South Pacific area, despite the views so clearly expressed by the Governments and the peoples of those countries. The Forum strongly reaffirmed its opposition to all such nuclear experiments anywhere in the world.
186.	In support of that standpoint, the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, referred to again this afternoon, has asked all States intending to carry out nuclear weapons tests to abandon those plans.  Countries in Asia, and in Latin America bordering the Pacific, have declared their total opposition. It is our intention to seek the Assembly's endorsement of these calls to cease all nuclear weapons testing.
187.	Nuclear testing is an issue on which the smaller States have had to speak bluntly to some of the larger Powers whose activities affect us.
188.	In the debate last year [1955th meeting], the New Zealand representative spoke of the great Powers taking policy decisions that profoundly affect the economic stability of smaller nations. There is still a pressing need for the great Powers to recognize that smaller economies can rock dangerously in the waves of their major-policy decisions. There is still a pressing need for a further liberalization of world trade and monetary matters. New Zealand attaches considerable importance to a successful outcome of the multilateral trade negotiations under the framework of GATT in 1973. The Kennedy Round failed to meet our hopes.
189.	New Zealand, like so many other, smaller countries, is heavily dependent on trade in primary agricultural commodities. We are vitally concerned, on that account, with the progress that will have to be made with eliminating or reducing barriers to trade in agricultural products. The developing countries quite rightly want to have their say in these talks, in these negotiations, in these kinds of decisions. Like us, they are less interested in tariff reductions on industrial products, which seem to be the pervading preoccupation of such talks, than in primary products. There are few benefits for smaller and developing nations in enhancing the economic advantages of the great industrial Powers. But I urge the need for less international charity and more true international economic reality.
190.	I suggested that the past year has seen the advent of a more favorable general political climate. Unfortunately, it will also be remembered as a year in which the resort to terrorism, individual killing of totally innocent and unsuspecting people, mass cruelty, mistreatment, and even genocide, have left a very tragic mark. Private violence as a means of influencing issues between States must be condemned as strongly as State violence against States, which of course is proscribed by our Charter.
191.	The revulsion to which violence gives rise, in the minds of all people throughout the world, renders these horrible actions politically sterile and useless, indeed counterproductive. It does not further the cause which they variously profess to espouse. Take two outstanding examples: those who claim to speak for the Palestinian and the Croatian peoples. What this violence does do is to increase the readiness of Governments to concert their actions to halt this scourge throughout the world.
192.	The New Zealand Government approves the efforts made by the Secretary-General to seek a greater awakening of the United Nations interest in these horrible actions and events.
193.	In the field of human rights, the right to life and security of person must have first place in anyone's scale of priorities. Nobody will underestimate the difficulties of grappling with the subject of international terrorism. Yet, it is surely right that this subject should be on our agenda. It will be a sad reflection on our strength of purpose and on the capacity of this Organization if no effective means can be found to eliminate the threat to innocent lives which this modern phenomenon presents.
194.	At the same time, we must not overlook other problems of human rights which may gravely affect very large numbers of people in particular areas of the world. The question of people of Asian origin expelled from Uganda is a case in point, as was already mentioned. My Government understands the wish of the Government of Uganda, or of any other Government, to ensure that the control of its economy remains largely in the hands of its own nationals. But there is more than one way of implementing such policy, and many countries have shown the way.
195.	The decision taken by the Uganda Government involves the abrupt wrenching from their own homes and the expulsion from the country of people who, for the most part, have that country as their only home and who spring from generations of people who haVe lived in that country. The New Zealand Government, which has offered a place in our own multiracial society to some of those expelled from Uganda, hopes that the Government of Uganda will even now reconsider the decision that it has taken. We would expect that, at the least, a more reasonable time limit for departure will be set and that, having regard to the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the persons concerned will be allowed to transfer from the country those assets to which they have an undoubted personal right. And so we strongly support the initiative taken by Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Foreign Minister of the United Kingdom. My delegation, as you can see, is in favor of his request for the inclusion in the agenda of a new item entitled "International implications of the expulsion of the Asian community from Uganda" [A/8794].
196.	Before I leave the subject of human rights I should like, only very briefly, to refer to three measures taken by the New Zealand Government which may be of interest to some countries represented in this Assembly. First, New Zealand has enacted its own Race Relations Act and should this year ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination [resolution 2106 A (XX), annex]. Secondly, our Government is this year passing legislation providing for the introduction of equal pay for women. New Zealand.was the first country in the world to give women the vote and so we are rather proud to be among the pioneers in making this further contribution to women's rights. The third measure I have in mind is a bill recently introduced in our Parliament which we hope will be passed this year and which will introduce a system whereby accident compensation amounting to 80 per cent of salary will be available to all employed persons who may suffer injury in any circumstances whatever, including accidents such as road accidents or any other kind of accident which is not related in any way to work at their jobs. We regard this as a major social advance and will be happy to provide details to any other countries which may be interested in it.
197.	A notable achievement in international co-operation of the best sort has been demonstrated in Stockholm where the Conference on the Human Environment alerted the world community to the dangers created in our environment by mankind's sometimes reckless use of the earth's resources. The fact of the Conference and its achievement is surely evidence of the vitality of this United Nations. I should like to place on record my Government's appreciation for the efforts made by Sweden as host Government to bring about the success of the Conference. We hope that the role played by Mr. Maurice Strong as Secretary-General of that Conference will be further recognized as we consider, I hope at this session, the setting up of new institutions, including a governing council for environmental programs and an environment fund. In anticipation of the Assembly's decision on the Fund, my Government will be prepared to contribute over a five-year period the sum of $320,000.
198.	The future crisis of world population, which will double by the year 2000, is inextricably linked with the problem of the world environment. Great tensions already exist in some parts of the world between populations and the space, natural resources and social structures available to them considerable stress. If these problems are not better understood now and dealt with in a pragmatic and, I hope, understanding way, we will be giving our children a legacy for which they will not thank us and in which we will take very little pride. Our Government is anxious to take its full share in international efforts which must move forward, we believe, speedily. We welcome the decision to hold the World Population Conference in 1974 [resolution 2683 (XXV)]. New Zealand will also continue, as we have in the past, to support the United Nations Fund for Population Activities which, after only two years, is already an active and worth-while agent of this Organization for this global endeavor.
199.	New Zealand has always "been a staunch supporter of the United Nations. New Zealand has always constantly supported the concept of an active role for the Secretary- General, and I take this opportunity to pay a tribute to Mr. Waldheim. We commend his firm approach to financial and administrative problems and questions at a difficult time. We commend him for the forthright action he has taken to draw the Assembly's attention to the growing question of violence and terrorism. In many more ways also the Secretary-General this year has exercised energetically the powers of initiative with which his office is properly endowed. We trust that he will continue to do so and he is certainly assured of the support and co-operation of New Zealand in that role. 
200.	Again, Mr. President, I congratulate you in your high office. I wish you every success in your heavy and demanding task.
Comrade President, allow me first of all to congratulate you on your election to the high post of President of the most important international political forum, the General Assembly of the United Nations. The unanimity displayed in your election is a reflection of the respect which States Members of the United Nations have for the peace-loving policies of the Polish People's Republic and for you personally.
39.	We should also like to congratulate the Secretary- General of the United Nations, Mr. Waldheim. Although he has occupied the post of chief administrative officer of the United Nations for less than a year, he has already shown his desire to co-operate in ensuring that the role of the United Nations in the maintenance and strengthening of peace is enhanced and its activities in the solution of this main task under the United Nations Charter expanded.
40.	It is logical and natural for sessions of the United Nations General Assembly to begin with a general political debate. Representatives of States Members of the United Nations assess the main international events, review the results of past United Nations activities in the light of the purposes and principles proclaimed in the Charter, and set definite tasks for the future. The political impetus which the United Nations receives during the general debate is helpful in the subsequent consideration of the items on the agenda.
41.	Even at last year's session of the General Assembly new trends were observed in relations among States which went some way towards meeting the desire of the peoples to secure lasting peace on the earth. Today there is reason to believe that these trends are growing stronger, although 
the forces opposed to a relaxation of tension in the world have not ceased their activities.
42.	In these circumstances the United Nations should make new efforts to promote the solution of acute international problems. As a Member of the United Nations and a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union will continue to make its contribution to the cause of the struggle for peace and the transformation of the United Nations into an even more effective instrument of peace.
43.	The Soviet State will soon celebrate its fiftieth anniversary as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. The Leninist formula of the state unity of the peoples of the Soviet Union contains a powerful potential for peace- building. A profound interest in peace is organically inherent in the voluntary and equal union of socialist republic which have joined efforts in a constructive endeavor for the good of their peoples, and predatory wars and the oppression of other peoples are organically alien to such a union.
44.	For the Soviet Union the policy of peace is an adequate reflection, in the sphere of .external relations, of its internal social nature. In the decisions of the Twenty- fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our country put forward a program of peace and international co-operation which, as is universally recognized, reflects not the narrow interests of any State or group of States but the aspirations of all peoples, of all mankind. Every step taken to implement it has a constructive influence on international development as a whole.
45.	"Our policy of principle", as Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, said, "is the active defense of peace, freedom and the security of peoples. We are pursuing it together with our friends and allies, co-ordinating our steps in the international arena."
46.	If aggression is committed, the Soviet Union always sides with the victim of the aggression. If trouble threatens our allies and friends, we always come to their aid. And when we sign treaties, we implement them and fulfill our obligations.
47.	The objectives for which the Soviet Union and all the countries of the socialist community have been tirelessly fighting for many years have taken concrete form in the positive changes which have come about in the international situation. Together with our allies and friends we shall continue to fight for peace, freedom and the progress of the peoples.
48.	While consistently pursuing a policy of peace, the Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community certainly do not claim to have a monopoly in this area. In the interests of peace, we are prepared to co-operate and we do co-operate with all States which are also prepared to do likewise. Whatever their social system and in whatever part of the world they may be situated, the door is closed to no one.
49.	The broader the circle of countries pursuing a constructive foreign policy line and the larger the contribution each of them makes towards reducing tension, the more significant are the changes for the better in international affairs. Recent developments confirm this.
50.	In the past, post-war periods have always turned out to be mere respites between wars. In the present circumstances real possibilities exist for a fundamentally different development, namely, a transition to a system of stable peace, in order to ensure which the United Nations was established.
. 
51.	This transition requires the solution of problems engendered by the Second World War and the special features of development during the subsequent quarter of a century. If we tried to express in the most general form the essence of the changes that have taken place, we should say that it consists in the fact that there is now a possibility of solving some of these problems, while constructive work has begun with a view to settling others.
52.	The territorial realities that have arisen in Europe, the continent where both World Wars originated, are gaining universal recognition and being formalized under international law. The entry into force of the well-known treaties concluded by the Federal Republic of Germany with the USSR, signed at Moscow on 12 August 1970, and with the Polish People's Republic, signed at Warsaw on 7 December 1970, confirms the inviolability of European boundaries, including the boundary between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany and the western boundary of Poland.
53.	The conclusion of the agreement on West Berlin eliminates a chronic source of friction between States in the very center of Europe.
54.	The clearing of the legacy of war from European soil must be completed through the normalization of relations between the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany in accordance with the requirements of observing the sovereignty and independence of both those States and settling relations between Czechoslovakia and the Federal Republic of Germany on the basis of recognizing the Munich Agreement as invalid from the very beginning. As you know, negotiations are being held on this matter and I should like to express the hope that they will have a positive outcome.
55.	Negotiations will soon take place on the conclusion of- a peace treaty between the USSR and Japan which should play its part in closing the book on the Second World War in Asia and in providing a lasting basis for peace and co-operation on that continent as well. For our part, we shall make efforts to ensure the success of these negotiations, but the same desire must of course exist on the other side too.
56.	On the whole the "cold war" is being replaced by recognition of the truth that in the nuclear age there is no other basis for relations between States having different Social systems but peaceful coexistence. More and more often this is taking the form of binding international legal documents.
57.	The prerequisites for many-sided and equal cooperation among States, in the political and other fields, are multiplying.
58.	The high level of such co-operation attained in relations between the USSR and France is an especially conspicuous reflection of these new trends. Soviet-French relations are growing increasingly stronger and we note this with great satisfaction. The trends I have referred to are increasingly manifest in the Soviet Union's relations with a number of other States as well.
59.	As a result of the Soviet-United States summit talks in Moscow in May of this year, a start has been made in the process of rebuilding relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America.
60.	-	Our country attaches great importance to its relations with the United States, a great Power wife a different social system. For our part we shall do everything in our power to develop these relations and we believe that this is in the interests of the Soviet and American peoples and in the interests of maintaining and strengthening international peace. The broadening of co-operation between the two countries has already begun to become a reality, although there remain and will remain political and ideological disagreements of principle between the Soviet Union and the United States as States having different social systems.
61.	Naturally, we proceed from the assumption that no improvement in Soviet-United States relations should be achieved at the expense of other States. This is an important principle of our policy in relations with any State. It is our conviction that all States should be guided by this principle in their mutual relations and it is this criterion which we apply in assessing the significance of various developments in relations between different countries.
62.	Since the first years after the Second World War, international relations have been complicated by the division of the world into military and political groupings which set some States against others and constantly carry the risk of a military conflict. The architects of the policy of establishing military blocs, pursuing the arms race and whipping up international tensions, who for a long time determined the foreign policy of the major Western capitalist Powers, worked hard to bring the world to the dangerous brink of a military conflict. Even today we are constantly encountering the consequences of that policy in various parts of the world.
63.	We can therefore scarcely over-estimate the importance of even the first steps which are now being taken to lay the foundations of security on the basis of the collective efforts of all interested States.
64.	We are now oh the eve of an all-European conference on questions of security and co-operation. Preparations for such a conference are to enter the practical phase very shortly. The great importance of this planned meeting of States lies in making Europe genuinely peaceful and in transforming relations among States on the European continent on the basis of mutual understanding and trust; we are in favor of such a policy and such a course of action in European affairs.
65.	In the well-known Prague Declaration,  the European socialist countries have already put forward their suggestions as to how, in their view, a system of security in Europe should be built up. Many other States have also expressed their views on this score. This is a great and extremely important task and the all-European conference is expected to make an important contribution to its solution.
66.	We are convinced that, if all interested States and Governments show a proper responsibility and a readiness to seek solutions which would be in the common interest, the conference will go down in the history of our time as a great success for the cause of peace.
67.	In Asia, too, the idea of ensuring security, which is equally in the interests of all Asian States, is also beginning to gain ground. The Soviet Union considers the question of security in Asia to be an important task also. TTiose who, for some reason, are not now in sympathy with it should understand that the countries of Asia are no less interested than the Soviet Union in strengthening peace in that area.
68.	Although there has been noticeable progress towards a relaxation of international tension, it is hardly likely that anyone would dispute the fact that so far only a beginning has been made and that much more remains to be done. What is more, unless further progress is made and unless the efforts to achieve greater detente are intensified, all that has been gained could be lost. There have been such cases in history.
69.	Some of the problems awaiting solution within an international framework affect the interests of practically all States. If we consider the substance of any of the problems leading to international complications and if we focus our attention on what directly generates the danger of war and the unleashing of military conflicts, we can only come to the conclusion that it is the use of force by some States against others for the purpose of territorial annexation and for the purpose of subjugating peoples and establishing domination over them, in other words, for predatory purposes.
70 This has been true up to now and remains true today.
71.	In the past tens and hundreds of millions of people in Asia, Africa and America were reduced to slavery by colonial force. Today, when almost all of them have freed themselves, the slightest opportunity is used to restore direct or indirect colonial domination over them.
72.	Those who ventured in the past, and venture now, to use force for purposes which have nothing in common with the interests of the peoples are not greatly troubled by the fact that no dispute between States has ever been, or could ever be, settled on a lasting and just basis by means of force. The use of force for the purpose of aggression, territorial annexation and oppression of other peoples has as a rule laid the foundations for further hostility and further conflicts. For this the peoples have to pay, human beings perish and the great material treasures created by their toil are destroyed.
73.	That is why progressive political leaders for almost as long as States themselves have existed have recognized the need to eliminate the use of force from relations between States. But mere understanding of this is, of course, not sufficient. Practical efforts by States are required. This is all the more necessary now that the presence and stockpiling bf nuclear weapons in the arsenals of States have radically changed the concept of the consequences which military conflicts can have for the peoples of the world.
74.	Although varying views can be held as to the likelihood that this or that crisis or conflict will develop into a nuclear confrontation, as long as nuclear weapons exist, this possibility and this danger also exist. No State, no Government can ignore this. Our country believes that it is possible to eliminate or, at least, to reduce drastically the danger of a conflict between States provoking a nuclear catastrophe. That can be done if renunciation of the use of force in international relations is elevated to the level of international law and if at the same time-I repeat, at the same time the use of nuclear weapons js prohibited.
75.	The Soviet Government is convinced that serious consideration of these questions cannot be put off any longer. The conditions for this are already more favorable now than before and the possibilities for adopting positive decisions are broader.
76.	For those reasons, and because it is aware of its responsibility as a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union has submitted for consideration at the twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly the item entitled "Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons" [A/8793].
77.	The essence of our proposal is that it provides for the renunciation by States of any use of force to resolve international disputes; including the use both of nuclear weapons and of such types of weapons as are commonly called conventional. It is proposed that this renunciation be of such a nature that no one could avoid observing it strictly; this is possible if the United Nations shows the necessary understanding of its responsibility for the fate of the world.
78.	Such an approach is fully in accordance with the fundamental principle proclaimed in the United Nations Charter under which the Members of the United Nations "shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations" [Article 2].
79. The real state of affairs in the world makes it necessary to solve the question of the non-use of force in general and the question of the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons in conjunction with each other.
80. Ever since they first appeared, nuclear weapons have always been considered the most dangerous weapons of mass destruction. This is even truer now since the strength of these weapons is not a constant but is growing.
81.	It would be wrong to lose sight of another aspect of the question: with the development of conventional types of weapons, the danger that they might be used in military conflicts has also increased several times even by comparison with the period of the Second World War. In the last quarter of a century nuclear weapons have not been used in military conflicts, yet who can be unaware of how many tragedies have been brought about by the use of conventional weapons and how numerous have been the victims of their use?
82.	All this argues in favor of the prohibition of the use of force in violation of the United Nations Charter in conjunction with the prohibition of the use, first of all, of nuclear weapons, which are especially important.
83.	The wisdom and expediency of such a decision have also been demonstrated by the experience which the United Nations has already gained in the consideration of problems of security and disarmament. The repeated attempts of the United Nations to find a solution to both these problems are fresh in everyone's memory. Attempts have been made now from one side, now from the other, now in terms of considering the question of the non-use of force, now in terms of considering the question of the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. And what has transpired?
84.	To take only recent years, the States Members of the United Nations have unanimously adopted a resolution on strict observance of the prohibition of the threat or use of force in international relations [resolution 2160 (XXI)], a Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolution 2625 (XXV)], and a Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)].
85.	At the real core of all these documents is the principle of the non-use of force in international relations and of the settlement of all disputes between States solely by peaceful means. All the necessary formulations have been carefully worked out and weighed on the political scales and all aspects of the problem seem to have been taken into account, but it is no secret that the goals set have still not been fully achieved; force is being used and human blood is being shed.
86.	More than 10 years ago, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a Declaration in which it proclaimed the use of nuclear weapons to be a crime against mankind and civilization [resolution 1653 (XVI)]. Since then the United Nations has repeatedly advocated the signing of an appropriate international convention by all States. However, the Declaration on the prohibition of the: use of nuclear weapons was not supported by all the nuclear Powers and it has still not been possible to initiate productive negotiations on the conclusion of an international convention on the question.
87.	Many reasons can be found for the ineffectiveness of the decisions adopted by the United Nations on these questions, but one of the most substantial is unarguably that they were considered and decided upon by the United Nations in isolation from one another.
88.	When the question of prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons was raised, several States had doubts as to the possibility of taking such a step if the use of force was not precluded in relations between States. We shall not now enter into a discussion of the question of the extent to which those doubts were justified but, whatever the case, they became an obstacle to agreement.
89.	At the same time, when the question of prohibiting the use of force was considered, the significance of any decisions adopted proved to be limited in the absence of agreement concerning nuclear weapons, that is to say, the most powerful weapons of mass destruction. The separation of one question from the other introduced a certain lack of understanding and suspicion and weakened the effectiveness of the best decisions of the United Nations. Furthermore, their effectiveness was further restricted because they were all in the form of recommendations, or, at best, declarations of intent. They were not given the force of law.
90.	The proposal of the Soviet Union [A/8793] envisages the adoption of the most realistic and effective decision possible in modern conditions. It is precisely such a decision which is in the interests of all States, regardless of their social systems, the size of their territory and population, or whether or not they possess nuclear weapons.
91.	As a result of such a decision, those States which are militarily stronger, and above all the nuclear Powers, will obtain greater mutual assurance that they are under no threat from one another. The security of each of them will be safeguarded more reliably and at the same time on an equal basis, that is to say, no one will gain a unilateral advantage at the expense of another in comparison with the situation which prevails at present, and no one would lose anything.
92.	Those States which are militarily less powerful, including all those which do not possess nuclear weapons, would also gain. Now, they are justifiably concerned at the danger that nuclear weapons might be directed against them if aggression is committed. The prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons in conjunction with the renunciation of the use of force would remove this threat and greatly strengthen the security of all States.
93.	It goes without saying that the obligation of States to renounce the use of force, including nuclear weapons, can in no way impair their right to individual and collective self-defense as laid down in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. On the contrary, that obligation would reinforce the right to self-defense against aggression and the right to struggle to eliminate the consequences of aggression in cases where it has already been committed and the aggressor seeks to benefit from it.
94.	No one can challenge the inalienable right of States and peoples subjected to aggression to repulse it by employing all possible means so long as the aggressor continues to use force, encroaches upon their freedom and sovereignty and tries to retain territories seized by force. It will suffice to refer to the examples before everyone's eyes: Indochina and the Middle East. Who would dare to contest the incontestable fact that brute force has been and still is being used against the peoples of Indochina and against the Arab States and that they are entitled to use all the necessary means to rebuff the aggressor?
95.	Renunciation of the use of force in relations between States in no way limits the right of the peoples of colonial countries to fight for their freedom and independence using any means which may be necessary in that struggle. This right is recognized by the United Nations as being a legitimate one. It is based on the fact that violence was used against those peoples, who have been the victims of colonialism and aggression, and, in resorting to force to liberate themselves, they are only restoring justice and their flouted rights.
96.	The adoption of a decision on non-use of force and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons would thus be beneficial to all. But this also makes it necessary for all States, particularly all those Powers which possess nuclear weapons, to participate in its elaboration and adoption. Otherwise no decision, not even the very best one, could attain the desired objective.
97.	The Soviet Government has given thorough consideration to the question of the most appropriate form for a decision by the United Nations on the renunciation of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. We propose that consideration of this item should result in the adoption of a clear-cut decision, which, in the interests of maximum effectiveness, should bind together appropriate actions by the two main organs of the United Nations the General Assembly and the Security Council. On behalf of the Soviet Union, the Soviet delegation is submitting the following draft resolution for consideration by the General Assembly:
[The speaker then read out the text of a draft resolution which was subsequently circulated as document A/L.676. For the text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh session, Annexes, agenda item 25.]
98.	The proposed draft speaks for itself. It envisages a major step on the part of the General Assembly a decision on behalf of States Members of the United Nations on their renunciation of the use or threat of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. It contains an appeal to the Security Council to take action to make this declaration binding on all States. For this purpose, and in accordance with well-known provisions of the United Nations Charter, a meeting of the Security Council should be convened at the level of members of Governments or other specially designated representatives.
99.	The Soviet delegation is authorized to state that the Soviet Union will stand ready to participate in the convening of such a meeting of the Security Council and in its work. We shall be ready to join in this political action with all other States which are permanent members of the Council. We are convinced that there can be no higher duty for those States on which the Charter of the United Nations places a special responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
100.	We appeal to all States represented in the General Assembly to study carefully the draft we have submitted and, on the basis "of it, to adopt-unanimously a resolution which will reflect the firm will of this world Organization to put an end to any use of force in relations between States in violation of the United Nations Charter and to eliminate the threat of nuclear war.
101.	In so doing, the United Nations will be giving strong support to the cause of a further relaxation of international tension, the strengthening of peace and increased mutual understanding in relations between States. This step will be in the interests of all those to whom peace, security and peaceful coexistence are not merely words but a guide for action.
102.	The task of building a lasting peace requires the adoption of effective measures to prevent and avert military conflicts in the future. But it is no less important to put an end to the conflicts which are poisoning the international atmosphere now and to put out the military fires in areas where the right of peoples to be masters of their own destinies is being encroached upon. Lack of progress in settling these problems cannot but cause deep anxiety for the future course of world affairs.
103.	The position of the Soviet Union concerning the war against the Vietnamese people is known to all. The continuation and expansion of the United States intervention in Viet-Nam and other countries of Indochina provoke indignation and condemnation. Probably never before have so many declarations been made containing promises to leave Viet-Nam and to stop the war as have been made recently. And never before has there been such a striking contrast between words and deeds. No matter how much the United States manipulates reports on reductions in the strength of the United States infantry in Viet-Nam in order to appease the public, behind those reports there is in reality an unprecedented expansion of military activities and of their cruelty and inhumanity. No matter how many assurances it gives us that it does not wish to settle the internal affairs of the Viet-Nam people for them, it is in fact pursuing a policy that is aimed at eliminating the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam and the people's armed forces of liberation and at preserving the Saigon puppet administration as the sole legitimate authority in South Viet-Nam.
104.	One can only wonder why the only correct conclusion has not yet been drawn: namely, that the Vietnamese people cannot be defeated. Their resistance will not be broken either by heavier bombing, the blockading of ports or damage to hydro-technical installations. The Vietnamese people are fighting heroically against aggression and fighting for just aims, in order to be master in their own country. They cannot allow anyone from outside to prescribe a political and social system for them or to impose puppets who uphold interests that are foreign to the Vietnamese people.
105.	A way out can be found, but only through serious negotiations, for which a constructive basis has been provided by the well-known proposals contained in the statements by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam of 11 September 1972 and by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam of 14 September 1972.
106.	The essence of these proposals is clear and simple. The United States of America must respect the right of the Vietnamese people to genuine independence and the right of the people of South Viet-Nam to self-determination. It must stop the war of aggression in Viet-Nam. put an end to the bombing and mining, the blockade and all military activities in Viet-Nam, renounce the policy of the "Vietnamization" of the war, immediately withdraw all United States troops from South Viet-Nam and discontinue its military participation and support of the Saigon puppet regime. In the solution of the internal problem of South Viet-Nam, it is essential to work on the basis of the real situation: two authorities, two armies and other political forces exist there. The basis for the solution of the problem lies in the equality of the parties and a rejection of annexation. To that end it is necessary to set up in South Viet-Nam a provisional Government which has been agreed on nationally on a tripartite basis and which will handle all matters during the transitional period and organize general elections on truly free and democratic lines.
107.	All those who respect the rights of the peoples and all those who have not lost the ability to assess the state of affairs objectively cannot but recognize that these proposals are very well founded, reasonable and logical and that they express the goodwill of the Vietnamese people. They cannot but reject categorically allegations that the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam is trying to impose a "Communist regime" on South Viet-Nam.
108.	If the United States of America wants the negotiations in Paris to lead to the restoration of peace, it should reply positively to the statement by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam of 11 September 1972. If, however, it is pursuing some other goal, then the talks in Paris can only lead to a deadlock, the war will continue and the full responsibility for it will rest with the United States of America.
109.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it fully supports the proposals by the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet-Nam. All those who cherish the ideals of freedom and independence cannot fail to have a sense of solidarity with the Vietnamese people in their struggle.
110.	A solution to the problems of the Middle East must be found. Recent events linked with the new criminal acts of aggression by Israel against Arab countries, including Lebanon, show how serious is the danger and how far the Israeli leaders are going in their reckless policy.
111.	The responsibility which rests with the aggressors is shared by all those who protect them and whose support enables Israel to defy the United Nations and its decisions regarding the elimination of the consequences of the aggression and the restoration of peace in the Middle East. The Israeli leaders must know that an adventurist policy can lead only to apparent success and that in the final analysis it will inevitably entail retribution.
112.	The attempts to appropriate Arab lands and repeated military acts of aggression cannot be tolerated. The United
Nations has the necessary right and the possibilities to put the aggressor in his place.
113.	Only a long-term and just settlement in the Middle East in accordance with the well-known decisions of the United Nations can ensure the peace and security of all-we repeat, all-States in this region. The Israeli troops must be withdrawn from all the Arab territories occupied in 1967.
114.	For the Soviet Union, support for the legitimate demands of the Arab countries, for the United Nations decisions regarding a political settlement of the Middle East conflict, and for the mission of Ambassador Jarring is a policy of principle. We are pursuing it and we shall continue to pursue it unswervingly.
115.	We also support the just struggle of the Arab people of Palestine for the restoration of their inalienable rights, which have been recognized by the United Nations. At the same time, we cannot, of course, condone the acts of terrorism committed by certain elements among the members of the Palestinian movement which have led, among other things, to the recent tragic events in Munich. Their criminal acts also strike a blow at the national interests and aspirations of the Palestinians and are used by the Israeli criminals to cover up their own piratical policy against the Arab peoples.
116.	On the basis of positions of principle, the Soviet Union opposes acts of terrorism which disrupt the diplomatic activities of States and their representatives, transport communications between them and the normal course of international contacts and meetings, and it opposes acts of violence which serve no positive end and cause loss of human life.
117.	Peace will not be truly lasting until an end is put to the arms race, which is one of the main sources of distrust among States and of an increased danger of war. The struggle for disarmament has been going on for a long time The Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community see in the struggle for disarmament one of the main orientations for their foreign policy activities. And this policy will be continued. Some of the things that seemed almost unattainable even 10 or 15 years ago are now reflected in treaties and agreements that have entered into force. These include some which to a certain extent curb the nuclear arms race and reduce the threat of nuclear war: the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373(XXII), annex], the Treaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the three environments, and others. In addition, the first agreement in history on the elimination of a type of armaments which falls within the category of means of mass destruction, namely, bacteriological and toxin weapons, has now been concluded.
118.	To the sum total of obligations in the field of the limitation of the arms race and disarmament already assumed by the majority of States, one more has recently been added: it concerns those types of armaments which have the greatest destructive force. I am referring to the Soviet-United States strategic arms limitation agreements, signed at Moscow on 26 May 1972. Limiting to the minimum the deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems, the agreements eliminate one of the main motives for unleashing a competition between offensive and defensive missile weapons, the full consequences of which are difficult to predict. By establishing quantitative limits for strategic offensive arms for the first time, the agreements curb the most dangerous trend in the arms race.
119.	The conclusion of the Soviet-United States strategic arms limitation agreements is an important step which will help to reduce the threat of nuclear war and to curb the arms race and which will open up new prospects for progress towards general disarmament. Both sides have agreed to continue the talks with a view to arriving at further agreements in that direction.
120.	Each successful step in the struggle to limit the arms race is important in its own right and is, at the same time, important as a starting point for further efforts. The possibilities for further progress towards the solution of new disarmament problems will increase with each new step on which agreement is reached. Our country has always desired this and we shall spare no effort in continuing to work, together with all other States, to relieve the peoples of the burden of weapons.
121.	The Soviet Union favors the earliest possible solution of the question of the halting of the production of chemical weapons and their destruction, concerning which negotiations are being held in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. It also favors the halting everywhere and by everyone of nuclear weapon tests, including underground tests, the elimination of foreign military bases on alien territory and the establishment of nuclear-free zones in various parts of the world.
122.	States have acquired a great deal of experience in negotiations on disarmament. Various methods have been used and are being used; some of them have fully justified themselves and should be used further. At the same time it can hardly be considered proper that, since the advent of the nuclear age, there has not yet been a single occasion on which States have all gathered together to consider the question of disarmament, which affects all States, socialist and capitalist, large and small, developed and developing, nuclear, and non-nuclear. We can therefore only welcome the fact that the idea of convening a world disarmament conference has become one of the most popular ideas among the States of the world and among world public opinion.
123.	The General Assembly will be considering in a specific manner the question of convening a world disarmament conference [item 26]. Our views on this are well known. We consider that this conference should be a forum at which all countries without exception could present and compare, on an equal basis, their views on the whole range of disarmament questions and come to agreement on practical steps designed to curb the arms race and achieve disarmament. This applies both to weapons of mass destruction and to conventional weapons.
124.	The Soviet Government believes that full advantage should be taken of the opportunities that are now taking shape for the convening of a world disarmament conference. We, for our part, shall continue to do everything in our power to ensure that it is held and is successful.
125.	The question of the strengthening of international security is once again on the agenda of the General Assembly [item 35], This problem is an urgent one and will remain so as long as there are forces at work which are interested not in implementing the principles of the United Nations Charter but in aggravating international tension and suppressing the liberation struggle of the peoples.
126.	Great victories have been won by the peoples in their struggle to eliminate colonial oppression. But this problem has not yet been completely solved and millions of people are still living under the colonial and racist yoke.
127.	The Soviet Union, which was the first country in the history of the world to eradicate national oppression and to ensure genuine prosperity for dozens of nations and nationalities, is irreconcilably opposed to all manifestations of racism, apartheid, colonialism and neocolonialism. Our country opposes all attempts to exert pressure direct or indirect-on States which, after a hard struggle, have won the right to independent development and are now building their national economies, carrying out progressive social and economic reforms and defending their rights to own the natural resources that belong to them. It is the duty of the United Nations to assist those States in every way possible to strengthen their sovereignty and independence.
128.	In international politics it is necessary constantly to take account of the various questions posed by scientific and technological progress and the requirements which such progress is making on an ever-increasing scale in the field of international co-operation. This applies to economic, scientific and technological links, which are becoming ever richer in content. It applies directly to new areas in which States are active, particularly outer space.
129.	It was on the basis of those considerations that the Soviet Union submitted proposals on principles governing the activities of States in outer space, on the conclusion of a treaty concerning the moon and on a number of other matters. At the current session of the General Assembly we are proposing that consideration should be given to the item entitled "Preparation of an international convention on principles governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct television broadcasting" [item 37]. Our purpose in raising this question is to link inseparably, from the very beginning, the use of this new type of space technology to the noble purposes of strengthening peace and friendship among peoples.
130.	The United Nations must promptly acquire a genuinely universal character. Universality could lend the United Nations new strength and enable it to consider world problems with greater results. We therefore see no justification for attempts to create artificial obstacle to the admission of new States to the United Nations.
131.	We consider it necessary to ensure the earliest possible admission to the United Nations of the German Democratic Republic, which is fully entitled to be admitted, as is, of course, the Federal Republic of Germany too. This will be in the interests of the further development of co-operation among States and will be in line with the political situation taking shape in Europe.
132.	No one should cast doubt on the legitimate right to membership in the United Nations of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, which has recently gained its national independence. That State has a legitimate right to become a Member of the United Nations.
133.	In general, the United Nations should rid itself as quickly as possible of the burden of the past, which is still making itself felt in its activities in various spheres. One such sphere is that of questions relating to Korea. This year there are new possibilities before the General Assembly for a constructive approach to the discussion and solution of these questions. Such possibilities had been afforded by the proposal put forward by the non-aligned and socialist States concerning the "Creation of favorable conditions to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea" [A/8752 and Add. 1-10]. But those who in the past created a hotbed of tension in the Korean region and are now trying to maintain it have prevented the General Assembly from considering this proposal at the current session. Everyone understands that an artificial delay in this case can only be harmful and that those States which resort to such methods are showing themselves to be opposed to a just settlement in the interests of the normalization of the situation in Korea and the strengthening of peace in that area.
134.	As to the Soviet Union, our position on the question of Korea has been set out many times. We are in favor of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea and support the measures and efforts of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to achieve the independent and peaceful unification of the country.
135.	During the period in which the United Nations has existed, attempts have been made on more than one occasion to destroy its Charter. Whatever the subjective intentions of those who are now raising the question of the review of the United Nations Charter, the objective reality is such that this will entail great dangers for all the activities of the United Nations.
136.	The Soviet Union considers that the interests of all States without exception require that attention should be focused not on a revision of the United Nations Charter but on its strict observance and on fuller utilization of the possibilities it affords.
137.	What is necessary for the United Nations to succeed is the readiness and determination of Member States to act together in the interests of solving the problems facing the Organization. This should make the United Nations a real center for concerted action by nations to achieve common goals, which is an obligation under the United Nations Charter.
138.	Those who seek to divide the United Nations either according to the principle of the size of the territory or
population of States or by classifying them as "rich" and "poor" are doing a disservice not only to the United Nations but also to the cause of preserving and strengthening peace as a whole.
139, That is not what inspired the founders of the United Nations. They wanted the United Nations to be strong and firm in rebuffing aggressors and to be capable of promoting co-operation among all countries irrespective of their size and level of economic development.
| 140. As to the Soviet Union, it has invariably done and will continue to do everything it can to ensure that the United Nations acts precisely in that manner. The policy of the struggle for peace and security is the general policy of the Soviet Union in the international arena. That policy was adopted half a century ago by. the socialist republics which joined together to form the Soviet Union and it is still the policy today.
141.	The twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly is a regular session. But it could become a prominent landmark in the formation of a new system of peaceful relations among States. For this purpose it should focus its attention on the main and most acute political problems brought to the fore by life itself and the whole course of international development.
During the past few years the world has made remarkable advances toward the Charter goal of practicing tolerance and living together in peace with one another as good neighbors.
45.	In 1972 alone, the United States and the Soviet Union have undertaken with each other to do their utmost to avoid military confrontations, to respect the sovereign equality of all countries and to promote conditions in which no country would be subject to outside interference in its internal affairs. The Soviet Union and the United States have also placed precise limitations on our defensive and, at least for the next five years, on our offensive strategic missile systems. The United States and the People's Republic of China have undertaken to broaden the understanding between our peoples, to improve relations between us in the conviction that this would be in the interests of all States, and to oppose any efforts to establish hegemony in Asia or toward division of the world into spheres of influence. The United Kingdom, France, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed on specific provisions to ensure unimpeded movement to and from Berlin by road, rail and waterways. The Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic have opened negotiations on a treaty to normalize their relations. And North and South Korea have intensified their talks on the plight of divided families and have agreed to establish a joint committee to examine problems of unification.
46.	There have been many other accomplishments in pursuance of the Charter's objectives in 1972. I mention these merely to illustrate how old patterns of hostility are being eroded. If continued, this process will in time find positive reflection within the United Nations itself.
47.	We are encouraged, too, by calls in both Eastern and Western capitals for a more secure and open Europe. A step toward realizing this goal would be the creation of a more stable military balance in central Europe through negotiation of mutual and balanced force reductions. We are currently in consultation with our allies, and we believe exploratory talks on this subject could begin within the next several months. We trust they will be productive.
48.	It is equally important to move toward more normal relationships in Europe relationships which have not existed since the end of the Second World War. Toward this objective, a conference on security and co-operation in Europe, if it is carefully and constructively prepared, could play a crucial role. A conference whose over-all effect was to put a stamp of approval upon the rigid divisions of Europe would only prolong the problems of today into yet another generation. On the other hand, a conference which promoted a more normal relationship among all of Europe's States and peoples would reinforce the trend toward better 
relations on other levels. That is why we believe that the conference must take practical steps to promote the freer movement of people, ideas and goods across the breadth of the continent.
49.	We are also now studying alternative approaches for the forthcoming Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. The United States will pursue the following general aims. First, our endeavor will be to negotiate on offensive weapons. In so doing we shall seek to expand the scope of strategic offensive weapons included in the limitations and to establish an equitable balance in the major delivery systems. Second, we shall wish to examine carefully qualitative limitations which could enhance stability. Third, we will aim to reduce levels of strategic arms. As President Nixon said to this General Assembly in 1969, our objective is ".. . not only to limit the build-up of strategic arms, but to reverse it."
50.	Of course we also attach importance to the work of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, which has now turned its attention to preventing the accumulation of chemical weapons for use in warfare. Work in that Committee has come a long way towards resolving some of the important and complex issues related to possible significant restraints in this area. The United States is intensifying its study of all proposals and we look forward to responding to them at an early date.
51.	It is clear from what I have said that the United States believes that a practical step-by-step approach is the best way to achieve genuine progress m disarmament.
52.	Let me take note of other areas in the world in which progress needs to be accelerated.
53.	In Africa, this Assembly must continue to champion the efforts of all peoples of all races to secure human dignity, self-determination and social justice. The United States will continue to lend its full support to all practical efforts to those ends.
54.	In Latin America, while growth rates in recent years have far exceeded Alliance for Progress targets, economic development is still a primary concern and a primary need. The United States Government remains committed to a substantial program of economic assistance, particularly through regional organizations. And, in recognition of the importance of trade to development, we are actively supporting the participation of Latin American and other developing countries in the coming negotiations on a new international monetary system.
55.	In Viet-Nam the United States has reduced its armed forces from about 550,000 to 35,000. President Nixon has proposed a cease-fire in all of IndoChina under international supervision, an exchange of prisoners of war, and a total withdrawal of United States forces. Under this proposal the political future of Viet-Nam could be negotiated by the VietNamese themselves. President Nixon has also pledged a major effort to assist both VietNamese States in post-war reconstruction. In such circumstances it is hard to understand why the other side persists in believing that the war should be continued.  
 
56.	And in the Middle East, the momentum towards a peace settlement must be regained. We should take note of two positive elements. First, the cease-fire is now in its twenty-sixth month. Second, the climate for a settlement seemed to improve very much as 1972 progressed. We must, however, recognize that the Munich killings have set off deplorable patterns of action and reaction and I emphasize that the United States believes that both action and reaction are deplorable-and that these patterns have seriously clouded the prospects for early progress. Nevertheless, neither side has permanently closed the door to future diplomatic efforts. We believe that the forces favoring a peaceful settlement still have the upper hand. Our task in this Assembly, our task individually as representatives of nations, is to do everything possible to see that the forces that favor a peaceful settlement are supported.
57.	The "no war, no peace" situation which prevails now in the Middle East does not and will not serve the interest of anyone in the area. Certainly a stable, just and durable peace agreement based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967) continues to be the objective of the United States. But this, we believe, cannot be achieved without the beginning of a genuine negotiating process between the parties concerned. No settlement imposed from the outside can long endure. Negotiation is not capitulation. Negotiating activity among long-standing antagonists across the world is occurring at present. Why should the Middle East be an exception? When North Korea can talk to South Korea, when East Germans can talk to West Germans, when Indians and Pakistanis can meet in the immediate aftermath of war and prior to the withdrawal of troops, then surely the Middle East should be no exception to the general rule that differences should be reconciled through an active dialog between the parties concerned.
58.	Let me hasten to add that we do not hold that the process need necessarily begin through direct negotiations. We understand that other diplomatic avenues exist. Ambassador Jarring remains available to help the parties negotiate the terms of a peace settlement in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
59.	Another-and in our view the most promising-first step would be proximity talks leading to an interim Suez Canal agreement. What would such an agreement do? It would separate the combatants, restore to Egypt operation of and authority over the Suez Canal, involve some Israeli withdrawal, preserve the cease-fire, and provide momentum for further efforts towards an over-all settlement.
60.	It is encouraging that both sides agree that such an interim agreement would be not an end in itself but rather the first step towards an over-all peace settlement. Such a practical test of peace on the ground would be in the interests of both sides, and the United States remains prepared to assist in achieving it, if that would be helpful to the parties. Moreover, an over-all settlement in accordance with Security Council resolution 242 (1967) must meet the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Governments on both sides as well as of the Palestinian people.
61.	In considering some of the great political developments of the past few years, one cannot help but observe as the Brazilian Foreign Minister has just done- that the United Nations has not been directly involved. This fact has often been cited in attacks against it.
62.	We are all aware, of course, that the Charter does not intend the United Nations to be the center of all diplomacy. Still, as the Secretary-General puts it temperately in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization, . . in the political sphere the Organization's place is . . . uncertain" [A/8701/Add.l, p. 1]. With that thought most of us would agree.
63.	As we look to the future, it is well to keep in mind that it is not so much in institutional reforms-and we are certainly not opposed to such reforms-as in national wills that the solutions to the problems must be sought. The future of this body, the future of the United Nations, depends on national wills, on the ability of nations to work together, accommodating themselves to each other's problems, if you will. Yet to the extent that better work methods and more realistic institutional arrangements will help, we also must bring them about.
64.	For example, we believe that for the Security Council to maintain its influence and authority, ways must be found to ensure the representation of States, other than the present permanent members and I am speaking about States whose resources and influence are of major importance in world affairs. The absence of Japan, for example, is notable in a body designed to engage the responsibilities of the world's principal Powers.
65.	We believe in greater recourse to fact-finding commissions, to good offices and to quiet preventive diplomacy.
66.	We believe that the increase in bloc voting, often without independent regard for the merits of the issue, is leading increasingly to unrealistic results.
67.	The discussion of the United Nations weaknesses in dealing with political problems has reached its peak just at a time when its contribution to economic development and scientific and technological co-operation is making great strides.
68.	Long before economic development became a major matter of international concern, the United Nations initiated efforts to reduce the economic gap between developed and developing countries. From the start the United States has supported that effort. It is an encouraging fact that during each of the last three years the per capita growth in production has finally achieved a higher rate in the less developed than in the developed world. Still, as the recent World Bank report showed, there are serious problems of income distribution, high rates of infant mortality, low rates of literacy, serious malnutrition and widespread ill health.  The United States intends to continue to devote serious efforts to solving such problems through the improved United Nations Development Program, and through other channels of economic assistance. 
69.	United Nations activities related to science and technology are also having an impact.
70.	The landmark United Nations Conference on the Human Environment has proposed a world monitoring of levels of pollution in water, air, earth and living beings, measuring levels of specific chemicals, such as hydrocarbons which poison the air of the world's cities. To launch this and other important programs without delay, we urge this Assembly to establish the secretariat and the proposed $100 million fund for the environment.
71.	The United Nations can also make a substantial contribution in the fight against drug traffic, particularly heroin traffic. A revised Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs will give the International Narcotics Control Board authority to reduce poppy cultivation and opium production in countries shown to be sources of that traffic. The United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control is helping States to improve their drug administrations, to train police and customs officials, to develop other means of livelihood for opium farmers, and to prevent and treat drug addiction. As President Nixon said last week, Every Government which wants to move against narcotics should know that it can count on our country for our wholehearted support and assistance in doing so'.
72.	Just last week the Secretary-General announced that 1974 will be the World Population Year and the time, of a major United Nations population conference. It is our hope that the conference will lead to the setting of concrete goals of reduced population growth.
73.	The General Assembly at this session will review the progress of its sea-bed Committee? in preparing for a conference on the law of the sea [item 36]. It is important for us to use this opportunity to help make the oceans an example of international co-operation rather than an area of future conflict.
74.	Such activities as pollution, narcotics, the sea-bed and population control-most of them connected with new applications of science and technology will increase in importance in the future. We believe that they must acquire a greater focus and priority in the United Nations.
75.	I have spoken today about some of the United Nations weaknesses as well as some of its strengths because I believe we must look at this Organization realistically so that we may contribute to its future prospects. In that spirit, the United States will continue to support the United Nations. We remain committed to making it stronger and more effective.
76.	During this session the United Nations will have an opportunity and an obligation to take action of vital importance to the international community. The United Nations must deal effectively with criminal acts of international terrorism which have so tragically touched the lives of people everywhere, without warning, without discrimination, without regard for the sanctity of human life. 
77.	Twenty-four years ago the United Nations, in its Universal Declaration of Human Rights, affirmed that every human being has the right to 'life, liberty, and the security of person'. Yet what is happening in the world today to that security?
78.	In Sweden, 90 people boarding an international flight are held hostage and held for ransom by Croatian terrorists.
79.	In London an Israeli diplomat is killed by a bomb sent through the mail. In New York colleagues in the United Nations narrowly avert a similar fate.
80.	In Cyprus 95 persons of many nationalities narrowly escape death on a Venezuelan plane when a bomb is discovered just in time.
81.	In New York shots are fired into the apartment of a member of the Soviet mission where children are playing.
82.	In Munich 11 Olympic athletes are kidnapped and murdered in a day of horror witnessed throughout the world.
83.	In Czechoslovakia a Czechoslovak pilot is killed and his plane hijacked and diverted to West Germany.
84.	In Israel 26 tourists, 16 of them American citizens, are slaughtered in an insane attack at an international airport.
85.	In this year alone 25 airliners from 13 countries have been successfully hijacked, and 26 other attempts have been frustrated. In this year alone 140 airplane passengers and crew have been killed-140 have been killed-and 97 wounded in acts of terrorism. In five years 27 diplomats from 11 countries have been kidnapped and three assassinated. In New York, Arab and other missions have been threatened with violence.
86.	Is there anyone here in this Assembly who has not had the occasion, as he has journeyed by plane from around the globe, to be concerned about his own personal safety? Is there any one of you here who has not wondered what terrorist might strike next, or where he might strike?
87.	The issue is not an issue of war-not war between States, not civil war or revolutionary war. The issue is not the strivings of people to achieve self-determination and independence. Rather, it is whether millions of air travelers can continue to fly in safety each year. It is whether a person who opens his mail can open it without fear of being blown up. It is whether diplomats can safely carry out their duties. It is whether international meetings, like the Olympics, like this General Assembly, can proceed without the ever-present threat of violence. In short, the issue is whether the vulnerable lines of international communications the airways and the mails, diplomatic discourse and international meetings can continue, without occupation, to bring nations and peoples together. All who have a stake in this have a stake in decisive action to suppress these demented acts of terrorism.
88.	We are all aware that, aside from the psychotic and the purely felonious, many criminal acts of terrorism derive from political origins. We all recognize that issues such as self-determination must continue to be addressed seriously by the international community. But political passion, however deeply held, cannot be a justification for criminal violence against innocent persons. Certainly the terrorist acts I have cited are totally unacceptable attacks against the very fabric of international order. They must be universally condemned, whether we consider the cause the terrorists invoke noble or ignoble, legitimate or illegitimate.
89.	We must take effective steps to prevent the hijacking of international civil aircraft.
90.	We must take effective steps to prevent murderous attacks and the kidnapping of diplomats.
91.	We must take effective steps to prevent terrorists from sending bombs through the mails, or murdering innocent civilians. Just a few hours ago, I am pleased to note, the International Criminal Police Organization [INTERPOL], by a vote of 58 to none, condemned such acts and decided to gear up its machinery to help cope with this very difficult problem.
92.	The United States welcomes the initiative the Secretary-General has taken to place this matter on the agenda [A/8791 and Add.l]. Two years ago, before the problem had reached its present dimensions, the General Assembly took the first step, the step that must guide us now. In the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations [resolution 2625 (XXV), annex], which so strongly-keep this in mind reaffirmed the right of self-determination, the General Assembly also unanimously declared that each nation has a duty to refrain from assisting or in any way participating in
"... terrorist acts in another State or acquiescing in organized activities within its territory directed towards the commission of such acts..."
93.	The time has come to make that obligation, which this General Assembly solemnly undertook, more specific and more meaningful. In the past two years the international community has taken certain steps in the field of hijacking. Conventions have been concluded prescribing severe penalties for the hijacking and sabotage of aircraft and requiring States to extradite or prosecute hijackers and saboteurs. We urge all States which have not ratified these conventions to do so.
94.	We are now faced with an urgent need to deter and punish international crimes of violence not only in the air but throughout our societies. The United States urges this Assembly to act, and act at once, to meet this challenge.
95.	First, the draft treaty to prosecute or extradite those who attack or kidnap diplomats or officials of foreign governments or international organizations should be completed and opened for signature at this session of the Assembly. The draft articles on the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic agents and other internationally protected persons are already before the Assembly in the report of the International Law Commission [A/8710/Rev.l, chap. II, sect. C]. 
96.	Second, a treaty providing for suspension of all air service to countries which fail to punish or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft should be promptly completed and opened for signature. We repeat that such a treaty should provide for the suspension of all air service to countries which fail to prosecute or extradite hijackers or saboteurs of civil aircraft. It is our view that a nation which provides a safe haven for hijackers should be outlawed by the international community. A draft of a treaty to do this has already been considered by a sub-committee of the International Civil Aviation Organization. To achieve early action, the process of deliberation should be accelerated and a diplomatic conference to complete the treaty should be called without delay.
97.	Third, a new treaty on the export of international terrorism should be concluded and opened for signature as soon as possible. It should include universal condemnation of, and require the prosecution or extradition of, persons who kill, seriously injure or kidnap innocent civilians in a foreign State for the purpose of harming or forcing concessions from a State or from an international organization. To complete such a treaty, we believe a diplomatic conference should be convened as soon as possible. The United States Government is today circulating the first draft of such a treaty.  We urge all governments to give it their earnest consideration. We refer to this as a first draft, because we are sure that many suggestions for changes will be made. We are perfectly flexible on the form of the treaty, but we think this is a subject that deserves our earnest attention.
98.	We have also embodied these various proposals in a draft resolution which we submitted to the Secretariat this morning for distribution. 
99.	These actions would mark a major advance in the struggle against international terrorism. Surely, it is in the collective interest of every nation represented in this hall to arrest the growing assault on international order with which we are all faced. Let this General Assembly be the driving force for the specific and vigorous steps that are required. Let it prove that the United Nations can meet this test. Let it show people everywhere that this Organization, here, now, is capable of the concrete action necessary to bring us closer to a world free of violence-the kind of world which is the great goal of the United Nations Charter.
Mr. President, I am glad to have the opportunity today of extending to you, on behalf of the South African delegation, my congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the General Assembly. At the same time, I should like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Malik of Indonesia, who so successfully guided our deliberations during the twenty- sixth session of the Assembly.
2.	May I also pay my respects to our new Secretary-General and wish him every success in the discharge of his heavy responsibilities?
3.	Change is inevitable, and nowhere is this more true than in the field of international relations. We contemplate today a world different from the world that existed at the time of the last session of the General Assembly, for the past year has witnessed changes of more than ordinary significance, including the evolution of what may be termed a new relationship among the major Powers. It is true that the legacy of the Second World War, the polarization of the nations of the world into different power blocs, is still with us today more than a quarter of a century later. But recently, important developments have begun to ease at least some of the tensions of the past.
4.	These developments have followed a series of initiatives on the part of several of the major Powers, leading, it would seem, to a degree of reconciliation and a lessening of animosity between some of them. We find ourselves in a new situation, and axiomatically a new situation brings with it the prospect of new opportunities. There is, in particular, the promise of better understanding and theft- fore of a more peaceful world.
5.	We in South Africa hope that this promise will be realized. We welcome any development which tends to lessen international tension and which leans in the direction of defusing, rather than accentuating, international confrontation-confrontation which in this day and age could lead to catastrophe for the world. We welcome the approach of the major Powers which, after all these years, are moving increasingly, albeit cautiously, from a posture of mutual recrimination towards one of negotiation. We are glad that the negotiations which have already taken place provide support for the concept of the peaceful settlement of disputes between nations, large and small.
6.	What conclusions are to be drawn by an onlooker from these developments? In the first place, it is striking that, although the internal political and social systems of the major Powers are often widely divergent, this has not deterred them from reaching an accommodation with one another on the issues which have hitherto divided them. None has found it necessary to change its own system or to try to impose such an adjustment on others. It has, in fact, been specifically stated in communiques and conference documentation that essential differences in ideology, social systems and even foreign policies should be no bar to the conduct of relations between States, based on such universal principles as respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, non-aggression against States, non-interference in the internal affairs of States, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence. It was also recognized that international disputes should be settled without resort to the threat or use of force.
7.	In the second place we should note that, despite the significance of the recent developments to which I have referred, the progress so far made is unfortunately only marginal in comparison with the awesome magnitude and complexity of the problems that still remain. These problems, which vitally affect not only the larger nations but every nation in the world, include such issues as economic development, the preservation of our global environment, famine and over-population, disarmament, and so on. Any advance in these spheres is encouraging and it is indeed gratifying to acknowledge in passing that a measure of progress has this year been recorded in some of them. It is regrettable, however, that even on such cardinal matters as the environment and economic development, political considerations, for reasons frequently not even remotely relevant to the central issue, are allowed to intrude into the proceedings.
A/PV.2046
8.	How are the smaller nations affected by the new fluidity in international relations? It is clear that the developments in the past year or two involving the major Powers have acted as a catalyst for the reassessment of many existing political situations. No country can wisely disregard them altogether. It seems to me, furthermore, that the smaller Powers now have an incentive to show that 
they, too, can relax tension among themselves. The lesson is that consultation and negotiation are more rewarding for all the parties concerned than confrontation leading to possible conflict, destruction and suffering; the lesson is that differences in internal social systems are no deterrent to accommodation between the parties; the lesson, furthermore, is that an essential prerequisite to a climate of mutua1 trust and confidence, leading to the settlement of diffe  ences, is acceptance and implementation of the principles of non-aggression, non-interference in the internal affairs of other States and peaceful coexistence. It is my hope that the smaller States will heed this lesson, strive for cooperation and thus lay the basis for the progress and advancement of their peoples.
9.	In the face of the great problems with which the world as a whole is confronted, and with particular reference to me immense task of development which faces the smaller developing countries, none of us can afford the luxury of international bickering and dispute, which distract our attention from the fundamental problems and detract from our ability to solve them.
10.	Let us in this regard briefly consider the record of the year which has just gone by. We find that progress has in fact been erratic. In some areas improvement has been registered; in others, however, an atmosphere of armed hostility survives in the aftermath of a regional war; elsewhere we have witnessed military coups d'etat, assassination attempts, massive loss of life in communal conflicts, hijacking and terrorism in its different manifestations. Only some of these activities have received the attention of this Organization. This is the darker side of the picture, but I mention it because these are activities which gravely undermine international order and progress, and history will harshly judge the international community and this Organization if they continue unchecked. In the economic and social fields progress has also been uneven and the world has had to live through a further period of financial crisis and instability. It is clear that progress will not come easily.
11.	Against this background of shifting international attitudes and uneven accomplishment, may I sketch some of the principles governing South Africa's approach to international intercourse. As a starting-point, let me reiterate that we fully subscribe to the principle of respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. We shall continue to apply this principle in the conduct of our relations with our neighbors in southern Africa, where the principle has most relevance for us. We have given solemn undertakings in this regard. Our aim is to exist peacefully with each of them to out mutual advantage. We have no aggressive intentions or expansionist ambitions.
12.	We believe also in the peaceful settlement of disputes, which is the fundamental message of the Charter, and we reject the use of violence and force as a means to an end. Instead we favor dialog and negotiation, contact and communication. We can point in this regard to our contacts with the Secretary-General on the future of South West Africa. We remain ready to enter into dialog with anyone who reciprocates our genuine interest therein. Let me make it clear once again today that we are prepared to discuss even South Africa's internal policies in the course of such a dialog. My country practices and lives dialog and sees in it a positive approach to world problems and an effective way of promoting peaceful coexistence and world harmony.
13.	Accordingly we have on several occasions shown our readiness to seek solutions to current problems within this framework. I am convinced that the development of dialog between South Africa and African nations can lead only to improved relations to the benefit of all. There is already evidence that this is so. I may mention in this regard, for example, the historic state visit of the President- for-life of Malawi to South Africa during 1971, which was followed by an equally successful return visit by the South African State President earlier this year. We believe that reciprocal visits of this nature, conducted at all levels, are important from the point of view of breaking down prejudices and increasing understanding.
14.	Then there is the question of internal dialog. It has been asserted in some quarters that South Africa should conduct a dialog with its own people before attempting to engage in a dialog with independent States, particularly those of Africa. This assertion appears to be based, as in the case of so many attitudes towards South Africa, on a fundamental misconception of the situation. There is, in fact, a continuing dialog with the various peoples in South Africa, which has been and is being conducted at all levels, from the lowest to the highest. The self-governing nations emerging in South Africa are producing leaders and representatives who are empowered by their own people to conduct a dialog at the highest level with the South African Government and this they have been doing. Ministers and officials of my Government are in constant touch with ministers and their officials in the homelands, all of which enjoy some form of self-government. Last year the South African Prime Minister himself conferred with leaders of all the different peoples of the Republic, some of which, namely the Xhosas and the Zulus, total as many as 4 million each, and these meetings have continued this year. Moreover, these leaders travel overseas extensively and exchange views and ideas with a wide cross-section of world opinion. What is all this, if it is not dialogue in the truest sense of the word?
15.	It is a strange phenomenon that dialogue in any form should be discouraged in this Organization. The Organization, whose raison d'etre is the maintenance of peace in the world, is the largest and most universal forum of the community of nations for the exchange of points of view. Implicit in the concept of the United Nations is that disputes are better settled by words than by force. It is therefore inexplicable and unforgiveable that the membership should actively or even obliquely support in any way programmes of force, violence and terror, while at the same time disavowing dialogue. We hope that all Members will adopt a positive approach to dialogue and that dialogue itself will not become a source of discord among the nations of the world. It would be tragic if it were to be used by some for divisive purposes to split us into opposing groups or blocs.
16.	The repudiation of dialogue leads to reliance upon uglier means of settling differences, none more ugly and abhorrent than terrorism. Recent incidents of terrorism have horrified the world. But terrorism is not new. It has existed for years. During the past decade or more, indiscriminate terrorism has spread to virtually every corner of the globe, bringing in its wake suffering, destruction and death. The terrorist outrages committed at Munich and elsewhere have been widely condemned, here and elsewhere. This is very proper, but it is not enough. Terrorism is a universal evil which must be stamped out everywhere. There can be no differentiation between types of terrorism. In all its forms it is a disease which respects no frontier. None that ignores it abroad is immune to it at home.
17.	This Organization in particular must be consistent. It cannot shirk its duty and discard its Charter in regard to terrorism. We must speak with one ',oice on this scourge, without equivocation, because terrorism, no matter where it may erupt or what its current guise, cannot shed its essential characteristics: it is beyond the pale of order, of law, of decency, of society and of humanity. We cannot for selfish or regional reasons move to stamp it out in one form or in one region, while encouraging it in another. It is obvious that this merely guarantees its survival and its spread. And yet, the records of this Assembly abound in expressions serving as encouragement to those committed to violence as a means of achieving their political objectives. Furthermore, at the very time of the Munich outrage, plans were openly being laid for stepping up terrorism in Africa. Terrorism will survive so long as this and other Organizations continue not only to condone the use of force and violence as a means to an end but, in certain circumstances, to support and even to subsidize it.
18.	We deplore this attitude. South Africa cannot and will not compromise on the issue of terrorism. We have not hesitated to take drastic action against it in the past, and we shall fight it with all means at our disposal in the future. I much regret, I might add, that even while the Secretary- General and the South African Government are engaged in discussions on the future of South West Africa, with progress already registered, some individuals and organizations, and even some Governments represented here, should still openly advocate the use of force and violence in that Territory.
19.	So far as the contacts between the Secretary-General and my Government are concerned, this is obviously not the opportune moment for me to speak on them at any length. There is no denying that the gap to be bridged is wide and deep, and it cannot be expected that a solution will be found overnight.. Time, perseverance and patience will clearly be required. Nevertheless, we sincerely hope that goodwill, mutual trust and understanding will prevail on all sides and that in this atmosphere progress will be possible. I want again to reaffirm that, so far as South West Africa is concerned, the South African Government is firmly committed to the principle of self-determination and independence with all that this implies, and we shall continue to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the search for a solution.
20.	.In the meantime, South Africa is continuing to assist in the development of the Territory and the advancement of its peoples in all spheres so that they may achieve the declared goal of self-determination and independence as rapidly as possible. During the last two generations we have made a considerable contribution to the Territory's development. I may also mention that, by virtue of South African legislation, all revenue collected in South West Africa, including taxation on foreign investments, is applied there exclusively for the benefit of all the inhabitants. In addition, South Africa itself annually contributes directly and indirectly a substantial amount to the Territory's development. In 1972 this additional contribution by the south African Government, on current account alone, is estimated at $80 million, an amount which very nearly equals South West Africa's own estimated revenue receipts. We shall be more than prepared to continue to assist the peoples of the Territory after independence, if that is what they desire; and we are in a good position to do so, because of our close association with South West Africa over many years, our geographic proximity and our links in numerous fields; but it will be clear that our assistance then cannot be on the same scale as it is today. Even now the growing needs of the indigenous peoples can hardly be met from local and South African resources combined.
21.	After independence, therefore, as in the case of most newly independent States, they will inevitably continue to look beyond their borders for assistance.
22.	In all the circumstances, we simply cannot understand the motives of those who discourage new foreign investment or call for the cessation of existing foreign investment in South West Africa. It cannot be in the interest of the peoples of the Territory to deprive them of the contribution to their welfare which overseas investors make in the context of their business operations there, for it is the inhabitants themselves who gain from such investments. And it must surely be clear that, the closer we move in the direction of self-determination and independence, the more important foreign investment becomes in developing the essential economic launching-pad which new States need in order to get off to a sound start. An attempt to retard the economic growth of the Territory simply means a prolongation of its economic dependence upon others. I would ask those discouraging, or advocating a withdrawal of, investments in South West Africa at least to take account of the wishes of the inhabitants of the Territory, and to cease arrogating to themselves exclusively the privilege of deciding what is in their best interests.
23.	From what I have said today, it should be clear that South Africa has adopted an approach to its problems and its relations with other countries which is not out of tune with the current trend of negotiation and detente now influencing international relations. This applies both to the conduct of South Africa's internal affairs and to the wider international sphere.
24.	I have in mind, in this regard, relations, with our neighbors as well as with the United Nations. We subscribe to this policy because we are convinced that, provided our efforts are not undermined by external influences, it will promote peace in our part of the world.
25.	It should not be necessary to commend a similar approach to Members of this Organization, since that approach is implicit in the Charter. But a return to the Charter in this respect might lead the Organization to higher levels of achievement in the pursuit of its principal objective: international peace 