Since the twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly, some notable events have successively taken place on the international arena. First, there was the cessation of the war in Viet-Nam and Laos. Secondly, there were the talks held and the agreements concluded between the two super-Powers-the United States and the Soviet Union. Thirdly, there was the convening of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. In. the meantime, the third world has further awakened and grown in strength, and the African, Latin American and non-aligned countries held a series of important international conferences. What is the characteristic of the present world situation? Is the international situation really moving towards a general detente? This is a question in which people are interested. The delegation of the People's Republic of China would like to state its views on this question and a number of other questions with which the current session of the General Assembly is confronted.
3.	First, what is the characteristic of the present world situation?
The Chinese Government has long held that our world is now going through a process of great turbulence, great division and great realignment. The basic contradictions in the world are all sharpening, in particular the contradictions between imperialism and colonialism on the one hand and
the oppressed nations and peoples on the other and the contradictions among the imperialist countries, especially those between the two super-Powers. Although no new world war has broken out since the Second World War, local wars resulting from imperialist aggressions have never ceased. The great victory of the heroic Viet-Namese people's war of resistance against United States aggression and for national salvation has once again proved that imperialism and all reactionaries are paper tigers. A small nation can defeat a big one and a weak nation can defeat a strong one, so long as they dare to struggle, are good at struggle and persevere in struggle. It is not the people who fear imperialism; it is imperialism which fears the people. Revolution is the main trend in the world today. Now that the war in Viet-Nam has ended, can it be assumed that the world will henceforth be tranquil? Obviously not. When the Korean war was ended in 1953, some people thought that no more gunshots would be heard in the world. Not long afterwards, however, the Suez war broke out and then the Viet-Nam war started. And even today, the war in Indo-China has not stopped completely, for there is still fighting in Cambodia. Tension in the Middle East has not relaxed in the least. The colonialists and racists are carrying out armed suppression against the African people and the African people are developing armed resistance against them. The aggression against, subversion and control of and interference in countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America by the super-Powers are continuing without end. A recent case in point is the military coup d'etat in Chile. President Salvador Allende died a martyr at his post. We express profound condolences on his heroic death. At the same time, we hold one should not forget how harmful the absurd theory of so-called "peaceful transition" is to the anti-imperialism revolutionary struggles of the Asian, African and Latin American people, a theory which has been advocated by another super-Power. The dismemberment of a sovereign country by armed force and the legalization and perpetuation of that division have also become a tendency on the part of the big Powers in their attempt to dominate the world. In the economic field, the gap is widening between the rich and developed countries and the poor and developing countries, and even among the developed countries there exist many contradictions, and hence detente among them is far from being the case. The recent Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-aligned Countries, held at Algiers, strongly condemned racism, Zionism, colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism and strongly demanded a change in the present state of affairs in the world, demonstrating a further awakening of the Asian, African and Latin American peoples. In a word, we consider that the characteristic of the present situation is one of great disorder throughout the world and not tranquillity. And the main trend amidst this great disorder is that countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution. 

5.	Second, why is there no tranquillity in the world today?
6.	We have always held that all countries in the world, big or small, should be equal; that all countries, irrespective of their social systems, should establish normal State relations on the five principles of mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual non-aggression, noninterference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence; and that international disputes should be settled peacefully on the basis of these principles without resorting to the use or threat of force. This should apply to relations between big Powers, to relations between a big Power and a small country, and all the more so to relations between a strong and a weak, or between a rich and a poor country. It was on these principles that China started to improve its relations with the United States and established diplomatic relations with Japan. In their joint communique issued in Shanghai on 27 February 1972, China and the United States further declared that they should not seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and were opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony. The same principle was reaffirmed in the Sino-Japanese statement of 30 September 1972 on the establishment of mutual diplomatic relations. In our view, the above-mentioned principles are the minimum criteria for the equality of all countries in international relations and indicate the correct way to achieve a relaxation of international tension.
7.	As sovereign States, the United States and the Soviet Union are fully entitled to take the measures they deem appropriate to improve and develop their bilateral relations. However, we cannot but point out that the Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War signed by them on 22 June 1973 goes far beyond the scope of bilateral relations. One may ask, Who has given them the right to enter into what they call "urgent consultations" in case of a dispute between either of the parties and other countries and even between any other two countries? The phrase about disputes which "appear to involve the risk of nuclear conflict" is open to any interpretation, and their so-called "urgent consultations" are bound to be followed by actions dictated by their own interests. Does not this mean that they may interfere at will in the relations among all countries on the strength of the huge numbers of nuclear weapons in their possession? China absolutely will not go begging for nuclear protection from any country, nor is she afraid of nuclear threat from any country. But we feel in duty bound to state our views on this matter since it concerns all the people of the world.
8.	The signing of such an agreement by the Soviet Union and the United States is by no means accidental, but is derived from the so-called principle which they agreed upon in 1972 that the Soviet Union and the United States have "security interests. . . based on the principle of equality". What is meant by "security interests.. . based on the principle of equality"? To put it bluntly, it means rivalry for world hegemony — wherever one goes, the other will do the same. What they are doing now is simply to wrap up this content in the form of an agreement.
9.	In fact, this Agreement is a mere scrap of paper. It contains no explicit undertaking on the non-use of nuclear weapons; still less does it envisage the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. The United States Government was more frank when it stated that the Agreement is only a general statement of policy which does not involve any particular positive actions that either side has to take, and pointed out that agreements are not always maintained and there is nothing self-enforcing about this document.
10.	However, the Soviet leaders have made a great fanfare, lauding that Agreement to the skies, alleging that it ushered in "a new era" in international relations and opened up "historical vistas for strengthening universal security as a whole," and that it was "indeed of historic importance for all mankind". They have their motives for so eulogizing the Agreement. One may recall Khrushchev's famous remarks: "Even a tiny spark can cause a world conflagration" and "We" — that is, the Soviet Union and the United States-"are the strongest countries in the world, and if we unite for peace there can be no war. Then if any madman wanted war, we would but have to shake our fingers to warn him off." In this way, if the Soviet Union could be bound together with the United States, would not the whole world have to cringe to them? However, in our view, things may not necessarily turn out that way.
11.	It is not so easy for the Soviet Union to bind itself to the United States. Shortly after the signing of the Agreement, the Soviet Union pressed forward with its underground nuclear tests and hastened the development of missiles with multiple warheads. The United States will not take this lying down. Why? Because the desperate struggle for nuclear superiority and world hegemony still goes on. The contention between the Soviet Union and the United States now extends all over the world. A vivid proof can be found in the recent subversion of a government in Asia and another in South America. Their scramble is becoming increasingly fierce. That is the reason why there is no tranquillity in the world today. So, what peaceful coexistence is there to speak of? There is. only a travesty of peaceful coexistence; the substance is coexistence in rivalry. But whether such coexistence can last is, of course, another question.
12.	The Soviet leaders noisily proclaim that as a "socialist" State the Soviet Union is the "natural and surest ally" of the developing countries. In the past, some people in China also believed this, because they saw the Soviet Union as the homeland of the great Lenin and the Chinese revolution, a continuation of the October Revolution. Therefore, how could the Soviet Union, as a socialist State, fail to give the developing countries whole-hearted internationalist assistance? But since Khrushchev rose to power, we came to realize, thanks to the long and direct experience we had gained as a result of the Soviet Union's demand for the establishment of a joint fleet in the China Sea, its withdrawal of experts, its tearing up of contracts, border intrusions, subversions, and so on, that this was not the case, and that what the Soviet Union practised was not internationalism but great-Power chauvinism, national egoism and territorial expansionism. Therefore we will not blame those friends who have so far failed to see this for lack of experience. How can a socialist turn into an imperialist? There is in fact nothing strange about it if one goes a little into the history of the international Communist movement. Was not Karl Kautsky once a somewhat well-known Marxist? But he later betrayed Marxism and capitulated to imperialism. It was Lenin who passed the final historical verdict on Kautsky in his well-known pamphlet Trie Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky.  People can change; so can a State. It has changed, and what can one do about it?
13.	Lenin pointed out on one occasion: "We judge a person not by what he says or thinks of himself but by his actions." That applies to a State as well. What has the Soviet Government done to other countries in these years? This is clear to the broad masses of the people of Czechoslovakia, Egypt and Pakistan, to the peoples of Cambodia who are fighting dauntlessly, and to other peoples who have been subjected to its aggression, subversion, control, interference or bullying. The actions of the Soviet Government have amply shown that it is "socialist in words, imperialist in deeds", as Lenin said.
14.	The Soviet-United States Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War cannot hoodwink many people or intimidate the peoples of the world, but can only arouse indignation, misgivings and disillusionment. The tide is mounting against the hegemonism and power politics practised by the super-Powers.
15.	Third, who is really against detente?
16.	Shortly after the war in Viet-Nam came to an end, the United States Government pronounced 1973 to be "the year of Europe". That was followed by the first stage of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe — a conference advocated by the Soviet Government for many years. All this indicates that Europe is the focus of contention between the two super-Powers — the United States and the Soviet Union — and that the so-called European Security Conference is nothing but one of the forms of contention. Its proceedings showed, however, that it went far beyond the scope to which the two superpowers wished to confine it. At that Conference many countries stated pointedly that deeds and not empty promises are called for in the matter of security; that European security must be based on the safeguarding of national independence and sovereignty; that one must not become mentally disarmed and off guard simply because the European Security Conference has taken place; and that in order to guarantee European security, military blocs must be disbanded, foreign military bases dismantled, and foreign troops withdrawn, so that the relations between European countries may be established on the principles of mutual respect for independence and sovereignty, complete equality and non-interference in each other's internal affairs.
17.	Moreover, some countries pointed out that the security of the Mediterranean and the security of Europe

were inseparable and that there could be no security for Europe when the Mediterranean is under the armed threat of, and contention by, the two super-Powers. All this is tantamount to a direct blow at those who seek by means of this Conference to consolidate the occupation of many European countries which resulted from the Second World War or the events thereafter, and to proceed further to disintegrate Western Europe and dominate the whole of Europe. The European Security Conference is still going on; but, judging from the proceedings of its first stage, it will further expose the ambitions of that super-Power which seeks to divide and disintegrate Western Europe.
18.	While stepping up its arms expansion and war preparations and its world-wide contention with the United States for spheres of influence, the Soviet Union is clamouring for "spreading the zone of relaxation to the whole world". Accordingly, it has lately picked up once again the long-ignored trash known as the Asian Collective Security System. This is most amusing. It reminds us of the American by the name of John Foster Dulles, who, after the war in Indo-China was brought to an end by the first Geneva Conference in 1954,  hastily rigged up the so-called South-East Asia Treaty Organization, which was directed against China and whose members were mostly non-Southeast Asian countries. The Soviet Union is a European country and the chief of the alliance deriving from the Warsaw Treaty. Why should it be so eagerly concerned about the "collective security" of Asian countries? Has the ghost of John Foster Dulles gone to the Kremlin? Actually, would it not be less devious and more direct simply to extend the Warsaw Treaty to Asia?
19.	Lately, the Soviet leaders have tried to pin an additional label on China, namely "opponent of detente". As the Chinese saying goes, this is putting Mr. Chang's hat on Mr. Li's head. Since you say you are so anxious to relax world tension, why do you not show your good faith by doing a thing or two — for instance, by withdrawing your armed forces from Czechoslovakia or the Mongolian People's Republic and by returning the four northern islands to Japan?
20.	We hold that imperialism means war. There is a danger of war so long as imperialism exists. Today, when the various types of basic contradictions in the world are sharpening, the danger of a new world war still exists, and the people of all countries must be prepared, and must not let themselves be misled by a temporary and superficial facade of detente. Only thus can we better strive for a bright future for the world. In the final analysis, the destiny of mankind is decided by the people in their hundreds of millions who persevere in struggle and unity, and not by the one or two super-Powers.
21.	Fourth, there is the Cambodian question.
22.	The Chinese Government resolutely denounces the United States Government for continuing to support in various ways the puppet regime in Phnom Penh and wantonly to interfere in the affairs of Cambodia. The regime of the traitorous Lon Nol clique, which is now installed in Phnom Penh, was imposed on the Khmer people by the United States imperialists and their allies and has been illegal from its very inception. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of the head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, is the sole legal government of Cambodia. The People's Armed Forces of National Liberation of Cambodia under its leadership have liberated over 90 per cent of Cambodia's territory, with over 80 per cent of the population. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia has been recognized by nearly 50 countries. The participants at the recent Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries, which met in September at Algiers, have declared that the Royal Government of National Union under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk is the only legal government of Cambodia and earnestly requested all countries which love peace and justice to give it formal recognition [see A/9330, p. 12]. This is a voice of justice. The Chinese Government holds that the continued usurpation by the traitorous Lon Nol clique of the seat in the United Nations is a contempt for all countries that uphold justice, for the Fourth Conference and for the United Nations itself. The Chinese Government firmly maintains that the present session of the General Assembly should take a decision immediately to expel the representatives of the traitorous Lon Nol clique from the United Nations and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of the head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, its rightful seat in the United Nations.
23.	Fifth, I turn now to the Korean question.
24.	There are now before the General Assembly two draft resolutions on the Korean question — one sponsored by the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan and other countries [A/C.1/L.645], the other sponsored by Algeria, China and other countries [A/C.1IL.644 and Corr.l]. Regarding the former draft resolution, the Chinese Government considers that the position for retaining the United Nations Command and the United States forces in South Korea and for the entry of both North and South Korea into the United Nations is unreasonable and contrary to the joint communiqué of North and South Korea issued on 4 July 1972,  although it contains the positive element of dissolving the so-called "United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea".
25.	The withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the Korean question are long overdue. According to the provisions of the Korean Armistice Agreement of 27 July 1953,  a high-level political conference for the settlement of the Korean question ought to have met within three months after the Armistice Agreement became effective. The conference was not held only because of the obstructions put up by the United States side at the time. Subsequently, the question was again discussed at the 1954 Korean Political Conference in Geneva. The then United States Secretary of State, Mr. John Foster Dulles, peremptorily rejected all reasonable proposals, thereby blocking once again a solution to the question of the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the Korean question. The United States was then absolutely unwilling to withdraw its forces from South Korea.
26.	What could be done about it? Well, if you would not withdraw, we would.
27.	In 1958 the Chinese People's Volunteers unilaterally and unconditionally withdrew from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Consequently, there are no foreign forces on one side in Korea, while large numbers of foreign forces, mainly United States forces, are stationed on the other side. This most unreasonable state of affairs cannot but constitute an obstacle to the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea.
28.	Is South Korea so lacking in national self-respect that it must rely on the support of foreign forces? Obviously, such a state of affairs cannot be tolerated by the people in South Korea. Subsequently, thanks to the initiative of President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, a joint communiqué of North and South Korea on the independent and peaceful reunification of the country was issued on 4 July 1972, leading to the start of a dialogue between the North and the South. This was a big step towards the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the problem of the reunification of Korea by the Koreans themselves. With the issuance of this communiqué, the Korean Armistice Agreement, signed 19 years ago, to a great extent ceased to play the role it once had. The Koreans in the North and the South have themselves agreed upon refraining from committing armed provocations, big or small, and upon taking active measures for preventing incidents of unexpected military conflicts. Is this not the best guarantee for the maintenance of the armistice?
29.	It is captious to say that the dissolution of the United Nations Command and the withdrawal of foreign forces would nullify the 1953 Armistice Agreement. It should be recalled that the Korean Armistice Agreement was signed between the Korean People's Army and the Chinese People's Volunteers on the one hand and the United Nations Command on the other. According to that kind of reasoning, would not the withdrawal of the Chinese People's Volunteers mean that the Korean Armistice Agreement had long been nullified? Since the Chinese People's Volunteers could withdraw from Korea, why cannot the foreign forces in South Korea under the signboard of the United Nations Command do the same?
30.	The continued presence of the so-called United Nations Command and of foreign forces in South Korea is at variance with the principles agreed on by the two sides in Korea on 4 July 1972 that "unification shall be achieved through independent Korean efforts without being subject to external imposition or interference". In point of fact, it is the very presence of this outside force that has emboldened the South Korean authorities to reject a number of reasonable proposals put forward by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, thus causing the dialogue between the North and the South to bog down. The Kim Dae Jung incident which occurred not long ago
has shown how abjectly the South Korean authorities depend upon foreign forces. In order that conditions may be created to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, the United Nations Command should agree to disband, and all foreign forces stationed in South Korea should agree to withdraw.
31.	As for the entry of both North and South Korea into the United Nations, this is plainly an attempt to legalize and perpetuate the division of Korea, which runs counter to the principle agreed upon between the North and the South that has a homogenous people, a great national unity shall be sought, above all as one nation, transcending differences in ideas, ideologies and systems". In his five propositions put forward on 23 June of this year [see A/9027, para. 19], President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has pointed out that the North and the South should not enter the United Nations separately and that if they want to enter the United Nations before the reunification of the country is achieved, they should enter it as one State, at least, under the name of the Confederal Republic of Koryo after the Confederation is enforced. This proposition is entirely reasonable and merits the sympathy and support of all countries that uphold justice.
32.	Sixth, there is the question of Bangladesh.
33.	At the time of the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly in 1971, the Soviet Union supported India in
 dismembering Pakistan by armed force. The General Assembly and then the Security Council adopted resolutions by overwhelming majorities calling for cease-fire, troop withdrawal and the repatriation of the prisoners of war by India and Pakistan f General Assembly resolution 2793 (XXVI) and Security Council resolution 307 (1971)]. At its twenty-seventh session, in 1972, the General Assembly further adopted two interdependent resolutions calling for the repatriation of Pakistan prisoners of war and expressing the desire for the admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations [resolutions 2938 and 2937 (XXVII)].
34.	It was not until 28 August of this year that an agreement on the repatriation of prisoners of war and civilians was reached between India and Pakistan at New Delhi. This agreement has come much too late, but its ultimate conclusion is to be welcomed. The agreement reached is on paper, and there will have to be a process before it can be turned into reality. Complications may yet arise. The Chinese Government holds that the question of admitting Bangladesh to the United Nations can be considered once the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council are implemented without qualification. But this can be done only after the thorough implementation of the United Nations resolutions, and definitely not before.
35.	Seventh, there is the Middle East question.
36.	Although the two super-Powers are both trumpeting about a general world trend towards detente, a tense stalemate of "no war, no peace" still prevails in the Middle East. When the Soviet Union dismembered Pakistan in 1971, no one said there was the risk of a nuclear war. Neither has anyone made a similar warning in connexion
with the current United States intervention in Cambodia. It is only in the Middle East that, at the mention of an attempt by Arab countries to repulse Israeli aggression and recover their lost territories, the air is filled with cries about a risk of nuclear war between the two super-Powers. Why is this so? Because the situation of "no war, no peace" created and maintained by the two super-Powers serves them best in their scramble for spheres of influence, oil resources and strategic positions in the Middle East. In. appearance the two super-Powers are each supporting one of the antagonistic sides, but in essence they are like two clay figurines which have been kneaded together and then remoulded, so that there is something of each in the other. Take the case of the aggressor Israel. Could Israel be so unbridled in its truculence if it received only supplies of American weapons but none of Soviet manpower? In our opinion, the so-called risk of a nuclear war has been deliberately fabricated to scare people. It is futile to count on the super-Powers to bring about a settlement of the Middle East question. Nor will the situation be changed by any resolution adopted by the United Nations. The only way out is to act independently and rely on one's own efforts. China has never had anything to do with the Israeli Zionists. China firmly supports the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle against Israeli zionism. We believe that so long as they uphold unity and persevere in struggle, the Palestinian and other Arab peoples, with the support of the people of the whole world, will certainly surmount all the difficulties on their road of advance, recover their sacred territories and regain their national rights.
37.	Eighth, there is the question of opposing colonialism.
38.	An excellent situation prevails in Africa. In the past year, the African people have achieved a series of new victories in their struggle to win and safeguard their national independence and to oppose racism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism. Through their struggle they have come to realize more and more the necessity of armed struggle and mutual support. The Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [OAU], at its tenth ordinary session held last May in Addis Ababa, issued the resounding call to "eliminate all forms of colonialism on the African continent". The conference documents fully manifested the unity and co-operation of the African countries and their militancy against the common enemies, as well as the determination of the African people in the territories which have not yet become independent to expand their armed struggle for national liberation. With imperialist and superpower support and connivance, the racist regimes and colonialist authorities in Africa are resorting to more insidious and brutal means in their desperate struggle to buttress their tottering rule. They have long refused to implement the United Nations resolutions which reflect the just demands of the African people. What deserves special attention is that while the old-line colonialists are on the decline, neo-colonialists of different shades are trying to take their place by means of cunning and deceptive manoeuvres. The super-Powers are sowing dissension among the African countries so as to fish in troubled waters. The African people are still faced with the task of a protracted, complicated and tortuous struggle. Africa belongs to the great African people. The Chinese people stand firmly by the African people. We resolutely support the peoples of Mozambique, Angola, Azania, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Guinea-Bissau, Spanish Sahara and other regions in their just struggle for national liberation. We warmly hail and give recognition to the new-born Republic of Guinea- Bissau. We resolutely support the just struggles of all African countries against aggression, subversion and the sowing of discord by colonialism and neo-colonialism and in defence of State sovereignty and African unity. We are confident that the awakening African people will continue to win new victories in the course of their coming struggle.
39.	Ninth, there is the question of opposing maritime hegemony.
40.	The determined struggle for the recognition of maritime rights in a zone of 200 nautical miles initiated by Latin American countries has won increasing support among the numerous small and medium-sized countries. Both the Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the OAU and the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held earlier this year, expressly declared that a coastal State is entitled to establish an exclusive economic zone or a zone of national jurisdiction with the maximum limit of 200 nautical miles. And land-locked States are also entitled to share sea-bed and fishery resources. On this problem of maritime rights, the numerous small and medium-sized countries are waging a gigantic and vigorous struggle against the maritime hegemony of the super-Powers. With a view to seeking hegemony on the seas and oceans, the super-Powers are trying in vain to preserve the outdated law of the sea and are doing their utmost to restrict the territorial sea and scope of jurisdiction of all countries. They insist that the three-nautical-mile or 12-nautical-mile rule for the territorial sea is sacred and inviolable, arguing that the expansion of the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction will narrow down the open sea. This is a bluff. What sacredness and inviolability! The three-nautical-mile rule was a man- made stipulation, and so was the 12-nautical mile rule. Both rules reflect the reality of the time when the seas and oceans were controlled by colonialism and imperialism. What is there that is so sacred and inviolable? As to the assertion that the larger the territorial seas and the zones of jurisdiction, the smaller the open sea, the question must be asked, What is the open sea? The so-called "open sea" has, in fact, always been the "private sea" of a few strong naval Powers. The numerous small and medium-sized countries have now stood up; they constitute the majority and demand a change in the so-called law of the sea, which is advantageous only to the imperialists. What fault can-one find with this? In a proposal submitted by the Soviet Union and its allies to the United Nations Industrial Development Board on 2 June 1972, they said that "the sovereignty over the natural resources is depending to a great extent upon the capability of utilizing these resources by the industry of the developing countries .. '.". 
41.	At the 101st meeting of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction held in Geneva on 22 August 1973, a Soviet representative said that the developing countries could not increase their catch even if they had a 200-nautical-mile zone, because they lacked the technical know-how, fishing capacity, and so forth. These statements simply mean that the greater the might, the greater the right. This is the logic of imperialism, pure and simple. Why are the super-Powers so violently opposed to the position of the small and medium-sized countries for enlarging the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction? It is not difficult to see the underlying motive if only one takes a look at the contention between the United States and the Soviet Union for maritime hegemony in the Mediterranean, the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean, the Caribbean, the Pacific and the Atlantic Ocean and their rivalry in setting up bases and plundering the fishing and sea-bed resources there. When the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction are enlarged, their "private sea" over which they act the overlords will contract. How can the super-Powers not desperately oppose this? However, their opposition will eventually prove futile. So long as the numerous small and medium-sized countries are united by seeking common ground on major points, while reserving differences on minor ones, and persevere in tenacious and protracted efforts, their struggle against maritime hegemony is bound to triumph.
42.	The struggle against maritime hegemony is an important aspect of the struggle waged by the numerous developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America to protect national resources and develop the national economy. It is also a new focus in the current struggle against hegemonism. In other economic spheres, the developing countries are also more closely co-ordinating their actions and strengthening their unity in the struggle against exploitation, plunder, dumping and monopoly by imperialism and big-Power hegemonism. The bilateral and regional economic co-operation of the developing countries is growing, and the various organizations of raw-material- exporting countries are expanding. More and more developing countries have come to realize that, in order to consolidate political independence, it is imperative to attain economic independence, and that in order to develop the national economy, it is imperative to rely on their own efforts and strengthen their mutual support and cooperation. It was by plundering and exploiting the people of Asia, Africa and Latin America that colonialism and imperialism accumulated their fortunes. Therefore, the people of these continents are fully entitled to demand repayment of this debt. However, in the light of China's own experience, colonialism and imperialism will never repay the debt and, what is more, they will create more difficulties for those countries which are defending their national independence and developing their national economy. It is futile to harbour any unrealistic notions about .them. We must persist in opposing imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. We must rely on ourselves, rely on the people, wage an arduous struggle and exert sustained efforts. We believe that, by so doing, the developing countries will certainly become prosperous.
43.	Tenth, there is the question of disarmament.
44.	The Chinese Government has always stood for disarmament. But what we stand for is genuine disarmament, not phoney disarmament; still less empty talk about disarmament coupled with actual arms expansion every day. At present, we face the harsh fact that the super-Powers are hawking disarmament, and the Soviet Union in particular is most energetic about it. Nearly every year it comes up with some sort of proposal on disarmament at the General Assembly. Last year, it boasted of the great significance of its agreement with the United States on the so-called limitation of strategic nuclear weapons. And this year, it is even more vehement in lauding the so-called epoch-making significance of the Soviet-United States Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. Meanwhile, it has sanctimoniously proposed a 10 per cent reduction of the military budgets of the five permanent members of the Security Council and the utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries [2124th meeting]. This is Krushchev's old war which has been peddled for more than a dozen years. It has not deceived many people. How are military budgets to be assessed? To study this problem alone, a committee will have to be set up and work for many years. Can military budgets really be reduced? Anyway, nobody has ever seen this happen. We think it is better to stop this kind of empty talk, and stop it quickly. If you are really the "natural and surest ally" of the developing countries you should come up to this rostrum and declare openly that your military aid to all developing countries which is used to resist foreign aggression is gratis and free of charge, that you will not be a merchant of death, and that, although you have charged previously, you will not press for the payment of debt and interest, especially in the case of the struggling Arab countries. Be forthright and simple. Declare publicly that you will cancel all the military loans, that there is no need for repayment and that you will let them be gone with the wind. Would not that be more practical?
45.	What general disarmament? Actually, in the world today, it is the two super-Powers that are engaged in an uncontrollable arms race. Their aim is nuclear superiority and the nuclear hegemony with which to dominate the world. To put it bluntly, any disarmament must first of all be the disarming of these two super-Powers. But can this be realized? On this point, the United States Government is somewhat more candid than is the Soviet Government. It admits that military expenditures cannot be reduced in the context of rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers. As to the numerous small and medium-sized countries, the real problem they face is definitely not disarmament, but the strengthening of their necessary and independent defence capabilities. Even Western Europe is inadequate in defence capabilities. How much more so are the large number of small and medium-sized countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America? What have these countries got to disarm? To talk about general disarmament in these circumstances is gibberish. If such proposals were really accepted, it would mean to ask the whole world completely to disarm itself in front of the two super-Powers and allow itself to be ordered about.
46.	The Chinese Government is in favour of convening a world conference on genuine disarmament. But there must be the necessary pre-conditions and clear aims for the conference. That is, all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against non-nuclear countries and in nuclear-weapon-free zones. For example, the Soviet Union should undertake obligations in respect of the nuclear-weapon-free zones in Latin America, and they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible for all countries big and small to discuss on an equal footing and with equanimity and to solve the questions of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and other questions free from any threat of force.
47.	Some people charge that China's position on the disarmament question is "either all or nothing". This is a distortion. One may ask, What difficulties are there for nuclear countries first of all to undertake the obligation, as the first step towards nuclear disarmament, that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against non-nuclear countries or in nuclear-weapon-free zones? Is this not a truly effective first step towards the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons? But these disarmament- advocating "saints" would not even agree to undertake this minimum obligation. Does this not suffice to show that they are actually imperialists who persist in arms expansion and aggression, menacing the people of the world and aspiring to world hegemony?
48.	The People's Republic of China is taking part in the activities of the United Nations for the third year. We wish to say frankly that what we have experienced in the United Nations has caused us to become worried. Speeches are multiplying and resolutions are piling up in the United Nations, yet the Organization has not been able to look into matters which it ought to — for instance, the question of the prevention of nuclear war — and it is impotent in the solution of many major world issues — for instance, the Middle East question. If things continue this way, what future is there for the United Nations? However, we are not disheartened. We believe that the present conditions in the United Nations should be changed and that the Charter should be revised. How can the United Nations go on working in the same old way it did more than 20 years ago, when the world has already changed? The third world has risen up. The United Nations must be able to give expression to the desires of the numerous small and medium-sized countries, truly to give effect to the principle of the equality of all countries big or small and to cease to be controlled by the super-Powers and their small number of followers if it is to be worthy of its name. China is ready to work together with all countries which love peace and uphold justice for the achievement of this noble aim.﻿Mr. President, let me begin by congratulating you most warmly on your election to this internationally very important post.

3.	I speak to you as a German and a European. To be more exact, my people live in two States, but they have not ceased to regard themselves as one nation. At the same time our part of Europe is as yet not much more than an economic community, but before the end of this decade it will grow into a European union.
4.	We-the representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany-are no strangers here. We have long participated in the work of the specialized agencies. We maintain good relations with nearly all Member States. Here, at United Nations Headquarters in New York, we have been shown much understanding in past years.
5.	I wish to take this opportunity to thank our friends who have spoken up for us in this forum when we were not in a position to speak for ourselves. We shall not forget on whom we were able to rely.
6.	But I would add immediately that we have not come here to use the United Nations as a wailing-wall for the German problems or to make claims we know cannot be met here in any case. Rather have we come to assume our
share in the responsibility for world affairs on the basis of our convictions and within the framework of our possibilities.
7.	The foundation of the United Nations and the most incisive break in German history were events which coincided in a dismal, though at the same time encouraging, manner. The recent history of my people is truly closely linked with the genesis of this world Organization.
8.	Since 1945, my people and the two German States have put a considerable distance behind them. And yet our gratification over the fact that we have been given a friendly welcome here is mitigated by the division of Europe, which is glaringly manifest in Germany and which, almost three decades after the end of the war, still claims its victims.
9.	Certainly, starting from that part of Europe which has been the source of so many tensions, we have initiated and developed a policy of understanding which was, and still is, to fill in the rifts left behind by the cold war.
10.	We have, I feel, seen in the meantime that not only tensions but also detente can be contagious.
11.	As the Federal Republic of Germany we shall-as our Foreign Minister emphasized here last week in internationally binding terms [2119th meeting] -seek to create a state of peace in Europe in which the German people also can regain their unity in free self-determination. I say this knowing very well-with all respect — that the United Nations cannot really help us in this matter.
12.	The two German States, belonging as they do to different political groupings and facing the problems resulting there from, have learned that their interrelationship is today of greater importance than what is known as the "national question". This applies to Europe in general.
13.	In spite of their different social and political systems, bound by treaty and conviction to different alliances, the two German States have resolved to embark on a policy of peaceful neighbourliness, coexistence and, we hope, cooperation. We shall therefore try to spell out peaceful coexistence German-style. But in view of the thoroughness which is said to be a German characteristic, I cannot promise that this will always be easy.
14.	More importantly, the consistent renunciation of force as a means of achieving aims, of furthering one's interests, and of settling differences, was the decisive factor needed to sow the seed of detente in the heart of Europe. The
Treaties of Moscow  and Warsaw,  the Treaty on the basis of our relations with the German Democratic Republic, the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin' of 3 September 1971, and soon, I hope, the treaty with Czechoslovakia, which has already been negotiated, are based on the renunciation of force.
15.	Berlin, in particular, displays constructive opportunities. It no longer needs to be a source of tension in the heart of Europe. West Berlin can bank on its interests being looked after by the Federal Republic of Germany and on its protection being ensured by the three Powers that, being the supreme authority, remain directly responsible for the city's security and status. If there is anyone to appreciate what this change means, it is most certainly the one who carried responsibility as Governing Mayor of Berlin during a critical phase of its history.
16.	Renunciation of force was one element of our peace policy; acceptance of the realities the other. Accepting things as they are has been a bitter pill f6r some, but it was necessary for the sake of peace. For the renunciation of force and the right attitude to reality are the two basic elements of concrete efforts to safeguard peace.
17.	This prepared the way for the next step. A new foundation is to be laid for security and co-operation in Europe.
18.	The bilateral renunciation of force encourages us to enter a second, multilateral phase of European diplomacy, the purpose of which will be to produce a real change in the relationship between the European States on the basis of what has come about. It will do so through growing security from military threat, through intensive economic and technological exchanges, through human contacts, through better knowledge of each other-in other words, through a state of everyday peace.
19.	It would indeed be a good thing if the work done in Helsinki and now being continued in Geneva could soon end with a conference convened at a level that is commensurate with the results achieved.
20.	What I am talking about here will one day be understood as a significant experiment: how States can learn to master conflicts and eliminate the use of force.
21.	And if we even succeed, by means of confidence- building measures, in reducing the tremendous wastage that has been the outcome of mistrust between antagonistic systems, we should then have set a historic example.
22.	Security cannot ensue from trust alone. This, too, is a reality. The reverse is also true. Confidence ensues from security.
23.	A distinguished American spoke in this city of the-as he called it-impending "nuclear death-dance". Well, the two super-Powers, which have in their hands by far the most powerful means of destruction, recently signed an agreement which some are still trying to fathom but which is quite certainly intended to obviate the death-dance. That agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union is oriented to the principle of renunciation of force and the recognition of realities. It is, as I understand it<a piece of active coexistence and surely also a response to the demands made by the non-nuclear-weapon States at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, held at Geneva in 1968. On that occasion, five years ago, the nuclear- weapon States were called upon to assume concrete obligations of their own. I still hold the view today that those who have power, particularly nuclear power, do not on that account have morality, or wisdom, on their side. Big dangers to mankind emanate from the big Powers, not from the small.
24.	A code of responsibilities should be defined to which the nuclear Powers should subject themselves.
25.	But if the two super-Powers do not guarantee peace, who could do so in their place? The responsibility of neither of the two I have mentioned can today be assumed by anyone else, and neither of them can relinquish that responsibility.
26.	Thus our world today finds its balance. But it cannot achieve that delicate balance without the specific weight of the People's Republic of China, of Japan and of the European Community. In such a system the specific role of Latin America, of the African countries, of the Asian subcontinent and the other partners in Asia becomes effective.
27.	Power, I feel, cannot be quantified at will. There is a limit to its expansion-a limit where power becomes transformed into impotence. But detente is not synonymous with disengagement, and it must by no means turn into disinterest if fresh tensions are not to be created.
28.	At the end of the cold war there can, in my view, be neither conquerors nor conquered. Truly, peace, if it is to be secured, must not call for victory of the one and defeat of the other, but only for the one victory of reason and moderation.
29.	Incidentally, the use or threat of force should be renounced by all States-regardless of whether they possess nuclear weapons or not. If we have the determination, and the luck, this can be achieved by means of an appropriate system of international agreements.
30.	The only legitimate exception would remain the right to individual and collective self-defence as embodied in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
31.	My Government is willing -- and I wish to state this clearly — to help bring about an agreement which is being prepared in the Atlantic Alliance in order to make possible a balanced reduction of forces and weapons systems. This will not be possible overnight, but we must get down to the job seriously and consistently.
32.	It is not only a question of giving Europe an opportunity. It is a question of giving the world an opportunity to create conditions which will permit us to turn our attention, and to devote our national energies, to the massive problems of tomorrow. If I may pose the question, If the world does not succeed in quelling force and violence and effectively proscribing it, how will it then be capable of resolving the problems of peace which — free and remote from force — will demand the employment of all our energies?
33.	In a world in which we are all increasingly dependent on each other, a policy for peace must not stop on our own doorstep. Small steps can, as experience has shown, take us quite a long way.
34.	To mediation and conciliation in disputes we attach special importance. The strengthening of international jurisdiction, the consolidation and further development of international law, require, in our opinion, the active attention of this Assembly.
35.	Our world is going through a process of rapid change. Many of its explosive problems and conflicts spread like epidemics, owing to the increasing proximity of States and continents. Conflicts can, as shown by the terrorism of the present time which either does not want to use or is incapable of using political means, have unforeseeable consequences owing to the vulnerability of highly developed societies.
36.	The catch phrase "preventive conflict research", the prerequisite to "preventive diplomacy" as it is called, is born of the realization that it is no longer sufficient to investigate the so-called classical motives of disputes — and here I mean motives such as territorial claims, ideological domination, nationalistic ambitions, the temptations of imperialist dominance, the flaws in security systems, disturbances of the balance of power.
37.	I am not preaching an existence free from conflict and free from tension. That would be an anaemic illusion. What I have in mind is the fruitless and negative conflicts which confirm to us every day that man, afraid of man, is capable of destroying himself. This opens up new and deeper areas of responsibility for conflict research.
38.	I wish to state with all due clarity that human distress is conflict. Where hunger prevails, there can be no peace in the long run. Where bitter poverty prevails, there can be no justice. Where a man's very existence is threatened for want of basic daily needs, it is not permissible to speak of security. There must not be resignation in the face of destitution.
39.	"Non-violence" is a concept we owe to the man who awakened a great Member country in this Assembly; the force of that doctrine has not diminished. But the realities of today require it to be complemented by an opposite statement of fact, namely, that there is violence through tolerance, intimidation through indolence, threat through passiveness, manslaughter through immobility. We must not stop on this threshold, for it may be the threshold between survival and decline.
40.	I did not make the personal acquaintance of that President of a Latin American country who lost his life through the recent coup. But I wish to emphasize most strongly that this type of solution is not the answer. Or, if you like, unfortunately it can be. But then one day it will be said that reform could only come from revolution because changes were not otherwise accepted.
41.	We are becoming more and more conscious of the limits of the globe. We must not ruthlessly exhaust its resources lest we condemn ourselves to slow suicide. We must not allow the globe's biological cycles to be poisoned any further.
42.	It is surely no coincidence that man today, having seen his planet from out of the depths of space, is becoming conscious of the material and biological dependence of the inhabitants of this so very small spaceship, Earth. Not only within individual countries but also on a world basis we shall — if we want to live in freedom and security-in future have to go without some things which, though economically profitable, are of questionable social value. And some of the things which appear to be economically unprofitable have become indispensable to the existence of a modern society.
43.	I know that there is a tendency in some developing countries to regard the dearth of raw materials as a special kind of political opportunity, for it may here and there swing the pendulum in highly industrialized countries from surplus to shortage. But I say this: this is no ground for satisfaction. These are problems which concern us all, and not just those who come after us.
44.	We must soberly appreciate that the resources of this world will suffice to give posterity an existence worthy of the modern concept of the quality of life only if we keep population growth within responsible limits and only if we achieve a larger measure of social justice in the world.
45.	The depressing food situation in many parts of the world requires us to draft a world food plan so that, if in any way possible, catastrophes can be prevented by means of an integrating strategy for the production of food and its distribution.
46.	Let me emphasize that we must not only establish, and very quickly, what food is needed to keep large sections of mankind from hunger, but also whether States are prepared to accept the rules required to that end.
47.	On the other hand, and at the same time, we must establish what raw materials we need in order to guarantee the quality of our civilization and to improve it where possible.
48.	Let me say quite frankly that, morally, it makes no difference whether a man is killed in war or is condemned to starve to death by the indifference of others. I repeat: it makes no difference morally. We shall have to decide to break with the ritualistic traditions; who proscribes war also has to proscribe hunger.
49.	The United Nations, built in response to the challenge of an almost total world war, is the mirror of an age-old dream of mankind. That dream closely matches the hopes of eternal peace cherished by the nations.
50.	But the Members having some 30 years of United Nations training here know at least as well as we newcomers that 1945 did not see the start of the millennium. Unfortunately, the United Nations has not-at least not yet-crystallized into the nucleus of a world government.
51.	And yet mankind has brought into this Assembly of nations not only its goodwill but also many of its problems. There is not a single Member nation that left its history at home when it came here, indeed did not find its identity confirmed to some extent in this unwieldy design for a republic of nations.
52.	I perceive here a convergence of the perspectives of all continents. To comprehend and to respect the diversity of life and its systems, to enable it to present itself freely, to set up standards to that end which are binding for all — this seems to me to be the mandate of the United Nations for civilization, also in future. That is our hope, at any rate.
53.	It is this very diversity which gives us the right to speak of a world society. This diversity is bound up in the tension between equal sovereignty and mutual dependence in this one, troubled world.
54.	Some of the criticism directed at the United Nations sounds bitter and cynical, is filled with an almost jubilant pessimism, as if it stemmed from a secret hope that the weaknesses of the Organization would refute the idea of it and its purpose. But setbacks in pursuit of an ideal do not necessarily prove that that ideal is wrong, but often merely that the road to it could be better.
55.	In this respect many of the goals which the Organization has set itself have not been achieved — the goals set in the Second World War and in 1945.1 want to say that in all frankness. But we also know that this Organization has been able to prevent a great deal of misery, misfortune and death.
56.	Here in this institution arguments of reason and morality have time and again and untiringly been proclaimed, arguments which have prohibited this step into the abyss. The United Nations is not a clinic where our peoples can be cured of their neuroses by patient world doctors. Yet it can help to create more solidarity among nations.
57.	That solidarity is the fundamental requirement of a world society, and it is the prerequisite to its survival. That is my deep conviction. I am not speaking of the Utopian realm of the equality of all nations and of all men. But anyone who has never dreamt this dream of equality knows little of the will for justice which, beyond all barriers of continents, race and religion, is perhaps the true binding power among us human beings.
58.	There is solidarity, but not enough of it. I ask for more sympathy for the victims of armed conflicts that threaten to break out anew in this or that corner of the world. But neither should we forget the victims of non-war which sometimes can be just as brutal. On the road to world citizenship we must practice solidarity. We shall not be able to speak of a humane world order until the principle of justice is universally understood.
59.	Permit me to say on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany that we shall support United Nations resolutions aimed at liquidating the anachronistic remnants of colonialism. This applies not least to our neighbouring continent of Africa. Without any addition and without any reservation I declare that we condemn racism as inhuman and as the cause of the most terrible crimes. Our own history has been a bitter experience on that score.
60.	Moreover, those who take their place in this Assembly must also adopt a position on the moral aspects of international coexistence even when their own national interests are not directly affected. In this process they come face to face with two recognized principles both of which serve the cause of peace: the first is the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of others; the other is the principle of the universality of human rights. Not only States but also individual citizens can invoke the fundamental rights embodied in the United Nations Charter. It is peace that benefits if people and information can move as freely as possible across boundaries.
61.	I would add that if we speak our mind on violations of individual human rights, on the suppression of the freedom to express critical opinions, on artificial barriers at national frontiers to the exchange of people and information, the decisive criterion for that attitude will not be whether the offender is an ally or one with whom we have friendly contractual ties, or whether it is a less friendly Power. What matters is that we do not remain indifferent on these questions — even if some details should at first sight or in general be hard to assess,
62.	A policy of peace, solidarity and renunciation of force is indivisible. The conflict in South-East Asia has not yet burnt itself out and the smouldering conflict in the Middle East has not yet been defused. In both cases the main thing is that those concerned should talk, not shoot.
63.	I wish to stress our interest in a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Middle East. That is the interest of the Federal Republic of Germany. My Government shares the hope that the international community will not relinquish the possibilities of mediation. My Government also feels that it is primarily direct peace talks between the Arab countries concerned and Israel that v will  best secure a balance of the elementary interests of both sides.
64.	The struggle for peace and the fight against misery require us to recognize that in the one world we live in our fate is, after all, indivisible. Here, too, mankind is therefore under the compulsion to establish solidarity. Where else than in this United Nations should we be able to discuss freely new forms of vital co-operation?
65.	No nation should live at the expense of another. Anyone who refuses to accept this principle may be the instrument of our having to pay dearly for. it. National egoism is no shield. On the contrary, it is an obstacle to that very solidarity which, in the last report, is the best guardian of natural and legitimate national interests as well.
66.	We should not speak of "young" and "old" nations. It is more realistic to distinguish between young and old nationalisms. Ours, in Europe, are old, although a century or two are only a couple of short breaths in history. But believe me, the wild dream that the destiny of a nation can be fulfilled only in unbridled nationalism has in our case completely faded away. We learned from painful experience that there have to be more rational, more reliable forms for the lives* of nations-and that such forms actually exist, namely, good neighbourliness.
67.	The countries of Western Europe have resolved to establish the first regional community that is more than a classical alliance and at the same time does not imply that its members subject themselves to a ideological rules. Our aim is to achieve if possible in this decade the union of our economies, our currencies, our social systems and our foreign policies, and - as dictated to us by the signs of our time -- our security.
68.	The membership of the Federal Republic which I represent, also strengthens the presence of Europe in the United Nations. We are sure it will also be of benefit to others.
69.	The European Community, we hope, can become an example of economic achievement and social balance. It establishes itself as a power without imperial pretensions. The European union will be a power of peace and will be outward-looking.
70.	The Federal Republic of Germany has declared in its Constitution its willingness to transfer sovereign rights to supranational organizations and it has placed international law above national law and made it directly applicable. This expresses the realization that the sovereignty of the individual and of nations can be secured only in larger communities, that the meaning and fulfilment of history can no longer be attributed to the nation-State.
71.	Thus I end my speech with a plea: let us all together be on our guard against making sacred a concept which I regard as perhaps the most dubious legacy of European history: nationalism, which has claimed millions and millions of human lives and under whose banner fertile country has been devastated, thriving cities destroyed, peoples exterminated, and a whole civilization — our own- nearly swept away.
72.	Europe has ceased to pretend that it is the measure of things for the rest of the world. But it has occasion to warn the nations of the world about the great error which almost brought about its destruction: negative nationalism. And I believe we have to a large extent shaken off that hypnosis.
73.	The nation no longer finds its security in isolated sovereignty. In actual fact, isolation creates dependencies which have ceased to have anything to do with enlightened sovereignty. We need the larger community which gives us peace, security and, hence, freedom.
74.	There is, perhaps, not yet "the world free from war" nor "the world-wide rule of reason" enunciated by the President of the United States on 26 June 1945 after the proclamation of the United Nations Charter in San Francisco's opera house. But mankind must not allow itself to become paralysed in the face of gigantic, seemingly insoluble problems. What we need now is a programme of new confidence in man's abilities.
75.	Therefore, I make this plea.
76.	Let us courageously and jointly venture forth on a new road to the great goals of eliminating conflicts, bringing armaments under control, making peace safer.
77.	Let us courageously and jointly fight for universal recognition of the renunciation of force as a principle for the solution of political problems.
78.	Let us courageously and jointly-and I hope we will be many-work untiringly to ensure that human rights and fundamental freedoms are respected and may be exercised all over the world.
79.	Let us courageously and jointly-and I hope we will be many-fight to defend the right of nations freely to decide their own destiny and to ensure that the remnants of colonialism are removed and that all forms of racism are banned.
80.	Let us courageously and jointly promote the further development of international law, in particular by an effective convention against terrorism.
81.	Let us courageously and jointly do what is necessary to sustain the viability of the world we live in by protecting the natural environment and-partly by intensifying and widening scientific exchanges — securing for mankind conditions of a quality that will make life worth living.
82.	And let us courageously and jointly, in addition to our endeavours to foster the further development of world trade, make fresh efforts to intensify economic cooperation and development; and, above all, let us in this way combine all our energies and declare war irrevocably on hunger around the world.
83.	Man's ability to apply his faculty of reason has made the United Nations possible. Man's propensity for being irrational makes it necessary. Reason will have won the field if one day all States and regions come to live and work together as world neighbours in accordance with the principles of the United Nations.
84.	That will not happen in my lifetime, but I want to do what I can to make it possible. And I exhort us all to give every assistance we can, progressing step by step, to ease the task of future generations.﻿1. Mr. President, in these last days of the general debate I should like to pay a tribute to the authority and distinction with which you are presiding over our work.
2.	I shall be relatively brief, for I wish to avoid repetition and, besides, I have no taste or desire for making propaganda. But I would prefer that the truth should prevail even if it should emerge as the truth which is obvious on the banks of the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne and the Rhone, the four principal rivers of my country.
3.	This debate is drawing to a close without surprises, except those that we have ceaselessly warned against, and without excesses. Everyone is gratified by this, even if, in order to achieve it, one had to keep silent on many questions and take for granted what is merely adumbrated in the same way that a fad secures a grip upon minds before it prevails in the streets.
4.	You will no doubt understand what I am referring to. To speak of peace does not call for any great precision. On the other hand, to invoke detente, to believe in it as one would believe in spring when one suddenly comes upon it around the bend after winter, would seem to warrant more assiduity and curiosity. Who does not wish for detente, or could reject it?
5.	At the risk of causing irritation, I would remind you that we have had a long experience of detente and the concept thereof. For the last 15 years it has been the concern of our foreign policy. Judge for yourselves: decolonization; the establishment of East-West relations; friendly and active co-operation with the Soviet Union; the fundamental treaty between France and Germany in 1963; the building of a European entity; as early as 1964, understanding of, and respect for, China, to which the President, of the French Republic has, as you know, just completed a trip; unfailing support for the third world, for the independence of nations and for a more equitable distribution of resources, and, to take a current example, for the harmony of the Comoro islands with their destiny. All these things protect us from naivete, but they have shown us that lucidity and generosity should always go hand in hand.
6.	Meanwhile, we learn that 1973 is to be primarily the year of detente. And reference is made to this at every turn, as if a single year were sufficient to meet its needs and as if this year promised exceptional developments. To be quite truthful, I see but two such events — much discussed, but the full expression of which is not yet completely manifest and of which the consequences, you will agree, are not yet entirely known.
7.	In the first place, I see the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. It is, of course, as we all know, not yet concluded. Its principal merit consists in its having gathered together 33 European countries and the United States and Canada. Apart from this essential fact, the results, if they are good, will be, as it were, thrown into the bargain. They will, furthermore, serve the concept of detente mainly by representing compromises between opposing stands that could not have been developed at leisure. In the long run, the contents will matter less than the way in which they were obtained. For our part, we are doing all we can to ensure the success of the Conference, and I am sure that this is well known.
8.	This Conference is therefore an important fact, an unaccustomed event, unusual in recent international practice; it is a development that is comforting to note. For all that, it is not the Eden of detente, it does not represent the alpha and omega of conciliation. It is a joint effort, an arduous effort that is the business of all. It is a state of mind that is being born — a miracle indeed! — among the poisonous flowers of the arms race, which remains, however, fraught with the mistrust and the ambitions to which it gives rise.
9.	Let us therefore be reasonable in our appreciation, cautious in our enthusiasm, and realistic in our behaviour. Let us not allow ourselves to be trapped in the all-too-easy syllogism: the Conference serves the idea of detente; detente can serve to nourish all speeches; therefore, he who refers to the Conference is, assuredly, one who practises detente.
10.	Furthermore on 22 June last, the United States and the Soviet Union published the news of an agreement they had reached on nuclear strategy. That agreement is but a 
beginning and is to be followed up, so it is stated, in 1974. Its authors were gratified and they invited the whole world to share in their gratification. Why? Because this undoubtedly is an agreement between two very great Powers and it consequently concerns us all — or rather it affects us all, because it can be clothed in the chaste cloak of detente. Those two reasons are not sufficient to mask the reality that has gradually become apparent to all. In order to avoid bankruptcy, and with political considerations in mind, the two Powers have preferred to limit the development of some of their nuclear armaments while at the same time maintaining a sufficiently strong mutual vulnerability to deter each other from upsetting the balance.
11.	Thus, this type of detente would be limited to such an exercise in balancing between the two treaty partners. When children fight, one often notices that the strongest avoid a head-on clash with each other and instead attack the lightest-weight members of the other gang, who can be easily knocked down by a few simple blows. It is the same with nations. And if the light-weight nations are at present worried, how can anyone be surprised? The only surprising thing is that it has taken them so long to become nervous, finding themselves with a mere rifle in their hands while the pressures and presences remain the same at their frontiers. All that one very famous actress wore was perfume. I fear that, so scantily clothed by detente alone, we still run the risk of shivering.
12.	My analysis of the recent months would perhaps have been rather less cruel in so far as detente is concerned —  detente is, after all, a French word which we have endowed with its full significance by our actions — had it not been for the fact that certain slanderous campaigns have sought to cast slurs upon our very idea of national independence, shared by so many others.
13.	The past and geography have taught us lessons that we are not likely to forget. We are like prey that has been so often hunted that the hunter can no longer approach. Illusions, wars, more illusions and war again: this has been our fate. Henceforth, we rely primarily on ourselves, on our own efforts. I cannot imagine anyone, unless he is under an illusion, who could think of making us renounce this.
14.	We have been distressed, I would say hurt, to hear from our friends or from peoples for whom we have affection statements made here or there whose lack of reality in comparison with the facts or the actual situation in the world seems surprising to me. Even more surprising are the steps which have been taken to convince us that the questions at issue are mere figures of speech that we are wrong to feel uneasy about, but merely justified by the domestic considerations of a sovereign State.
15.	Can one really deal so lightly with a serious matter of concern to us all? Because it is a matter of national independence for a nation which does not want to be the pawn of world strategy. In its turn, after many others, and left to its own resources France provided itself with nuclear armaments, not in order to indulge in dreams of grandeur, but because its every existence was at stake. Alone, we covered the ground of difficult research, with a considerable time lag. And today some people are indignant that we have dared to tread this path, which is presumably the royal way reserved to those who today hold power; that we have placed our footsteps in their tracks, such deep tracks. And yet what protests did their actions give rise to? I look for them in vain.
16.	Nowadays one is less modest, doubtless because one knows that with France, a peaceful Power whose only ambition is to live in harmony with all and not to be taken by surprise, one does not run a great risk. Well, one does in fact.
17.	I shall not refer to the risk of ridicule. But a risk one is essentially exposed to is the risk of not understanding that one is being manipulated, used, propelled against one's own interests. And more serious still is the risk of being wholly mistaken in one's analysis of the world situation, to have understood nothing, with gaping mouth and, unfortunately, closed eyes. Finally, there is the risk of opposing the will for independence, which should be that of all peace- loving peoples and which France is convinced it is serving while ensuring its own destiny as a free nation.
18.	We shall at least preserve a vivid memory of the moment of collective blindness in which some have foundered, dragging down with them, by means of false evidence, some quarters of public opinion whose irrational fears were nursed at leisure. And we shall therefore abide by our conduct so that our fate cannot be settled except by ourselves, since from now on everyone can realize that we cannot disappear without damage to others.
19.	And again, we are convinced, we are sure, that by so doing we are strengthening the ground on which Europe must be built by affirming our steadfastness, our independence, our determination not to slacken our defence efforts.
20.	How could I avoid, after all, referring to Europe? Everyone quite rightly wonders, does Europe already exist, and particularly in the consciousness of others rather than in the consciousness of Europe itself? Is it something that is really going to exist? I refer to it only as a citizen of one of the States that go to make it up, attached like so many others to those landscapes and those shores which have borne witness to such diverse activity and been the scene of so much meditation. I speak about Europe only from a certain memory of the past and with the reasonable hope of a more just, more secure and fuller life.
21.	I am sure that this is the deep aspiration of all those European peoples who live on an exiguous territory, densely populated, closely partitioned, the internal boundaries of which are crumbling a little more each day, yielding to the thrust of time — a universal phenomenon.
22.	There is no collective will or power here; only the certainty that in joining forces everything will eventually become simpler, even if the path towards it is not entirely mapped out. This effort might perhaps also warrant the fair name of detente, the effort that nine States, often so different, pursue tirelessly in order to bury antagonisms, adjust their policies, and ensure their well-being. It would warrant being hailed often from this rostrum, and even better to be encouraged from the bottom of people's hearts. It would warrant an organization such as the United Nations showing it henceforth less indifference. Finally, it would warrant an appreciation of the extent to which Europe undoubtedly would be useful to the international order because, besides the virtues of its own joining of forces, Europe would become a pole of peace in a world drifting from one spell of vertigo to another.
23.	Recently in Copenhagen, "the Nine" — as they have become known these days — agreed to define their common identity among themselves and to express with one voice their opinion on an important matter — their relationship with the United States — as they have already done in other cases, for example the Conference on European security. There is nothing unwonted in such behaviour nor is there in the approaches which are to follow, because some State or other will also have wished to establish such a dialogue. There is nothing unwonted either if, in the weeks to come, a common view is expressed within the framework of the Atlantic alliance, where thinking is going on in the light of world developments.
24.	Perhaps even, but I do not want to dream too much, the latter will have to take into account this common will which may animate European countries so that a more equitable and better shared universal order may prevail.
25.	A more equitable and better shared universal order: it is there that genuine detente will truly be able to flourish.
26.	As long as the independence of everyone is not fully recognized and respected, as long as the living conditions of every country are not made more secure, where indeed is detente?
27.	Does it not lie in the restoration of international monetary regulations, which would give equal opportunities to all, and in a stability without which the weaker will be trampled underfoot?
28.	Does it not lie in the establishment of normal trade practices that would limit emergency measures which have an unexpected effect on markets?
29.	Does it not lie in a rational, generous and far-reaching concept of production and trade, which would share major commodities equally between producers and consumers?
30.	Does it not lie in the establishment of an international code defining the rights and obligations of each State in the world commercial order?
31.	There is nothing new left to be said about these topics. Should one be irritated at the fact that nothing can yet be put down to the credit of international co-operation? Should one be irritated that the monetary organization has been smashed to smithereens under the pressure of its own deficiencies? Should we be irritated that the selfishness of nations hinders any progress towards agreements on primary commodities? Should we be irritated at the fact that shortage is replacing affluence, that the forecasts of technicians are not borne out by the facts and that humble and innumerable lives, often wrecked by hurricanes and droughts, are also suffering from unforeseen vicissitudes, the origin of which they do not know, and that even squander the slender resources of days of starvation?
32.	Should one allow onself to become disheartened enough to accept the false pretences, the abortive texts, the proposals which aim at politics and not at the well-being of our fellow men?
33.	For our part, we shall continue crying out certain truths, perhaps in the wilderness of some meetings which are too densely packed with words. We shall continue, by our national action, and also in Europe with our partners,, and everywhere in the world where we are bound by ties of history and friendship, we shall continue to affirm that stability, generosity, responsibility, respect for others are concepts without which there can be no monetary or commercial future for the world, without which there would be just one single prospect: that of bitterness and violence.
34.	In this year of 1973, it would have been easy, had one wished, to restore equanimity to the whole world. Away from dialectics which cause one to lose sight of realities and which deflect the deep inclination for peace of peoples, could not those who claim to bear the highest responsibilities have found the path to true glory?
35.	However, only interested motives, too well-understood and thoroughly weighed, seem to have guided their thoughts and actions. Take South-East Asia — where the fighting is taking so long to be extinguished after having been endless — and on other frontiers where it is still the eve of battle, with sudden outbursts.
36.	There is the Middle East where the situation, one had been told, was under control. And so why should it change? And being so sure of tomorrow one had left until tomorrow what should have been done today. And the results are there for all to see. Did not so much certainty, such assurance, warrant the present being dealt with before the irreparable occurred?
37.	Let us hope that those conflicts of another era —  anachronistic to the point that they last without causing inconvenience except, unfortunately, for the suffering populations — will cease. Let us hope that the collective conscience will be heeded before they go astray who, in keeping with their tremendous present responsibilities, must quickly understand the friendly and urgent message that we put to friends that they be inspired by tolerance and prompted by the will to concerted action not only in their own meetings, but also in their relations with all peoples who, in their powerlessness, follow the progress of such merciless games.
38.	On the subject of those absurd, ruthless, unfair wars, my country has long since, over and over again, voiced its views and stated its policies. Therefore I shall not dwell on that.
39.	In this assembly of nations we have many friends. We feel a community of thought with many peoples, many States, young or old, which, like us, are seeking their way in order to assert their dignity by themselves assuming the responsibility for their destinies.
40.	We believe with them that this rostrum, this international gathering, this periodic and organized pooling of world preoccupations are indispensable so that peoples souls may sometimes throb and that some cries may be uttered here and there; and these, heard by the multitude, may so animate them that nothing will ever be as before; so that falsehood may lose its assurance, that indifference may finally come to be tinged with concern; and that those who make demands and claims may also heed the voice of responsibility; that friendship may cease to be a matter of subservience and influence cease to be burdensome; that the veiled but ever-present threat may no longer weigh on people's minds and hearts, and that from now on, nobody may dare to give expression to it.
41.	I myself, prepared this speech several days ago. Before coming here today I changed nothing except the tenses of two verbs, from the present to the past, and inserted two phrases quite spontaneously.
42.	This address is a statement of our policy, a statement of its concepts, duration and determination. I delete nothing. I add nothing to it.
43.	But since last Saturday, fighting has been resumed and all the evidence indicates that it is particularly bloody. I offer the assistance of my country so that the war may quickly subside and not flare up again. We could make suggestions to contribute to a peaceful settlement on condition that everyone wants this and really wants a just and lasting peace. I am convinced that our European friends share this wish. I hope that these sincere wishes are not offered in vain﻿118.	Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to join with my colleagues in congratulating you on your high office. Ecuador will rightly feel a reflected glory.
119.	Sir, I have spoken on many occasions in this Assembly and have usually felt it right to deal with the main topical and urgent issues in the field of international affairs. I do not intend to do this today. Many of them, it is true, remain as difficult and contentious as ever, but they will feature on the agenda of the various Committees of this Assembly and the views of the British Government will be explained when they come up for discussion. All of them should be soluble by patient bilateral diplomacy, assisted as the need arises — and it arises more often day by day-by the conciliation machinery of this United Nations organization for conciliation. This must be the order of the day in the middle of this twentieth century. Now, however, I wish to concentrate only on two major long-term problems in the world, both profound and in the long run decisive in terms of what I shall call in shorthand the problems between East and West and North and South.
120.	The first duty laid upon the United Nations is to maintain international peace and security. We have had a deeply troubled century. Twenty-one years after the First World War the world was just beginning to recover from the appalling carnage when it all started all over again. It is now 28 years since the ending of the Second World War. So far we have avoided a global holocaust, although at all times the situation has been saved only by knife-edge diplomacy. But there are signs at long last that we are just starting to learn. Whether peace has been forced upon us by the realization of the ultimate horror of the nuclear weapon, or whether the miseries of two world wars have taught us the bitter lesson that war solves nothing, unless it is that in the main the innocent pay the penalty, or whether the United Nations, if it has not preserved peace, has helped men to talk themselves into a more sober mood in which they realize that there are no slick answers to the modern problems of this world. Perhaps it is in fact a mixture of all three. But the hope must be that one way or another at this moment of time-late, it is true, but better late than never-the lesson of the futility of violence is being learned.
121.	Herr Brandt just now said that we should talk, not shoot, and as a European I stand here to say that it was that failure in Europe which very nearly led to the destruction of our continent; and that, surely, should be a lesson for all.
122.	In his thoughtful introduction to his report on the work of the Organization the Secretary-General rightly reminds us that while it is easy to criticize the limitations of the United Nations in matters affecting peace and security, the Organization, and particularly the Security Council, does have to its credit real achievements in defusing disputes. Of that at least we should remind ourselves lest we lose heart. But he would be a bold man who would say that an era of universal peace is within our grasp. War, although contained, is still with us. Man has not solved his basic needs for security, for food and for shelter. At this time of the twentieth century I think we ought to remind ourselves that there is no excuse for these shortcomings apart from prejudice, fear and suspicion, for we have all the technical means that we need to provide for man's very modest needs.
123.	Since 1945 the international scene has been dominated by the problems arising from the totally different social, economic and political systems of the East and West and from the aftermath of rapid decolonization. In East- West relations there have been periods of comparative calm and moments of acute peril. Coexistence has been preached. But it has meant different things to different people and the shock waves of tension between the Communists and the rest have spread, and the impact has been felt world-wide. Those who have wished to avoid the contagion of the rivalry of the great Powers have not always been able to do so. The rigid confrontation of the major Powers and the continuing escalation of force and counter- force was not only a source of grave danger in itself to the countries in the Northern Hemisphere but, worse perhaps, also paralysed the use of common resources and stultified the economic development of nations much further afield - nations that otherwise would have been able to do something to bridge the gap between the developed and the developing countries.
124. Now, at long last, these preoccupations seem to be yielding to a wider perspective. It is not, of course, easy for Communists and the rest to live together and work together when philosophy and practice are so different, but, at long last, at least there are signs of flexibility. The United States has established a relationship with China. The Soviet Union and the United States have softened the edges of their bilateral relations. It became possible for serious negotiations to begin between the Western Allies and the East over the future of Berlin. The two German States have made real progress in their joint discussions and are now both Members of this Organization-a historic step, which my Government welcomes-and if it is followed up with tolerance and with generosity this will undoubtedly have beneficial effects in Europe. The European Community, now enlarged, is finding its own identity and looks outward to fruitful contacts with the rest of the world; and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has met and defined an agenda for work leading towards detente. Up till now it is no more than that, but lest we are to despair, we must recognize it as a start in reconciliation and try to build further upon it. That being said, I must make it clear that detente must be real and not an illusion. Lip service to detente which evaporates at the first test is a trap. Like so much in life it is the will to work together for the highest common factor that counts and certainly as far as my Government is concerned the will is there. Our strong desire is that, however difficult it may be, the two political systems should live together not only without enmity but in broad accord. We will therefore take risks for peace, but at the same time we will not be duped by empty declarations into jeopardizing our security and our chosen way of life which goes with it. I would echo the words of Mr. Kissinger a few days ago [2124th meeting]: my country, like his, seeks true peace, not an armistice. Let us, therefore, share our ideas, share our resources and share our cultures. Let us resolve not to undermine but to understand, not to confront but to reconcile. We-that is, the East and the West-will have the chance to put these sentiments to the test in phase two of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. I trust that the Communist countries will be able to prove that they care for the basic freedoms of people everywhere; for, I say with great respect, it is people, not bits of paper, that politics, national and international, are about. We will try to respond in a constructive spirit in phase two of that
Conference, remembering always that, as Mr. Andersen has just reminded us-and I think it is too often forgotten-that politics are also about the quality of life.
125.	The other division in the world-the division between the rich and the poor countries-is just as profound and just as likely to breed tension. This is essentially an economic rather than an ideological division. Even if there was no conflict between East and West, and even if this conflict had not sometimes spread to the third world, we would still face the great human problems caused by the vast difference between the living standards of the developing and the developed countries because of the accidents of time. I understand the emotions which break out from time to time in the wake of the colonial era. But we have a situation now in this modern world which requires not slogans, however tempting, but cool, rational analysis and a realistic assessment of what can be done under a number of headings: investment, credit, commodity arrangements, debt, aid and trade. They are all relevant to the relationship between the rich and the poor countries and during this session of the General Assembly we shall be discussing the first review and appraisal of the progress of the Second United Nations Development Decade, and I hope it is these things-and I will repeat them: investment, credit, commodity arrangements, debt, aid and trade-which will be the subjects of analysis and, if possible, of agreement. We shall not agree on every aspect of these and of other subjects. Important interests of both developing and developed countries are involved and prima facie at times they seem to diverge but, again, if one looks at each one separately under those headings that I have listed, it will almost always be proved by careful analysis that the interests of the developed and the developing are complementary and not antagonistic. Our common deliberations, therefore, will be fruitful only in so far as we make a deliberate attempt to find the common interest and act on it to a point where we all can see that we can gain as well as give. We must simply not allow politics to intervene to hamper or cripple the fine economic prospects for ordinary people in developing and developed countries. I conclude from this that the key word for the future of economic development is "partnership". Let us recognize the situation for what it is and work together to put it right. In short, the less emotion there is, the quicker we shall get on. For partnership to work it is necessary that each understand the realities which limit the possibilities for action of the other.
126.	We are-and again I make no apology for reminding the Assembly of this-we are dealing with human beings, not with units on the economist's slide rule. So the developed countries must understand the right of the newly emerging countries to be master of their own fate, to control their economic, political and social destinies. What else is nationhood about? And in turn it should be clear that politicians in countries like my own which are governed by a parliamentary democracy have to satisfy their electors that the money which is deliberately being diverted from them is not only being well spent for the benefit of the recipients but to the long-term advantage for all. We in the Western countries-and here I can speak especially for the enlarged European Community-are tackling these questions with energy. The European summit conference last autumn gave to the outside world a high place in its programme. But we can be really successful only if we can move forward with the developing countries in a spirit and practice of partnership and create an atmosphere of mutual purpose and of mutual trust. So I repeat, partnership in this age and day is the key word to success.
127.	We also have undertaken to transfer economic resources and expertise to developing countries and are doing so on an expanding scale. But the word "transfer" means just what it says, at least in the short term. Money and resources, in other words, which would otherwise be available to the donor country are transferred for the benefit of another and I would invite the developing countries to recognize the problems of presentation which, for example, we in the United Kingdom have when we are speaking to our own electors. We could do a lot ourselves with the £300 million or so which we agree to transfer to others. We are willing to forgo these advantages for ourselves, but the transfer of resources must be seen to be directly related to the achievement of general prosperity all round. That is the only condition we make, but I think it is reasonable.
128.	My country continues to attach high importance to aid. Our official aid flow has steadily increased. In the two years between 1970 and 1972 it rose by nearly half &s much again and it is our intention that it should continue to grow. I was interested, in this context of aid and investment, in what Mr. Gromyko had to say yesterday [2126th meeting], and in particular in his proposal for a 10 per cent reduction in the military expenditure of the leading Powers [A/9191]. My recollections in this Assembly go back some way, and I thought I had recollected having heard this before. I was right. In 1958 the Soviet spokesman stated:
"The Soviet Government's proposal is to reduce the military budgets of the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France by 10 to 15 per cent and use part of the savings so effected for assistance to the under-developed countries."
That was debated. It did not at that time find favour, for reasons which I think were then valid — how do you measure, for example, military budgets?  — and which may still be valid now but I am not concerned in prejudging what the decision on this proposal may be not in 1958, but in 1973. But I would not like it to be thought that in other countries things have stood still on this front of aid and investment. For example, in terms of international aid our contribution in the United Kingdom is many times greater than that of the Soviet Union and, incidentally, it so happens that our total aid is already about 10 per cent of our expenditure of defence. In other words, as far as the United Kingdom is concerned, this is a field in which we should welcome more competition from the Soviet Union and from other countries.
129.	There is, of course, the question of how much of the total flow of resources could be met by official aid and how much by private investment. Whatever the proportions achieved, it will remain true that the private investment will play a significant role in development and I would remind this Assembly of the Pearson report, which says as follows and I quote:
"There can be no doubt about the contribution which private capital can render to economic development. Indeed, dollar for dollar, it may be more effective than official aid . .. ."
It is of course important that private investment should be properly integrated into the development plans and priorities of the host country. Investors should involve the nationals of the recipient State to the maximum, strive for maximum participation of local capital and reinvest a fair proportion of the profits in the enterprises of the country's enterprise which is concerned. But there is a reverse side to any coin and, as the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade put it, developing countries should bear in mind the importance of the attraction of foreign capital of conditions conducive to sustained investment. The plain fact is that private investment will not flow to the countries which do not provide the conditions in which it can bear fruit. It is therefore necessary once again to underline and emphasize that it is necessary to create an atmosphere of partnership if enough resources are to be transferred from those who have them to those who have not to make any real impact at all on the gap between the developed and the developing countries; and this applies both to official aid and to private investment.
130.	A pre-condition, therefore, of success is that we must get away from the concept of conflict, whether ideological or racial. We have a common and a material interest in this and it is our joint responsibility as leaders of opinion to see to it that our peoples understand the destructive implications of actions and words which are designed to fuel the fires of intolerance and, by contrast, realize the benefits which flow from partnership which is open and trustful.
131.	I cannot accept that the greater East-West detente must somehow be at the expense of the developing world. The reverse should be the case. If detente means anything, it must entail a liberation of resources from both East and West  —  a liberation of resources for more constructive ends. In a sense, the problems of the relationship between East and West and between the developing and the developed countries are linked, and success in dealing with the one will ease the anxieties of the other. When problems exist they can either be approached in an atmosphere of tension and conflict, as if a solution can be reached only by the victory of one side and the defeat of the other, or they can be faced in the belief that reconciliation and partnership is possible and should be pursued with relentless purpose and vigour. This Organization-I believe we ought to remind ourselves - was founded on the latter premise. That was the basis and the inspiration of the Charter. Until now it has

been confounded by political distrust and, for the reasons of which I have spoken, we have left undone much that ought to have been done together. It is in the basic belief that man has the capacity to reject his baser instincts and accept the disciplines inherent in reconciliation that we in this Assembly should formulate our policies and lead our peoples.﻿122.	Mr. President, I bring to you and to all our colleagues assembled here the greetings and good wishes of the Government and the people of India. I extend to you our warmest congratulations on your accession to the high office of President of the General Assembly. In selecting you as its candidate for President, the continent of Latin America has shown its appreciation of your ability and experience and has helped the Assembly in choosing a man whose faith, competence and devoted services to the United Nations can assure us of a successful session. You can always depend on the full co-operation of my delegation in carrying out your tasks as President.
123.	I should like to record our appreciation of the outgoing President, Mr. Trepczynski of Poland, for the skill and patience with which he discharged his responsibilities. With his leadership we accomplished much that was valuable in the work of the United Nations.
124.	Our distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, has now been in office for nearly two years. We have admired his dynamism, and the sense of purpose he has brought to his work. We look forward to his wise counsel and assessment on many of the issues we shall deal with during the current session.
125.	We deeply mourn the death of the President of Chile, Dr. Allende, in such violent and tragic circumstances. I do not intend to comment on internal developments of a sovereign State. In the wider context, however, I must express profound regret and concern over the setback that the democratic tradition of the people of Chile has suffered as a result of his overthrow, and over the violence, bloodshed and deprivation of human rights and infringement of diplomatic obligations which have recently been reported from that country. We earnestly hope that peace and harmony will be restored soon so that the people of Chile can resume their work of national reconstruction and reconciliation without any outside intervention and without further violence.
126.	The Secretary-General, in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/9001 /Add. IJ, has indicated the value of the United Nations in the present-day world, and has emphasized once again that the United Nations can only be what its Member States wish it to be. Few delegations will disagree with that assessment; the universal desire to render the United Nations a more effective instrument for promoting international peace and co-operation will depend on the willingness and ability of the States represented here to appreciate and reconcile different points of view and to arrive at decisions which serve those interests which are shared by most of us. Surely, our effort should be to extend the area of co-operation through identification of those interests. At the same time, in discussing any problems we must look at them in their totality and apply the Charter provisions in all their aspects and not selectively or in a piecemeal fashion.
127.	The year that has just passed since we last met has seen important, though uneven, developments, but, on the whole, the world has moved forward, however haltingly and however slightly, towards our goal of peace, justice and progress. The gradual reduction of tension between rival blocs, which many of us had long been urging, is now clearly noticeable. The recent improvement of relations between the great Powers and the increase in contacts between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America, and the United States of America and China, are important in themselves, and also as an indication that the trend that developed last year has maintained its momentum. The Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War, concluded between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in June of this year, and the understandings between them in several other fields are welcome. We are also gratified that this steady search for international peace and security has led to important developments in Europe: in the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, in the treaties between the two German States and between the Federal Republic of Germany and other countries in Eastern Europe, and in the convening of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
128.	We join others in welcoming the process of mutual accommodation and co-operation and the consequent reduction of tension. However, this spirit of detente has yet to extend to all parts of the world and should not be limited to mere coexistence among the major Powers. Regrettably, such concepts as the balance of power, spheres of influence and power vacuum are yet to be discarded. Unfortunately also, the great Power rivalry continues to show itself in many ways and in many areas; this brings severe stress and strain in international relations. The power of the strong is still to be placed at the common service of mankind. Only through genuine co-operation can the peoples of the world move forward towards a better future, in accordance with their own wishes and without any feeling of subordination and dependence, or of imposition or pressure from outside.
129.	I was privileged to take part in the Fourth Conference of Heads of State and Government of Non-Aligned Countries in Algiers, where those problems received the most careful and comprehensive examination from the largest gathering of Heads of State or Government ever held. The most significant feature of that great Conference was the confidence it created and the will it generated to work together for realizing our common objectives. Those States are determined to achieve, together with all nations of the world and with a spirit of constructive co-operation, equality among all nations and an equitable exploitation of resources of the world. We shall thus encourage the march forward of man for peace and for a better life. Political understanding and economic co-operation among major
Powers are therefore to be so arranged and channelled that they do not become, even unintentionally, instruments of new forms of domination and dependence.
130.	The maintenance of world peace and security will depend to a large extent on the speedy removal of economic and social disparities, both nationally and internationally. The non-aligned countries wish to build, together with other developing States, a collective self- reliance within the framework of international understanding. They are determined to remove all forms and manifestations of injustice and inequality, discrimination and oppression wherever they may exist. Their dedication to this cause should not be mistaken as a confrontation with any particular country or a group of countries. They have reaffirmed their firm resolve to strengthen the United Nations, which remains the best available machinery for world-wide co-operation.
131.	The world has changed a great deal since our Charter was signed in San Francisco nearly 30 years ago. The Charter must evolve with the times in order to remain an effective and dynamic force for peace and progress. Thus, there is an understandable desire for a comprehensive review of it. We believe, however, that in the prevailing climate of international politics, it would be premature to do more than examine the Charter in certain fields.
132.	We welcome this year three new Members: the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Commonwealth of the Bahamas. We have excellent relations with those States and look forward to working with them in the United Nations. The Bahamas joins us as the newest Member State from the Caribbean within a few weeks of attaining freedom. We cannot forget in this connexion that there are still a number of countries which are to be freed from colonial rule.
133.	The simultaneous admission of the two German States to the United Nations may well signal the disappearance of tensions and hostilities of the past and the beginning of a new era of understanding and co-operation in Central Europe. We welcome the new pattern of relationship. The two German States, as Members of this Organization, could indeed make a significant contribution to world peace and development.
134.	The admission of these States marks an important step in achieving the goal of universality of membership of the United Nations. This makes it all the more regrettable that Bangladesh, a sovereign State recognized by over 100 Members of the United Nations and with a population of over 75 million people, has not yet been able to take its rightful place among us. I should like to emphasize the call made by the Algiers Conference for the admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations. Member States will no doubt recognize that the continuing denial of Bangladesh's right to be in the United Nations injures, if not defeats, the purposes and principles of the Charter of this Organization.
135.	India seeks friendship and co-operation with all nations on the basis of equality, reciprocity and mutual respect. With over 75 States of the different continents of the world we share the common ideals of non-alignment. Together with these and many other developing countries we face the common problem of economic development and are working for a better world order.
136.	With western Europe our links go back for centuries and the future holds bright prospects for greater exchanges in various fields. Our political and economic relations with the countries of eastern Europe have shown steady and fruitful development. With the Soviet Union we have achieved a close and co-operative friendship, based on mutual trust and understanding, which we greatly cherish. Both the United States and India have a strong faith in democratic systems and we share many common values. Our contacts and associations with Britain have lasted for hundreds of years and now continue to develop on a basis of mutual respect and equality. Our common cultural values and liberal traditions provide a strong base for our growing friendship with France. As close neighbours, India and China have to live in peace and amity, and we hope that our relations will soon move in that direction.
137.	Japan's rapid industrial advance is a lesson for us, and we welcome that country's co-operation in various fields. We are glad that Australia, Canada and New Zealand an: sharing, more and more, our values and attitudes and are showing greater awareness of Asian and African aspirations. In Ottawa, we had a successful meeting of the Commonwealth countries about six weeks ago.
138.	With our most immediate neighbours-Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma, Nepal and Sri Lanka — we maintain and seek the closest friendship and wide-ranging co-operation. We are making all possible efforts to end the era of confrontation with Pakistan.'
139.	The most significant development in our subcontinent has been the search through direct negotiations for normalization of relations. The New Delhi Agreement of 28 August 1973 provides for the settlement of the humanitarian problems left over from the conflict of 1971. It represents yet another step in the fulfilment of the Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972, which had set out the framework for the establishment of durable peace in the subcontinent.
140.	Ever since independence, India has tried its utmost to live in peace and friendship with Pakistan. In spite of many setbacks and frustrations, this has remained, and will remain, a fundamental objective of our foreign policy.
141.	The tragic events in the subcontinent in 1971 were a direct consequence of the short-sighted policies and adventurist actions of the Pakistani military rulers to which the President, now Prime Minister, Mr. Bhutto himself has made repeated references. The military oligarchy, having failed to crush the determination of 75 million Bangalis, involved India in a war by suddenly bombing from the air several places in western India on 3 December 1971.1 state these simple facts only to give a proper perspective, and not with any desire to dwell on the past. Our purpose is to look forward.
142.	The war lasted about two weeks and the fighting stopped in Bangladesh on 16 December 1971. From that moment onwards, we took a series of steps to restore normalcy and achieve durable peace in the Indian subcontinent.
143.	In the eastern sector, all Indian troops were withdrawn from Bangladesh within a period of 90 days by agreement between the two Governments; all the prisoners taken in Bangladesh were transferred to India as a result of a decision by the joint Indo-Bangladesh command; and all the refugees-nearly 10 million of them — returned from India to Bangladesh in three months' time, by the end of March 1972. In the western sector, the unilateral cease-fire declared by India came into effect on 17 December 1971.
144.	Soon after the cease-fire, we sought negotiations with Pakistan. As a result of the initiative taken by Prime Minister Mrs. Indira Gandhi a summit meeting was held in Simla. An agreement was arrived at on 2 July 1972, which, among other things, provided for, first, a line of control in Jammu and Kashmir, secondly, evacuation of territories occupied during the conflict; and thirdly, troop withdrawals. All these decisions were implemented in less than six months. An area of over 5,000 square miles occupied during the conflict was vacated and restored to Pakistan. In addition, all the prisoners of war taken by either side in the western sector returned home.
145.	Our next initiative was to make a joint declaration with Bangladesh on 17 April 1973 for solving the major humanitarian problems which arose as a result of the 1971 conflict. Three groups of people were affected: (a) hundreds of thousands of Bangalis stranded in Pakistan and prevented from returning to Bangladesh; (b)  hundreds of thousands of Pakistanis in Bangladesh whom Pakistan was refusing to receive; and (c) about 90,000 prisoners of war and civilian internees held in India. Bangladesh showed a spirit of accommodation and statesmanship in delinking the humanitarian problems from the unresolved political issues between Bangladesh and Pakistan.
146.	Following negotiations with Pakistan on the basis of this joint declaration, an agreement between India and Bangladesh, with the full concurrence of Bangladesh, was arrived at and signed in Delhi on 28 August 1973. This agreement provides for simultaneous repatriation of all the three groups I have just mentioned.
147.	As regards the 195 prisoners of war, all three Governments agreed that they should be kept in India pending a final settlement. The Delhi Agreement further provides, and I quote:
"On completion of repatriation of Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian internees in India, Bengalis in Pakistan and Pakistanis in Bangladesh referred to in Clause (v) above, or earlier if they so agree, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan will discuss and settle the question of 195 prisoners of war. Bangladesh has made it clear that it can participate in such a meeting only on the basis of sovereign equality."
148.	We hope that the Delhi Agreement will be fully, speedily and smoothly implemented with goodwill on all sides. The first steps in this direction have already been taken. Simultaneous repatriation of Bengalis from Pakistan, Pakistanis from Bangladesh, and prisoners of war and civilian internees from India has already started.
149.	I doubt if there is any comparable instance in modern history where a cease-fire, demarcation, troop
withdrawal, evacuation of occupied territories and repatriation of persons detained or stranded, following an international armed conflict of significant character, has been brought about within such a short period. All this has been achieved through direct negotiations, and as a result of the understanding shown on all sides, after taking into account all aspects of the problems. Therefore, to discuss now piecemeal and in isolation any of these problems from the point of view of any single party would be, to say the least, of little profit.
150.	These concrete facts clearly show that our search for normalization of relations and the establishment of a durable peace in the subcontinent has continued and has produced significant results. Our commitment to this goal is unequivocal. If we succeed in making the subcontinent an area of peace and co-operation, it not only will lead to a better life for over 700 millions of its people, but also will have a salutary impact on other areas as well.
151.	The Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Viet-Nam was signed in Paris this year. For many years we had repeatedly expressed our conviction that a military solution in this area was not feasible. Therefore, the massive and what seemed to be avoidable destruction of life and property in Indo-China shocked and pained us. The final terms of settlement, including provisions for the withdrawal of foreign forces from Indo-China and for bringing about a workable cease-fire in that area, are not much different from what we have been advocating all these years. The tragic sufferings of the people of Viet-Nam must come to an end and the full implementation of the Paris Agreement offers a challenge as well as an opportunity; every effort should be made to ensure lasting peace and to promote full and speedy reconstruction.
152.	As with the people of Viet-Nam, so with the people of Laos and Cambodia, India has always had close historical, cultural and emotional links. They can always depend on our sympathy, understanding and support. In this context, we welcome the recently concluded agreement
 among the parties in Laos. We hope that the people pf Laos will soon be able to set up a national coalition government in accordance with their legitimate aspirations without any outside interference.
153.	The peace in Indo-China will not be complete until the war in Cambodia has also been brought to an end. We are deeply distressed at the suffering which the people of Cambodia are still undergoing and the heavy toll of lives that is still taking place. We would urge that the people of Cambodia should be enabled to determine freely, and without any outside interference, their own future so that peace can return to that unhappy and tortured land. The international community can best assist this process by respecting fully the legitimate right to freedom, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the States of Indo-China.
154.	The comprehensive debate on the situation in the Middle East in the Security Council this summer showed once more, and most convincingly, that there can be no solution to this problem until Israel withdraws from the territories it has occupied by force as a consequence of the 1967 war. Israel's persistent refusal to vacate the occupied Arab lands and its violation of the rights of the inhabitants of the territories occupied by force are the direct causes of tension and conflict in this area. A just solution based on the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and the recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians can lead to an enduring peace in this region. The Secretary-General's visit to the Middle East must have brought into clearer focus the views of the contestants. His analysis may well help the parties and the Security Council to continue the search for a just and speedy solution to this explosive situation. We, on our part, will be guided by the principles we have always followed in regard to the problem of the Middle East; they are: the non-acquisition of territories by force of arms, the right of all States in the area to exist, and the inalienable rights of the Palestinians.
155.	We have noted with satisfaction the direct dialogue established between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea for the intensification of contacts to solve humanitarian problems and the eventual reunification of the Korean people. In these talks, as indeed in the whole of Korea, the less outside interference there is the better will be the chances of the parties leaching agreement. Any proposal before the United Nations on this subject will be examined by us with these considerations in mind.
156.	The twin phenomena of colonial domination and racial bigotry in Africa are the greatest burden on the conscience of the contemporary world.
157.	The situation of the people under Portuguese domination was tragically highlighted by the disclosures in the international press of the gruesome massacres in Mozambique. We must continue to expose the criminal character of Portuguese colonialism.
158.	We welcome the declaration of independence by the people of Guinea-Bissau and extend our support to Partido Africano da Independencia da Guine e Cabo Verde in its work of national integration and consolidation. We have no doubt that the peoples of Angola and Mozambique will soon succeed in their struggle for independence.
159.	The will to be independent must be sustained by the United Nations not only in the areas I have specifically mentioned, but in many others which we shall consider during these three months. We were disappointed, therefore, that when the question of terrorism was discussed in the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism, the
 refusal by some to admit the possibility of freedom fighters using all means to achieve their objectives, prevented the Committee from coming to any conclusion.
160.	In Zimbabwe, the racist regime continues to maintain its illegal administration in defiance of world opinion. We regret that the Security Council has been prevented from taking any .decisive action for applying the existing sanctions. In addition to improving the effectiveness of sanctions, their extension and strengthening is necessary. The breach of sanctions by some countries and trading interests is most regrettable, particularly when we recall that the sanctions were imposed by a unanimous decision of the Security Council.
161.	Nowhere are the obligations of trust vested in the United Nations more binding than in Namibia. The people
of Namibia have demonstrated the greatest courage in asserting their own rights by boycotting the recent so-called elections in Ovamboland. Clearly, the South African Government is not willing to work with the United Nations in bringing about Namibian independence and unity. The efforts made through the United Nations Council for Namibia, its High Commissioner, and the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa could, if their activities are planned and co-ordinated in a well-thought-out manner, contribute effectively to the political independence of the Namibian people as a whole.
162.	In this session, the General Assembly will consider the adoption of the Draft Convention for the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid [item 53 (b)/. We shall support all measures to intensify and widen action for outlawing this intolerable and inhuman doctrine which has brought so much suffering to millions of human beings in South Africa. Only recently, the world was shocked with the brutal killing in Carletonville.

163.	Today is the birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, and I recall that he was the first man to rise and revolt against the cruel practices of the Government of South Africa. He led a movement for improving the lot of the coloured people in that country, even before he launched the civil disobedience movement in India for obtaining our freedom and independence. Since India raised this question in the United Nations in 1946, practically every Member of this Organization, including South Africa's allies, has denounced apartheid. We shall continue to co-operate with all other Member States until South Africa gives up its intolerable policies of racial discrimination.
164.	While recent developments on the limitation of nuclear armaments and the prohibition of certain categories of weapons of mass destruction are important, enduring world peace and security can be based only on total disarmament. However, the goal of general and complete disarmament, including, in particular, nuclear disarmament, remains as distant as ever. We have long urged the convening of a world conference on disarmament with the participation of all countries so as to focus attention on this urgent problem. Unfortunately, the Special Committee on the World Disarmament Conference, set up after the last General Assembly session, could not proceed with any substantive work. Given goodwill on all sides, the difficulties which arose can be removed by the present session of the Assembly so that a world conference on disarmament can be prepared for and convened as early as possible.
165.	My delegation has noted with interest the new item proposed by the delegation of the USSR for a reduction in the military budgets [item 102]. The intention seems to be that the permanent members of the Security Council and other militarily significant States should use a part of the savings for providing assistance to developing countries. We have been stressing that savings from disarmament should be diverted to development assistance. We shall therefore co-operate with other delegations in a constructive effort to consider how this proposal, which will no doubt be elaborated in course of discussion, could serve the interest of disarmament and also enhance development assistance.
166.	The declaration of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)J was a significant step in our efforts to reduce great Power rivalries and tensions in the different regions of the world and forms a part of our desire to eliminate military alliances and bases. I should take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the statesmanship of Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka in mobilizing international opinion for this purpose. Useful work has been initiated by the 15-member Ad Hoc, Committee on the Indian Ocean established by the last session of the Assembly [resolution 2992 (XXVII)] for considering measures for implementing the Declaration. This Declaration cannot be effective unless the great Powers and other major maritime Powers co-operate fully with the littoral and hinterland States.
167.	We look forward with utmost interest to the forthcoming plenipotentiary Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The meetings of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction this year have brought out certain difficulties, none of which need prove insurmountable. By working together with all other countries we could achieve a just and equitable law of the sea and sea-bed which would provide for and ensure an orderly exploration and exploitation of the sea-bed beyond the limits of national jurisdiction and a rational management of its resources, bearing in mind the special needs and interests of the developing countries, whether coastal or land-locked. A fair and viable law of the sea should also provide a framework of regulations for other uses of the sea, including those relating to the exploitation of its living and other resources by establishing an exclusive fishery and economic zone for the coastal States.
168.	The concept of world-wide partnership in economic and social development has been accepted. However, the progress towards full implementation of the International Development Strategy for the 1970s [resolution 2626 (XXV)] has been extremely disappointing. Some developed countries, particularly the smaller among them, have responded well, but little success has been achieved in even its most publicized goals. The dismal fact is that the Second Development Decade is going the way of the first, and with far less excuse. The growth of most developing countries is well below the targets set. The growth in the least developed countries has been slower still. The benefits of world economic growth are not being shared equitably and the rich societies are becoming richer and the poor poorer. Full recognition of the interdependence of the world community and adoption of measures conducive to the attainment of a more balanced growth in the world economy is still lacking.
169.	Many developing countries have already spoken of a real and imminent danger that, owing to the preoccupation of developed countries with readjustment of their mutual relations, the urgent need to implement policy measures in favour of developing countries may not receive the attention it deserves. The first biennial review and appraisal of the Strategy has so far been inconclusive. If agreed conclusions could be reached during this session, remedial measures to improve performance in the remaining years of the Decade would be easier to take. In the developing countries the struggle for greater equality and justice must
continue. Equally, we have to seek wider economic co-operation among the developing countries themselves. The important measures outlined recently at Algiers for this purpose should prove most useful.
170.	Contrary to earlier expectations, agreement on international monetary reform has not been reached. Stability in international monetary arrangements is not yet within our grasp. The issues are undoubtedly complex. Non-aligned countries have reiterated that the new international monetary system, in the establishment and working of which the developing countries should participate as equals, should be universal. The system should guarantee the stability of international trade flows and conditions of financing; it has to recognize the specific situation and needs of the developing countries for preferential treatment.
171.	The growth of world trade and the rightful share of the developing countries in it will be facilitated by the establishment of special drawing rights as the principal reserve asset, for the phasing out of the monetary role of gold, for an adjustment mechanism which is both efficient and equitable and, above all, for the establishment of a link between the special drawing rights and development finance, in order to provide for the adequate transfer of additional real resources to the developing countries. All these measures will create an orderly arrangement for adequate liquidity.
172.	The Declaration adopted a few days ago at Tokyo will soon be followed by a round of multilateral trade negotiations. The trend towards liberalization of world trade is to be welcomed, but the developing countries should not emerge from these negotiations as net losers. Specific measures must be taken to secure additional benefits for the international trade of developing countries. This has indeed been agreed to in Tokyo.
173.	To achieve this, the concept of preferential treatment for developing countries in all sectors of the negotiations has to be accepted. Moreover, we must ensure that the enlargement of the preferential arrangements among the
 developed countries, as well as the reduction of industrial tariffs following the multilateral trade negotiations, do not erode the meagre benefits which the developing countries have secured under the generalized scheme of preferences. To make this scheme fully operational will require its implementation by those who have not yet done so and substantial improvements in the arrangements already in operation.
174.	The delicate and precarious balance between-world food supply and demand during the last few years has emphasized the urgent need for a global strategy for food security. Widespread drought in several countries has brought to the forefront the problem of matching world resources and technology for production of food with global needs, in normal as also in abnormal years. We support the initiative of the Food and Agriculture Organization to work out an effective solution to this problem.
175.	In stressing the essential link between economic development and environmental improvement we have
consistently underlined that there is no contradiction between the solution of ecological problems and the interests of developing countries. We have, therefore, spoken against ecological considerations being used to curtail aid, erect trade barriers and prevent the transfer of technology. This could be the result of a short-sighted desire to protect economic advantages: restraints on economic growth must not be adopted to the detriment of the developing world.
176.	We are confident, therefore, that the United Nations Environment Programme under Mr. Maurice Strong will keep all these aspects in mind in working out a plan of action for the betterment of mankind as a whole. In this context, the development of human settlements is of particular importance to developing countries.
177.	I have followed with great interest the many important views expressed by distinguished ministers and leaders of delegations gathered here. Today, I have taken the time of the Assembly to set forth our ideas on some of the important issues before us. We must ponder over the many valuable ideas presented to us by men of thought, and we must bend our energies to collective effort as men of action. The Charter provides the mechanism for translating these ideas into action. Let us, if we can, gather enough courage and wisdom and seize this opportunity to serve our fellow men.﻿52.	 Mr. President, those of us who know you well take a special pride in your elevation to the presidency of the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session. The people of Ecuador share the honour which your personal qualities have justly earned.
53.	The international climate is charged with confidence and hope. Attitudes of hostility which once seemed to bean organic part of our generation's life are now giving way to patient dialogue. The Viet-Nam cease-fire, the American-Chinese encounter, the summit meetings at Moscow and Washington, the German agreements and the European treaties have been succeeded by a cease-fire in Laos, by talks between North and South Korea, and by contacts between the three States of the Indian subcontinent. The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe is at work, bringing a tragic era of confrontation to its end.
54.	Let us leave the historians to define the precise point at which the international journey took a new direction — and the causes which inspired the change. In the meantime the results are tangible and impressive, although not yet universal. In some discussions — but not in all — the old vocabularies of abuse are being softened by a welcome air of civility. It is generally understood that coexistence must be based on a separation between viewpoints and relationships. Even when Governments differ in their ideas, their viewpoints and their policies, in their social structures and in their international orientations, they can, nevertheless, foster good relations even across the gulf of their divergences. It was the cold-war philosophy that insisted on ideological agreement or political harmony as the condition of good relations between States. The detente accepts and admits no such condition. It respects and transcends diversities of interest and outlook. Indeed, the logical conclusion of the detente is the universality of international relations. Fidelity to detente requires all States to cultivate normal relations with each other, irrespective of differences and even of conflicts in their interests or policies. At a time when States which have real conflicts of ideology, policy and interest are establishing relations with each other, it would be a grotesque paradox if States which have never had any reason to quarrel about anything were induced to weaken or to sunder their mutual ties.
55.	But we shall not do service to the spirit of detente if we carry our satisfaction beyond the point of reason and truth. Free dialogue and compromise have prevailed in many disputes, but they are still rejected in others, and the victories of international conciliation in the past few years have all been won outside the United Nations structure. This indicates that the growth of world community is painfully slow, Indeed, our Secretary-General, with admirable realism, has found it necessary, in the introduction to his annual
report o n the work of the Organization [A/9001/Add. 1], to warn us of some of the shortcomings in the work of the United Nations so far. The truth is that, while quiet, bilateral diplomacy has recorded many triumphs, strident, polemical, public debate has not brought any good result on any issue at any time. The lesson is plain. The central role of this Organization should be to promote agreements between parties to a conflict irrespective of their voting strength, and not to try to adjudicate between conflicting views on the mere basis of numerical weight. The United Nations, in short, should have a diplomatic and not a parliamentary vocation. This point was stated with great precision by the Foreign Minister of Canada. I quote his words:
"... we must try to avoid barren and abrasive confrontations, which are frequently the result of formal voting processes. Consensus is another and often surer route —  Consensus does not mean the imposition of the will of the majority on a reluctant minority which feels its vital interests are at issue; it means the shared recognition of what should and can be done." [2126th meeting, para. 60.1
56.	Now here, in a few words, is a basic evaluation of what may be wrong with United Nations techniques. The result is not only that successes have come outside these walls; failures have abounded within them. The discussions on international terrorism by our Ad Hoc Committee ended in fiasco, as had the debate in the General Assembly after the Munich outrage last year. In Rome the International Civil Aviation Organization sat for many weeks without being allowed to agree on any amendments to the Hague or Montreal Conventions. All Members of the United Nations are united in their ability to discuss each other's imperfections. There are majorities to be had for selective political judgements against those who do not belong to a large voting bloc. But majorities cannot always be found for objective, temperate statements free of denunciation and invective.
57.	The Secretary-General's introduction to the annual report reminds us that the efforts of the United Nations in political conciliation are, in his words, "complementary" to "the normal bilateral dealings of Governments" [A/9001/ Add. 1, p. 5]. That is true. I also think that it is true that an attempt by all the Arab Governments to escape from the duty of engaging in "the normal bilateral dealings of Governments" to a constant reliance on public debate is one of the sources of the continuing deadlock in the Middle East. Indeed, every procedure and attitude that has proved its efficacy in other disputes has so far been ignored or rejected in our region.
58.	Would we not do well then to listen to the counsel of two statesmen whose names are pre-eminent in the history of the recent detente. Chancellor Willy Brandt of the Federal Republic of Germany has told this Assembly that
".. . it is primarily direct peace talks between the Arab countries concerned and Israel that will best secure a balance of the elementary interests of both sides." [2128th meeting, para. 63.]
And Mr, Kissinger, Secretary of State of the United States, has reminded us that not even the strongest of great Powers can "substitute for the efforts of those most directly involved" [2124th meeting, para. 56],
59.	The absence of negotiation in the Middle East is the gravest obstacle to the termination of regional tension. But it is not the parent cause of the tension. The root of the conflict lies deeper; the root of the conflict lies in the refusal of Arab Governments to come to terms with Israel as a sovereign nation rising from the depths of Middle Eastern history to resume its place in the universal community. Not one of the Arab Governments whose representatives have spoken from this rostrum about withdrawal from territories held since 1967 has said that in order to achieve their territorial claims the Arab States would recognize Israel's rightful place amongst the free nations of the area and establish permanent peace, friendship, commerce and normal relations with Israel similar, for example, to the relations which exist between the States of Western Europe, which only a short time ago were locked in hostility and war. Many Arab spokesmen say the opposite. The Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. El Zayyat, has stated in the Security Council and elsewhere that beyond the 1967 armistice lines lie the frontiers proposed in a United Nations recommendation of 1947 [resolution 181 (II)], which Egypt and other Arab Governments destroyed, as they had promised, "by blood and fire", and these in his learned view are the only legal frontiers. Nor would this be the end of Israel's dismantlement. An article in the official Cairo newspaper Al Gum-huriya only several days ago tells us that
"The withdrawal of Israel from all the conquered Arab territories is an initial demand of the Arab States presented as a part of the comprehensive programme aimed at putting an end to the Zionist settlement in Palestine."
60.	From such statements it is not hard to deduce the meaning of the phrase about the "legitimate aspirations of the Palestine Arab people" when employed by those in whose eyes the sole representatives of that people are the organizations which carry out murder and banditry all over the world but usually at a discreet distance from the Middle East,
61.	The plain fact is that the present Arab leadership is not satisfied with the verdict of history which has led to the constitution of 18 Arab States in an area of II million square kilometres with a population of 100 million. Arab leadership seems to be in an excited imperialist mood. It demands the elimination of Israel, a non-Arab nation, older in its roots within the Middle East than any other, more venerable than any other in the lineage of spirit and tongue that ties it to that soil, unexampled in the persistence of its national identity.
62.	Israel is the very heart and core of Middle Eastern history; but Israel is a Jewish and not an Arab entity. Therefore, there are Arab leaders who cannot sustain its sovereign presence: it must be either physically eliminated or swallowed up in something else so that its "Israel hood" would vanish under some Arab combination or domination. In its philosophy national freedom in the Middle East is an exclusive Arab right — to be monopolized, and not to be shared. There are other expressions of this hegemonistic and exclusive spirit —  in Arab policy in the Persian Gulf and in the posturing of Colonel Qaddafi as he flaunts his opulent purse across the world. But it is in the Israeli context that the tendency to see sovereignty in the Middle East as an Arab monopoly has had its most ominous effects.
63.	Now, what I have said is admittedly a stringent view of what Arab Governments seek to achieve. But unfortunately it is sustained by a great array of official statements. It is confirmed by the implacable warfare to which Israel, alone amongst all the States of the world, has been subjected since its birth. It is nourished by outrages such as the shooting in the head of the 11 Israeli athletes, tied hand and foot, on the floor of a helicopter in Munich one year ago. Such acts are possible only if the victims are regarded by the assassins as lying outside and beyond any human context. And, indeed, the Arab hostility towards Israel today joins hands with another and deadlier hatred to which it is akin. For where else, Members of the United Nations, other than in Cairo, can you imagine the publication by writers close to the seat of power of an article which I hold in my hand and from which I read the concluding extract:
"In the whole world people have ended by understanding that Hitler was right, for the Jews are vampires which suck the blood of humanity. They wish to destroy the world, but the world vomits them. They have been chased from land to land; they were burned in the ovens of Hitler — 1 million, 2 million, 6 million. Would that he had accomplished it fully!"
That is what Al Akhbar wrote on 19 August this year.
64.	"Would that [Hitler] had accomplished it fully!" This particular extract is only one example of hundreds of Nazi publications that have made Cairo a world centre of anti-Semitic ideology. As we listen to these obscenities on Cairo Radio, as we bury our dead after Munich or Lod, as we recall wars, assaults, boycotts and threats over these 25 years, as we read of the Covenant of the so-called "Palestine Liberation Organization", which asserts that only Arabs have sovereign rights in the Middle East, can we be reproached if we see ourselves as the target of a particularly virulent hatred, at variance with all humane values and vastly removed from anything that can be called detente?
65.	In short, one of the components of Israel's policy —  and I say this in great frankness —  is a profound scepticism about the basic intention of Arab States to respect Israel's sovereignty, its national identity, its cultural legacy, its place in the Middle East and the world. There is one thing, and one thing alone, that could undermine that scepticism: negotiation.
66.	For recent international experience teaches us that negotiation is not simply a procedural method: it is a principle of coexistence. Negotiation does not merely photograph established positions; it leads them towards mutual accommodation. It puts hopes and suspicions to their only viable test. At the negotiating table the discourse between the parties ceases to be rhetorical, abrasive and polemical. It becomes pragmatic, concrete, empirical. A unique kind of solidarity asserts itself between the negotiators, who become subject to the mystique of potential success and put forth their maximal effort to avoid a final break. Precisely because negotiation has such far-reaching effects, the Arab refusal to negotiate without prior conditions arouses far-reaching suspicions.
67.	We have long been convinced of the need to undertake a detailed negotiation ranging freely across all the problems at issue. If this aim has not been fulfilled, we share the
universal regret — but we disclaim culpability. We have accepted Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which calls for the establishment of permanent peace by agreement between Member States in the Middle East, including withdrawal of forces from territories occupied since 1967 to secure and recognized boundaries to be determined in the peace agreement. We proposed detailed agendas for discussion with Egypt and Jordan, We accepted Ambassador Jarring's proposal, rejected by Egypt in March 1968, for convening Israeli and Egyptian representatives in conferences under his auspices to discuss a peace settlement. When four eminent Heads of African States visited our region in 1971, they submitted six proposals in writing, to which my Prime Minister made written and appropriate response on 28 November 1971.5 The African Presidents reported that this reply, together with that of Egypt, constituted a sufficient basis to justify negotiation. We stand by those replies today. In particular, we responded to the suggestion of the African Presidents which reads as follows:
"Acceptance by the two parties that 'secure and recognized boundaries' be determined in the peace agreement".
68.	In 1971, when it was pointed out that direct contact might not yet be easily acceptable to Arab Governments, we agreed to the United States procedure for proximity talks. When it was then suggested that it might be difficult to conceive a sudden transition from total deadlock to total peace, we accepted the idea of a Suez agreement involving the opening of the Canal under Egyptian administration, with a limited, agreed withdrawal of Israeli forces, even ahead of a peace settlement. We stipulated that this would not be the final withdrawal, but a phase leading to further negotiations in which the permanent and final line would be agreed upon between the parties.
69.	Throughout all this period we abstained — as we still do — from changing the political and juridical status of the administered territories, and have not closed any options for a negotiated peace. We opened the river crossings and cease-fire lines to a free movement of hundreds of thousands of Arabs from areas outside Israeli jurisdiction — and indeed from all over the Arab world. We placed the Holy Places of Christendom and Islam under the administration of Christian and Moslem authorities and proposed that this principle be given appropriate statutory expression in a peace agreement. In October 1972 I suggested a meeting with Foreign Minister Riad in New York "in order to break out of old deadlocks into a new vision and a new hope". We utilized the good offices of foreign statesmen and other visitors to convey to Cairo and other Middle Eastern capitals our proposals for contact and dialogue in any form and at any level agreeable to the other side. We welcomed the Secretary-General of the United Nations on his visit to Member States in the Middle East, and appreciated his testimony to the will for peace that, in his words, he found in his contacts with the Government of Israel.
70.	That is not an exhaustive list of all the soundings and gestures that we have made in an effort to generate a process of negotiation. Nor have we decided to despair of the
prospect. But can anyone seriously believe that all these initiatives, all these responses — none of which was put in ultimative form — offered no opening whatever through which Arab Governments genuinely desiring peace could seek or accept a dialogue with us?
71. The Arab reactions to these and other initiatives have always included refusals to negotiate; or refusals to acknowledge Israel's statehood at all; or an insistence that Arab positions be accepted in advance by Israel as a condition of negotiation; or a demand that the situation which preceded and in large measure provoked the war of 1967 be meticulously restored.
72.	Now, there is one important thing to be noted about those positions. If all or any of them had been adopted by Governments in America, Europe and East Asia in the past few years, there would be no agreements for the General Assembly to welcome and no detente for anybody anywhere lo celebrate.
73.	I turn from the past to the future. It is natural for the Israeli Government to use this opportunity of making a precise definition of the principles which move its policy. That policy is frequently and grossly misrepresented, especially at conferences from which we are excluded while our adversaries command the scene. Our policy is to seek peace and security. If the Israeli mind is intensely preoccupied with the problem of security, it is because of the particular memories that converge upon us. On one level of recollection we come face to face with a recent experience that no other family of the human race has ever undergone. The fires are out in the gas chambers, and the ashes are silent in European fields. But the memory of our 6 million kinsmen, brutally wiped off the slate of life, and the terrible agony of the million Jewish children butchered in the year of martyrdom abide with us, vivid, stark, unforgotten. And on the other level of memory there is the experience of 25 years in which our nation's progress has been secured only at a heavy price of suffering and death,
74.	A people that has undergone such affliction and borne such loss is bound by historic duty lo insist on a very precise craftsmanship in the construction of peace. It will not do simply to reproduce the vulnerable and explosive situation which threatened world peace six years ago. Israel's statehood, its Jewish vocation, its name and flag and tongue are a part of the international reality now and for all time. They are axiomatic, and it is our business to maintain them in growing security.
75.	We are asked whether we seek peace. The answer is, Yes, that is our central aim, the destination of all our policies and hopes. Peace does not only involve a documentary acknowledgement of rights. It signifies the permanent end of conflict, and the proof of its authenticity must be sought in human terms. Peace means open frontiers across which peoples can seek commerce and contact with each other in mutual accessibility and thus give depth and meaning to formal governmental engagements.
76.	Should we not look hard and long at the European example? The aim should be a community of sovereign States in the Middle East, as in Benelux and the European communities. With our eastern neighbour, once the boundary is determined, we should seek a system of relations based on separate sovereignties but with a high measure of social and economic integration. The remarkable ease and cordiality of access between Israelis and the mass of Palestinian Arabs today should be preserved and consolidated in a peace settlement. The squalid conspiracies of Arafat and Habash, with their grenades, daggers, bombs and guns, do not represent the views or interests of the million non-Israeli Arabs west of the Jordan living in peaceful interaction with Israelis today. That is why terrorist violence has no expression there.
77.	We are asked if we accept negotiation. The answer is, Yes, by any procedure mutually agreed upon. The negotiation is between the sovereign States of the area. We must be concerned to insulate our region from the rivalries and competitions of the Powers. The Middle East, after generations of servitude, is now free. It should not seek new. hegemonies and new servitudes at the expense of its newly won independence.
78.	What about Security Council resolution 242 (1967)? The answer is, Yes, we accept it as the basis for negotiation with Egypt and Jordan, and our memorandum of 4 August 1970 remains in force. It is vital to understand what the resolution says and what it does not say. The resolution rules out withdrawal except in the context of a "just and lasting peace". It does not require any unconditional Israeli action without balancing actions on the Arab side. And it specifically makes provision for the establishment of secure and recognized boundaries by agreement between Member States. When Arab Governments persuade international conferences to say that resolution 242(1967) requires immediate and unconditional withdrawal from all the territories, they commit a triple forgery within a single sentence and put our documentary consensus in jeopardy. But as it stands and as it is written it is a documentary basis for negotiation,
79.	Do we accept the principle of withdrawal? Yes. In the context of a permanent peace Israeli forces would withdraw to the positions and boundaries determined mutually by the peace agreements. Our policy is not unilateral annexation but the negotiation of agreements on the final boundary. That position is in full accord with the intentions of those who drafted and sponsored Security Council resolution 242 (1967). One of them, Assistant Secretary Sisco, said publicly in 1970:
"That resolution did not say withdrawal to the pre-June 5 line, The resolution said the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final, secure and recognized borders. In other words the question of the final borders is a matter of negotiation between the parties."
80.	We are asked about the Palestinian Arabs. If the idea is Palestine instead of Israel, our answer, of course, is, No. There is nothing "instead" of Israel either in universal history or in modern political reality. The question whether the Arabs have 18 or 19 States does not stand on an equal plane with Israel's solitary domain of nationhood and existence. But if the issue is Palestine side by side with Israel, the answer is that in peace negotiations with Jordan Israel's permanent boundary would be determined. It is not our governmental consensus to seek such boundary changes as would bring all or most of the Arabs of the West Bank and
their populated territories under Israeli sovereignty or citizenship. The majority of Jordan's population are Palestinians, and most of the Palestinians are Jordanian citizens. Thus an Israel-Jordan peace settlement would enable most of the Palestine Arabs east and west of the Jordan to affirm their identity and citizenship within an Arab framework. It is for Arabs and not Israelis to determine the precise constitutional structure of our eastern neighbour. In a peace settlement the area of the former Palestine Mandate on both sides of the Jordan between the desert and the sea would have two States — Israel and an Arab State which would be a Palestinian Arab State in its composition whatever its name or constitutional structure. It would be normal for Palestinian Arabs to be included in the Jordanian delegation that would negotiate peace with Israel.
81.	The principles I have outlined today would, of course, have to be submitted to negotiation with the other side. Here I seek only to emphasize that our positions are legitimate, normal and conducive to a wide range of peaceful solutions. Indeed, they are identical with the principles adopted by many States which have been praised here for their contribution to the new detente. It is possible to agree with those positions or to differ from them. But we see a moral and intellectual affront in any tendency to portray them as eccentric, as immoderate and, more grotesquely, as intransigent, when they are quite clearly nothing of the kind.
82.	Least of all is there any justification for making them the basis for abusive or punitive formulations in obedience to the pressures of Arab States which decline negotiation, refuse peace, encourage international terrorism and seek to impose their own hostilities on other States in a manner prejudicial to the sovereignty and dignity of newly emerging nations.
83.	Whatever has divided them in the past, the Israeli and Arab nations cannot escape their common destiny. History and geography ensure their proximity. Experience teaches us that there are no irreconcilable conflicts. If the Arab Governments will take example and inspiration from the prevailing spirit of detente, they will find in Israel a willing partner for regional development and co-operation. There would be more benefit and, above all, more honour and dignity for them and for us in the exploration of a peaceful future than in the pursuit of an ineffective and sterile rancour, which has achieved and will achieve none of its objectives but which degrades our region's name and obstructs its better visions.
84.	We shall respond affirmatively to any efforts, such as those indicated by the United States, to assist in the search for just solutions and to generate a spirit of accommodation.
85.	Israel's relations with the European community will enter a new phase with the conclusion this year of an agreement constituting a free trade area within the Mediterranean context. If the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe succeeds in its task, the Mediterranean and Middle East will benefit from the resultant growth of continental harmony. We welcome the decision of the Conference to invite Israel to present its views on matters inscribed on the Conference agenda,
86.	A central theme of the dialogue on detente in Europe, in the European Security Conference and elsewhere is liberty of movement and freedom of intellectual expression. Unless some success is registered here, there will be scepticism about the authenticity and depth of the change in the international climate. Our concern for detente should not lead us to ignore the desperate bid for freedom by men such as Solzhenitsyn, Sakharov, Levich and other scientists and thinkers who fall under governmental harassment and oppression.
87.	The saga of Soviet Jewry belongs to this theme,
88.	During his visit to the United States this summer, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Union of Soviet Socialists Republics, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, made a number of declarations implying that there are almost no rejections of requests by Soviet Jews to be permitted to leave for Israel. To our regret, we cannot confirm such statements at a time when so many Jews in the Soviet Union are held against their will and call out to us daily in despair. They face powerful authorities in a struggle to exercise the right, granted fortunately to many thousands of others, to join their people and their families in Israel. Applicants for emigration have in some instances been dismissed from work and left without any means of livelihood. Media of information have incited against them. Administrative molestation has made their life unbearable. Dozens of Jews, amongst them a young woman, have been condemned to long years of suffering behind barbed wire. The penalties inflicted on these people are especially surprising in view of the fact that the right to leave for Israel has been recognized in principle and that other Jews have exercised it. It is difficult to understand or condone a policy granting exit permits to some Jews while at the same time creating cruel obstacles for many others.
89.	Nor can we pass in silence over the anti-Jewish incitement conducted openly or under the cover of propaganda directed against religion or against Zionism. This campaign is still carried on through governmental media of information and by means of propaganda publications and pseudo-scientific literature. In this manner anti-Semitic ideas are disseminated and injected into the masses of the Soviet Union's population.
90.	On 26 March this year a tribunal in the French capital determined that information material distributed by the Soviet Embassy contained slanders on the Jewish faith and incitement to racial discrimination, and found those responsible guilty. But the Soviet authorities have not applied the Soviet law against the disseminators of anti-Semitic propaganda,
91.	At the same time, the Jews of Syria and the remnant still left in Iraq are living in constant torment. Israel again appeals to world opinion which has already alleviated the plight of these helpless small minorities whose only salvation lies in emigration and the pursuit of a new life.
92.	This season of the year was darkened for us in 1972 by the fearful affliction and murder of our sportsmen who went to Munich in the shelter of the Olympic flag. This year the horizon is clouded again. The kidnapping of Jewish refugees by terrorists in Austria is a reproach to international institutions whose sterile discussion of International terrorism must have given more encouragement to terrorists than they would have derived even from the absence of discussion. The decision to close the camp at Schoenau defied our belief. I recall an unforgettable day there a few months ago. In a world convulsed by nihilism and violence, it was moving to see this oasis of humane values, dedicated to the impulses of compassion and solidarity which have so often become submerged in the torrent of twentieth-century life. The very name Schoenau was recited with pride by every Austrian whom I was privileged to encounter. Those who have passed through its gates have known great suffering and torment in the tempests which have shaken Europe in this generation. To abandon such an enterprise in deference to a pair of brutal gangsters has a terrifying meaning, It raises the question where the final human victory belongs. Can law and civility triumph if they are not strongly defended? Can a decent and rational public order take root in the world if indulgence beyond their own expectation is shown to those who put a pistol to the head of unarmed wayfarers? What will be the effect of the constant suspension of European legal systems in favour of early release and impunity for those who come to kill and maim and leave their trail of innocent blood behind?
93.	The issue is not only how the safe transit of Jews from the Soviet Union to Israel will be arranged, once the emigration has been authorized and the immigration approved. This is an acutely grave question, but it arises in an even graver context. What is the future of a world in which two pirates and criminals can bring a, proud nation, can bring sovereign governments to the acceptance of their terms? What are the implications of transactions and engagements between civilized governments and violent extortionists? Who is going to rule our world, governments or gunmen?
94.	The Council of Europe in its resolution entitled "Report on the responsibility of the Member States of the Council of Europe regarding the free movement of people in Europe", adopted on 1 October 1973, rightly expressed the hope that no government will regard itself as bound by a promise secured by extortion to terminate facilities for the transit of emigrants from the Soviet Union. All these human predicaments emerge from the developments in Vienna this week. When the civilized world stands with bowed head, along comes President El-Sadat to celebrate joyfully the triumph of the young gunmen over a few aging, weary Jews and over the sovereignty and law of an enlightened European State.
95.	Once it was an international offence to aid pirates. They were defined as humani generis hostis, enemies of the human race. Are we approaching a time when it will be an offence to resist them?
96.	Chancellor Brandt called from this platform for an effective convention against terrorism. But experience shows that if in this matter we aim at universality we shall not have the necessary parliamentary success. There is — let us face it — no effective anti-terrorist majority in the United Nations. That is an ominous truth, but nothing is gained by ignoring it.
97.	I ask myself therefore whether it would be more effective to follow the general traditions of international law by
convening like-minded interested States to discuss and formulate a convention against terrorism. The law of the seas and other instruments of international law and international co-operation evolved from the common action of a few States to which others came to adhere. Most of the historic international conventions were constructed in this way. Formulated by the few, they became the consensus of the many. The 43 States whose votes indicated their dissatisfaction with the results of last year's debate on terrorism might well consider meeting for common action, which would in the first place engage themselves and later attract a gradual but broad consensus.
98.	For it becomes more evident each day that the United Nations, frustrated in its activity in regional disputes, should concentrate more of its efforts on matters of planetary concern which require a unitary framework. Mankind has a long past and an uncertain future. Revolutions in science, in technology, in the use of energy, in industrial productivity, in demographic growth have moved forward at a rhythm too quick for the mind to absorb. Man is not at ease with his environment. The intellectual and spiritual consequences are deep. Our culture is dominated by a sense of fragmentation and instability. It expresses the special pathos of the twentieth century condition — the confidence of power and yet the sharp premonition of vulnerability both living within us, together, side by side.
99.	The United Nations may recapture some of its lost prestige and resonance if it gives first priority to those issues which have a planetary dimension. The law of the air and of the seas, the defence of air and water against pollution, the stimulation of economic growth in developing countries, the conservation of resources, the fight against famine, the establishment of a reserve of cereals in years of abundance for use in years of scarcity (following may I say, the thrifty example of our Israeli ancestor Joseph in ancient Egypt), the response to the call of hunger south of the Sahara, the response to the important initiative of President Echeverria of Mexico calling for a charter of economic rights and duties of States — those are some problems which can only be discussed and solved on a global scale. Too much of the time of the United Nations may have been spent on the regional disputes in which individual Governments have the last say — for the simple reason that they have the ultimate responsibility. In the meantime, problems have collected which because they belong equally to all nations, end up by belonging to none. Each of our national societies has its custodians and spokesmen. The question is who except the United Nations can speak for the City of Man? Who speaks in responsible tutelage of the atmosphere, the soil, the oceans, the unique life-supporting Earth?
100.	Perhaps mankind's dilemma is the United Nations opportunity. Let us, therefore, tread this ground firmly but with precision for this is the only planet that we have.﻿60.	Mr. President, it is no mere duty but a real pleasure for me, in coming to the rostrum, to pay a tribute to you, the distinguished representative of Ecuador, and through you to the great Latin American community. I greet your country also as a good Pacific neighbour in the southern hemisphere, and we express the hope that every success will attend your efforts.
61.	This is a session of the Assembly at which we will be assessing the growing relaxation of tensions and the breaking down of the old barriers between East and West.
62.	The debates and the welcome action taken here on new Members are, of course, both a symbol and a practical result of these developments. But other results of the new relationship among the great Powers have still to be translated into practical benefits for the smaller countries and for this Organization. That new great Power relationship, that relaxation, has been brought about by a concert of convenience among the few. But we, the smaller nations, who need stable peace, co-operation and international order cannot rest satisfied with such a temporary and fragile situation. We have to find a way to build upon the relaxation, to bring it within a larger, more constructive and more permanent framework of international order.
63.	A "balance of power" among the great Powers has doubtless contributed to the new spirit of relaxation in international affairs; and to that extent we of course welcome it. But we are not naive. "Balance of power" in the past has been merely another term for the continuation, in a different guise, of competition and rivalry. The great Powers have continued their efforts to shift the balance in their direction; and in due course they have miscalculated, the balance has collapsed and major wars have occurred. In so far as similar elements are inherent in the present situation the world will continue unstable and the detente will be fragile. For, let us not forget, the great Powers still remain free to undertake their unilateral actions. And some of those unilateral, often sadly misguided, actions have brought great suffering in recent years and set back the progress of wide sections of the whole human family. In this nuclear age unfettered freedom on the part of the more powerful members of the family of nations is too dangerous. The great Powers are beginning at last to show signs of recognizing this. We, and they, in their interests as well as ours, must move to repair the damaged structure of international order. They are establishing some sort of balance among themselves; our task is to build a framework for a healthier relationship between the so-called great and the small.
64.	As the head of a newly elected Labour Government, I come to the international scene new; but the needs of the day seem startlingly obvious. Leaving aside the question of international security and international order, the chief need among nations is the same as the chief need within individual nations  —  that is, to achieve economic and social justice. That is the principal concern of my own Government at home; and I am convinced that it must also be the focal concern of the United Nations.
65.	We view with profound concern and dismay a situation in which, more than a quarter of a century after the United Nations was founded, the most critical of issues show no sign of improvement. I refer to the immense and growing gap between standards of living in the industrialized countries and the developing countries. I refer to the world food situation, which is more difficult than at any time since the aftermath of the Second World War. I refer to the rapidly multiplying world population and the other pressures on available resources. These are the obvious ills of international society, complicated still further by an international monetary instability that jeopardizes the development plans of all countries, by the rapid price inflation in much of the world and, this year, by crop failures and famines.
66.	We are in no doubt about the need to tackle more seriously the deepening division between the rich and the poor. It is depressing and deplorable  —  indeed it is intolerable  —  that most of the international conferences of the last decade or more have ultimately evolved along lines dividing the developed from the developing and in ways and with results in some cases which have reflected no credit on countries which were better off than others. Somehow-and sooner, not later  —  resources must be more equitably shared.
67.	A few countries, a minority of the human family, are using the bulk of the world's resources-resources which we now increasingly realize are exhaustible. Yet, ironically, the ever-increasing consumption of these resources is steadily bringing less and less real enjoyment to the favoured few. An increasing number among them are realizing the dead end  —  the literal dead end  —  of a philosophy and a way of life favouring the accumulation of material things to the point of greed and senselessness. It is a philosophy that in its time brought immense material benefits; but the cost to society of its pursuit to excess is now being plainly revealed. Rich countries, at some time, must appreciate that enough is enough. The richer countries must turn consciously towards improving the more intangible qualities of life for themselves while making their energies and skills available to improve, to a far greater extent than ever before, the material level of life for the majority of poorer countries.
68.	I mean, in other words, that a change in attitudes is required. If not, we run the risk that solutions will impose themselves by means of famine, pestilence, the exhaustion of resources and every form of social unrest and war. There is no need to manage so foolishly the resources of this beautiful planet. If this smacks of Idealism I make no apology for it. If there are no ideals there is no hope. We could do with more of the idealism with which we entered the post-war era  —  an idealism which has been pressed out by the weight of paper and speeches and resolutions and, yes, by the many sobering practical experiences of the last 28 years. One could, I can see it. be disillusioned and cynical. But it is imperative that we should act as if we believe the human race has a future. This may be idealistic, but I am not talking idealism, I am talking practicalities. The world has to move on to new courses if we are to survive. It is a matter of practical common sense.
69.	My Government, since taking office, has been trying to put its convictions into effect  —  though I speak in no boastful way, for I am conscious of how small our efforts are when measured against the needs of others. But we are trying to translate into international terms the vision of a decent and humane society which motivates our domestic policies. We have reviewed our mutual assistance programmes against the internationally accepted targets which now form part of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)]. We did so because it seemed to us that there was no greater or more urgent priority confronting us in international affairs  —  at least among those priorities which we, as a non-great Power, were in a position to do anything about. We were especially concerned about the possibility of failure of the Strategy for the Second Development Decade implicit in the decision of many countries to maintain reservations about the targets of the Strategy. In a world where millions continue to go hungry New Zealand has not felt able to rest on its achievements despite a steady growth in the size of our aid programme in absolute terms.
70.	My Government has therefore withdrawn previous reservations  on the Strategy targets. We shall seek to meet them. Notably, we have drawn up a programme of government aid which aims to increase more than threefold the existing flow of aid over the next three-year period. We hope to play our part through membership in the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme next year in ensuring expanded and equitable policies of United Nations aid for countries in need of it.
71.	The process of working to improve conditions of life can never be one-sided; it is a mutual one. In the South Pacific in particular and in South-East Asia, which are areas of close interest to us, we look forward to continued co-operation with the countries of the region. Their resources and skills and the efforts of their peoples are an all-important factor and will deserve the major credit for success if the Second Decade's targets are gained. We have seen the way self-government and independence have drawn forth those skills in small South Pacific territories for which New Zealand was once responsible  —  Western Samoa and the Cook Islands. We look forward to the same constructive development and co-operation in the case of the island of Niue, whose representatives will be discussing their plans with you at this session.
72.	What I have been saying grows out of my Government's strong feeling of the necessity-and, one can say increasingly, the inevitability-of social cohesion in the world today. This is not a unique notion of Labour Governments everywhere, but is rather the root idea of the United Nations Charter itself. We are all part of the one human family. Some of us welcome this, but the plain fact is that all of us have no choice but to adjust ourselves to this central fact of human existence.
73.	Obviously a great deal more than aid is needed. Action has to be undertaken on many fronts. For instance, we heard with interest the proposal of the Secretary of State of the United States of America for a world conference on food [2124th meeting]. Such a proposal naturally interests a country like New Zealand, which is deeply involved in the production of food, and we welcome it. But immediately we consider such a proposal we realize afresh how interconnected all the problems of the world are. People are hungry, but in some countries farmers are paid not to produce, and land is taken out of production. Other food-producing countries, like ours, have difficulty in getting access to northern hemisphere markets, because agricultural arrangements have been established which have nothing to do with efficiency but a lot to do with politics and protectionism. Unless fanners can sell their products at fair prices more food is not likely to be produced. Without freer trade in agricultural products it will be difficult lo get Imore food to the people who need it. Thus we hardly start to talk of food before we are face to face with the fundamental issues raised by the new round of negotiations among the States parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). And the GATT round takes us to a series of other interconnected issues. Yet the basic problems are not really mysterious at all or incapable of resolution if the will is there. Somehow the resources of this planet and the needs of the human family have to be matched. It can be done and it can be done in a way that would benefit all and harm very few.
74.	Both the proliferation of nuclear weapons generally, and the testing of nuclear weapons and devices in the atmosphere, notably in the. South Pacific, have caused New Zealand deepest concern. We view with disquiet the whole attitude of mind by which nuclear weaponry is preserved and indeed fortified as the years go by. In every way possible  —  by protests to the Governments concerned, by action in the General Assembly, by application to the International Court of Justice  —  we have made every effort to bring about the cessation of nuclear testing. But ,the testing in the Pacific zone has still persisted.
75.	In the more general context we have heard with dismay recently of the reported acquisition by the Soviet Union of a more advanced weapons delivery system which will increase the danger of a new round of nuclear weapons escalation. This news underlines the urgency of achieving further progress in disarmament.
76.	This Organization has recently marked the tenth anniversary of the partial test-ban treaty. But there have been more explosions on the average each year since the Treaty was signed than in the years of the nuclear age that preceded the Treaty. Testing continues unabated. Two nuclear Powers have deliberately ignored the Treaty and have continued with intensive programmes of nuclear testing in the atmosphere, with scant regard for the environment in which we all live or for the growing outcry from world opinion. The remaining nuclear Powers which are parties to the Treaty have continued with underground tests, thereby affording the two Powers that are not party to the Treaty with a pretext for pressing ahead with their own programmes. There has been a lamentable lack of progress in the preparation of a Treaty which would impose a comprehensive ban on all testing, in spite of the undertaking contained in the preamble to the 1963 Treaty to work for such an agreement.
77.	In the absence of a comprehensive agreement, accepted by all the nuclear Powers and backed by the overwhelming weight of world opinion, there must remain an acute and continuing danger that still more countries will seek to acquire nuclear weapons. The proliferation of nuclear weapons - measurably advances the certainty of nuclear war, and only a universal ban on weapons testing can eliminate this grave threat. I am convinced that the people of every country are sick of war and the threat of war. They do not want nuclear weapons and their attendant threats. They want peace and they want more progress towards it. Is it impossible for Governments to be moved by the desires of ordinary people?
78.	Just as we shall not solve the problems of pollution, or the exhaustion of the planet's resources, or the growing gulf between the rich and the poor, unless we change our attitudes towards the accumulation of things, so we shall not solve the problems of war and of international order unless we change our attitudes towards power and the accumulation of power. Arms are the potential for war, for mass slaughter, for the human family to destroy itself. Let us keep in the forefront of our thinking a conviction that war is now unacceptable as an instrument for achieving national aims.
79.	Might we not then deduce the consequences of this truth? Shall we continue to recognize nations as "great Powers" merely because they have the capacity to inflict greater damage than any other nation? Of course if they acted, under the Charter, as protectors of the human family, they might be so recognized; but in the last 28 years they have demonstrated convincingly their incapacity to rise to such a role; they have failed to match power with responsibility. Sometimes the shepherds have preyed upon the sheep. Might we not therefore respond by questioning the scale of values that puts power at the top? Might we not insist on a different scale of values, a human scale, a civilized scale, a scale based on the belief that the truly great country is the country which shows concern for the quality of life both of its own people and of its neighbours? We have to eliminate the very institution of war from international dealings. Let us therefore start adjusting our attitudes and bring that changed approach to this very Organization. In that way we might prepare the ground for the changes which are required if the United Nations is to meet the needs of human beings here and now and in the challenging years immediately ahead of it.
80.	For-and do we doubt it? -so long as the old attitudes persist, so long will those nations that aspire to so-called greatness strain and swell themselves to reach the critical bulk and dignity. To attain the honour of sitting at the "top table" they will waste natural resources and cause damage and concern to their neighbours. But let us see for what it is the absurdity of a lonely few sitting at their top table with their obscene weapons which they can use only by committing suicide. That "honour" is surely now an empty one-if it ever was otherwise. Let us develop values that are relevant to the real world and get to grips with the real business of mankind.
81.	In the case of at least one of the great Powers many citizens are realizing the basic truth about power in the nuclear age and are moving to work out its implications. But in the meantime, what do we, the smaller Members of the United Nations, do  —  we whose requests and pleas are arrogantly brushed aside, perhaps not even listened to?
82.	The small Powers should demand a more effective voice in disarmament negotiations. Let us begin at this session of the Assembly with a concerted call for the earliest possible conclusion of a treaty to ban all forms of nuclear-weapons testing. If no significant progress is made through the existing machinery within one year, the Assembly should, I suggest, consider calling a general conference to draft such a treaty.
83.	We have also to confront the simple fact that in the last 10 years or so international law and international organizations have been the casualties of the cold war. We face a desolate landscape within the United Nations. Some Powers have either ignored the United Nations or brought threats to it only when diplomacy had failed and it was too late for the United Nations to act effectively. How often have they then blamed the United Nations and justified their own unilateral actions by its alleged ineffectiveness? It is now for the smaller countries to take up the task of making this Organization work. If the great Powers will also show a change of approach, the United Nations, and mankind with it, will get back into business.
84.	I have already mentioned the possibility of a concerted call for a treaty to ban all nuclear-weapons testing. The small Powers may also wish to consider carefully the possibilities of partial disarmament or demilitarization on a regional basis where circumstances and geography make it appropriate. One of my Government's first acts after election last year was to change New Zealand's vote at the Assembly in order to express its sympathy with the concept of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean. At the Conference of the Commonwealth Heads of Government in Ottawa in August, New Zealand joined in a unanimous endorsement of the action of the Foreign Ministers of the Association of South-East Asian Nations in adopting a declaration to make South-East Asia a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality. In the words of the Commonwealth communique of 10 August 1973, we regard that initiative as a positive contribution towards peace and stability in that region. New Zealand looks with favour also on the establishment by treaty of nuclear-free zones such as that accorded by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), and we intend to consult with our Pacific neighbours about the feasibility of establishing a similar kind of nuclear-free zone in the South Pacific region.
85.	In the field of the settlement of disputes the small nations could achieve gains by showing a readiness to submit disputes to the International Court or to arbitration. There is a disturbing tendency for some influential countries to pay lip-service to the importance of international law and the role of the Court, but in practice to take all possible steps to avoid its jurisdiction. The more countries that accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court the more internationally unacceptable such evasive practices will become and the greater will be the pressure for the unreserved acceptance of the Court's jurisdiction.
86.	Small nations can help to prevent wars and to assist the peaceful resolution of tense situations by strengthening the peace-keeping role of the United Nations. They can do this by earmarking units on which the United Nations may call for peace-keeping purposes. My own Government has decided to train units of its defence services in readiness for participation in future United Nations peace-keeping operations. Small nations may, I believe, express justified disappointment at the lack of progress hitherto recorded by the Assembly's Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations. Recognizing the valuable contributions made by Canada and one or two other members, they should press for the completion of the Committee's mandate set out in resolutions dating from 1967. There is no doubt that the Secretary-General must be given moral and practical support in the initiatives he may have to take in the exercise of his responsibilities in regard to peace and security.
87.	If we think of ourselves as a single family, and if we are going to work together for economic advancement, for the prevention of pollution and other ills, and to escape the threat of war, it follows that we must work together on racial discrimination, which is, justly, one of the major preoccupations of our Organization. This has been a year in which a number of situations affecting human rights have constituted gross affronts to the ideals of the United Nations. In some countries with serious racial problems great efforts have been made and substantial progress achieved in the direction of racial equality, as has happened, for example, in our host country during the lifespan of the United Nations. In other countries racial segregation continues, notoriously, to be enshrined in government policy. In still other countries members of a racial minority who wish to emigrate are subject to onerous conditions and delays, and in yet* another country, members of a racial group have been expelled at short notice and stripped of their possessions without compensation. To these and other situations the response of the United Nations membership has varied widely; some have virtually ignored them.
88.	My own Government is opposed to racial discrimination and oppression no matter where it is practised, by whom, or in whatever form. We have been combing through United Nations resolutions and taking whatever action is appropriate to ensure that our own house is in order. Above and beyond those obligations we have voluntarily accepted a visit from a United Nations representative investigating the problems of indigenous populations. New Zealand is, as far as I know, the first country to show a United Nations mission all aspects of its internal racial situation. We hope that the report of this mission shortly to be presented  will be of value not only to New Zealand but to the United Nations as a whole.
89.	In concert with others, New Zealand will work towards re-establishing the Organization as a protector of the interests of the majority of States, and in particular of the small States. The calls for justice and equity made by the huge new membership must be listened to and heeded. The aspirations of the smaller Powers, their fears, their determination to build a world without war, a world where the rule of law prevails, a world where the weaker will not be subservient to the political and economic interests of the stronger-these demands cannot be ignored. We agree with the Secretary-General that we need action, innovation and determination if mankind is not to be overtaken once again by the dark destructive or selfish side of human nature. We are eager to play our part in creating a true family of man.
﻿1.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the Soviet delegation I should like to congratulate you on your election to the post of President of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly. In discharging your duties, you may be assured of our firm intention to help make this session a successful one. The Soviet Union seeks to ensure that every session of the General Assembly yields practical results in strengthening peace and the security of peoples.
2.	The past year has been crowded with major international events. Some of them, even if viewed separately, represent historic milestones. However, what chiefly characterizes this entire set of events is the development and strengthening of the shift from an extended period of tension in the world to detente and business-like co-operation. From this standpoint, the past year can in a sense be described as having marked a turning-point.
3.	The war in Viet-Nam was brought to an end. The flames of one of the most dangerous breeding grounds of war were stamped out. The just cause of the Viet-Namese people gained a major victory.
4.	In southern Asia, steps are being taken to bring about a further easing of the tension which several times in the past has led to open hostilities. It is gratifying that all three of the States on the subcontinent-India, Pakistan and Bangladesh-are involved in this process.
5.	The positive changes in the situation in Europe are even more clearly apparent. The task of normalizing relations between the States of Eastern and Western Europe is virtually complete, and we hope that no one will create artificial obstacles to the completion of this process. The convening of the all-European conference'' marked the opening of a new and extremely important stage in the work of guaranteeing security and organizing peaceful co-operation on a continent-wide scale.
6.	The danger of a global clash between the two world-wide social systems which would inevitably result in a terrible catastrophe for all mankind has been lessened. That is how the entire world views the Agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the Prevention of Nuclear War,  which was concluded during the visit to the United States by L. I. Brezhnev, tire General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
7.	Today, the principle of peaceful coexistence is not only recognized as the only possible basis for relations between the socialist and capitalist countries but is increasingly being given practical effect and embodied in treaties and agreements. The process of detente is a broad and deep one which is involving an increasing number of States and affecting more and more important areas of the relations between them.
8.	This gives us reason to hope that, as Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev noted in a recent statement, "the present detente is not a temporary phenomenon but the beginning of a fundamental reorientation of international relations".
9.	The changes for the better in international affairs arouse particular satisfaction in the Soviet Union. Not, of course, that other peoples are any less interested in peace than the Soviet Union, It is just that to us the increasing trend towards detente and co-operation is also confirmation of the correctness and consistency of the foreign policy pursued by the Soviet Union.
10.	Peace and friendship between peoples have always been the watchword of Soviet foreign policy and its unchanging goal. That goal was defined by V. I. Lenin, the founder of the Soviet Socialist State and head of its first Government. It has been and continues to be the basis of the foreign policy guidelines laid down at all Congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Our country has taken this position under all circumstances, regardless of the configuration of the international situation. It must be clear by now to any unprejudiced person that this is the long-range, permanent policy of the Soviet Union and is not merely a response to immediate circumstances. It is determined by the very nature of our social system.
11.	The shift in the course of international events in the last few years indicates clearly that ensuring a lasting peace on earth is not simply a noble but remote ideal; it is, rather a completely attainable goal of practical politics.
12.	Another fact is no less obvious. The positive results that hive been achieved up to now did not come about of themselves.
13.	A great deal of intensive effort has gone into the various international measures which led to detente. Sometimes the result is a treaty of agreement drawn up on a page or two of official stationery, but how much labour has gone into every article and paragraph! These agreements are generally preceded by an intensive process of feeling out, by discussions and intensive negotiations. A State visit or international conference lasting no more than a few days crowns the labour of many years.
14.	Obviously, there is no Government that will not say it wants peace, lasting peace, indeed eternal peace. If such pronouncements are not to remain an idle dream, however, they must be backed up by unremitting efforts that go on day after day.
15.	The Soviet Union exhorts its allies as well to follow this course. Indeed, we go beyond exhortations; acting in close co-ordination and in the light of international developments, we take concrete initiatives. At the recent Crimean meeting of leaders of the Communist and workers parties of the socialist countries, it was emphasized that all the States concerned must now join efforts in consolidating the favourable changes that have come about in international affairs, must consistently give practical effect to the treaties and agreements that have been concluded and must advance steadily towards the main objective, which is that of ensuring a lasting peace.
16.	It is a secret .to no one that detente has its enemies whose resistance must not be underestimated. There is also a certain inertia to be overcome. After all, what we are trying to do is to solve problems that have built up over a period of years or even decades.
17.	However, the supporters of detente are more numerous, and what matters is that their efforts should increase and not slacken.
18.	In a number of capitalist countries, a trend towards broader co-operation with socialist States has emerged and is becoming increasingly apparent. Far-sighted political figures in those countries, taking a realistic, responsible view of the world situation, show a willingness to join efforts in working out solutions which give equal weight to the interests of all concerned. It goes without saying that this benefits not only the States directly concerned but the entire cause of peace.
19.	Detente gives the non-aligned and neutral States a greater opportunity to exert a positive influence on international developments, A good many useful ventures, including some within the framework of the United Nations, got their start because of the political influence which these countries exercise. The results of the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries at Algiers showed once again that when the Conference participants speak out in favour of detente and co-operation and against the forces of aggression and oppression of peoples, their voice is convincing and authoritative.
20.	By its very nature, detente cannot simply be a matter of improving relations between a few States or certain geographical regions. If it is to become irreversible, it must be a matter of concern to all States and ultimately become universal.
21.	The United Nations has 135 Member States, all of which, when they joined the Organization, assumed an obligation under the Charter to maintain international peace and security. If that entire potential for peace was translated into action, it would indeed give powerful impetus to the advance towards a reliable system of security for all peoples.
22.	One sometimes hears it said that now that the Soviet Union and the United States are improving their relations and concluding important agreements which help to lessen international tension, there is nothing left for other States to do but to stand by passively. Some go further than that and try to foster the false notion that all of this damages the interests of other countries.
23.	Apart from the fact that such assertions,, whether intentionally or unintentionally, distort the actual state of affairs, their practical effect can only be to paralyse initiative and hamper detente.
24.	Is it possible to conceive of a broader sphere in which energies can be brought to bear than that of peace? Peace offers vast scope for all countries. Every State, large or small, bears responsibility for maintaining security throughout the world. The whole question is where its policy leads to — whether it helps detente or hinders it.
25.	It is important to mark out the political paths to further detente. However, it is no less important that meaningful activities should be undertaken. These efforts cannot remain shut up in government offices. They must be supported by broad, tireless work on behalf of peace by the most varied social forces. Parliamentarians and businessmen, political parties and trade-union, youth, women's and veterans' groups, scientists and artists-all can play a part if there is a determination to work for peace. Millions upon millions of people must be drawn into the movement for a lasting peace.
26.	Yes, the situation in the world has definitely improved in the past year. It is incomparably better than 5 or 10 years ago. But does that mean that all is bright on the international horizon? No, not by any means.
27.	In several parts of the world, the danger of war still exists. In some the guns are already speaking, while in others the finger is poised on the trigger.
28.	The situation in Indo-China is still a complicated one. Military operations are now of a relatively limited nature, but tensions cannot be completely cleared away in that area unless the political settlement if fully implemented in keeping with the legitimate rights and interests of all the peoples of Indo-China.
29.	The key to this lies in strict compliance by all parties to the Paris agreements on ending the war and restoring peace m Viet Nam. in respect for the agreements reached in Laos, and in permitting the people of Cambodia to settle their internal affairs as they see fit and without foreign interference.
30.	True to its internationalist convictions, the Soviet Union will continue to give the necessary aid and support of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and to stand beside the patriotic forces in Indo-China.
31.	Again and again we find ourselves returning to the situation in the Middle East, which, it must be stated bluntly, presents a danger because of the continuing Israeli aggression. Surely we cannot lake comfort in the fact that right now the breeding ground of war is not aflame but merely smouldering. The flames of war may shoot up at any moment, and who can say what the result will be'?
32.	The aggressor seized foreign lands before the eyes of the entire world and is holding on to them by force. In doing so, he is flagrantly violating the rules of international law. One need only recall the latest acts of provocation against neighbouring Arab countries, which were just recently the object of renewed condemnation by the Security Council. Furthermore, all this is not simply a gesture of recklessness or desperation by a handful of people, but the calculated policy of the State of Israel.
33.	No Arab can be made to believe that he must reconcile himself to the existing situation. The Arab States, which have been the victims of imperialist aggression, want only one thing - the restoration of what was taken from them by force -and they are right.
34.	The Soviet Union remains convinced that the Middle East problem can be solved. The basis for a solution exists in the form of the well-known Security Council resolutions, which as was confirmed once again by the recent discussion of the Middle East question in the United Nations are supported by an overwhelming majority of Stales Members of our Organization. The aggressor is becoming increasingly defiant in his refusal to agree to a settlement.
35.	Every effort must be made to see that Israel and the countries and circles that support its present policy understand at long last the need for a more sober approach and that they truly *et out on the path leading to a solution of the problem.
36.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, its position is clear, the situation in the Middle East must be resolved un the basis of the complete I repeat, complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from occupied Arab territories and of respect for the independence and inalienable rights of the States and peoples of the area, including the Arab people of Palestine. Our main, decisive interest in the Middle Fast is to promote the achievement of a just and lasting peace. The Soviet Union wishes to state tins once again from tins rostrum in the most categorical terms.
37.	In order to obtain a proper perspective in a situation characterized by the extreme complexity of the interplay of various factors, one must appraise events in all their fullness and constant flux. That is particularly true at the present stage of the situation, which is dynamic and full of contrasts.
38.	If one views unsolved problems without reference to the positive results that have already been achieved, it is easy to take an extreme position and deny the very possibility of resolving acute, controversial issues. In our opinion, however, there is no place for this approach to international phenomena, including the activities of the United Nations.
39.	Equally unproductive is the other extreme that of presenting the situation in rosy hues and failing to see that what remains to be done is far more than what has already been accomplished.
40.	Both extremes are bad. All States, all Governments and all political figures must, if they are conscious of their responsibility, regard it as their first duty in (he international arena to work actively for peace.
41.	A whole series of problems are clamouring for solution. It cannot be said that the United Nations is not dealing with them. It may well be asked, however, how many of them are really being solved, and the answer is not a comforting one. It must be acknowledged that some problems become harder rather than easier to solve as time goes by, but they may become even more difficult if they are put off further.
42.	The problem of problems is that of the continuing arms race. The development of techniques of mass destruction and the stockpiling of weapons have long since gone beyond the point where using them becomes an absurdity, for, as V. I. Lenin foresaw half a century ago, this process is "undermining the very conditions for the existence of human society". It must be obvious to all how ruinous it is to go on replenishing the arsenals. Yet. only in recent years has it become possible to take the first I repeat, the first step towards limiting the arms race.
43.	It would be wrong to underestimate the importance of the measures that have already been taken. These measures serve to impede to some extent the unrestrained proliferation of armaments, particularly the most destructive types.
44.	Ten years have passed since the signing of the Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, which was the first in a series of agreements. The fact that some countries have not acceded to the Treaty does not nullify the indisputable fact that it is beneficial to the peoples of the world.
45.	The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons  has gained wide recognition, and it has also been extremely helpful in curbing the unclear arms race.
46.	Success has been achieved in preventing of the emplacement of nuclear weapons in several important natural environments, namely the sea-bed and the ocean floor and outer space. Bacteriological weapons which are among the most deadly, have been banned and eliminated.
47.	 Just recently, an important frontier was crossed when, as a result of agreements reached between the Soviet Union and the United States, mutual limitations were imposed on strategic arms and principles were formulated for negotiations on further such limitations. In conjunction with the historic conclusion of the Agreement between the Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the Prevention of Nuclear War, these accords contribute significantly to an improvement in the international atmosphere.

48.	However, further efforts are needed, and they cannot, of course, be confined to two nuclear Powers, even though those two may be militarily the mightiest in the world. We could, in particular, find it gratifying if other States were willing to adhere to the principles jointly laid down by the Soviet Union and the United States for renunciation of the use of force and decisive action to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war; that would be of exceptional importance in ensuring lasting peace throughout the world.

120.	Huge sums continue to be spent for military purposes, and military planning goes on.
121.	Since the United Nations first began to function, the Soviet Union has consistently sought to turn events in the direction of disarmament. We have always urged that it is of the utmost importance to ban nuclear weapons and ensure that nuclear energy is used exclusively for peaceful purposes. I might recall that back in 1946, the first year of our Organization's existence, the Soviet Union placed on the negotiating table a draft international convention to prohibit the production and employment of weapons based on the use of atomic energy for the purpose of mass destruction; it did so in the belief that the aspirations and the conscience of nations called for such a convention.
122.	How much discussion there has been since that time, and how many resolutions have been adopted by the Security Council, the General Assembly and various committees and commissions! If this were not such a serious matter, one could speak sarcastically about the mountains of paper that have been used up in the process. The essential point, however, is that there has been little change in the situation.
123.	It would not occur to anyone to deny that the solution of the problems of disarmament involves great difficulties. And yet the international questions which have been successfully resolved up to now also appeared forbidding at the outset. Consequently, references to objective difficulties do not reveal the main point. The crux of the matter lies in political considerations. And responsibility for political considerations rests primarily with the people who are invested with power, those who stand at the helm of government.
124.	There is hardly any point in digging about in the past, in analysing all the proposals which have been made or in dwelling on the positions of individual States. All that is quite well known. The walls of the United Nations have heard many speeches on the subject of disarmament.
125.	Today, however, we all have more experience in settling international problems than we had yesterday. And it suggests to us that even in the field of disarmament real progress can be achieved in some areas. All that is needed is to follow in practice a truth which in theory is certainly recognized by all: not to proclaim "all or nothing", but to single out one after another those problems on which agreement can be reached even at the present stage, and then solve them. Experience has shown that this approach can prove its worth even in such matters as vital to the security of the State as that ultimate weapon, the nuclear missile. Is that not demonstrated by the Soviet-American agreements dealing with that matter?
126.	Neither can there be any doubt about another matter. Those agreements would not have been possible if they had put either side at a disadvantage, if the principle of equal security had not been scrupulously observed.
127.	But if, on such a basis, two countries have been able to achieve a limitation of arms, then why cannot, say, five Powers act similarly, provided, of course, that there will be no threat to the security of any of them? And if that can be done, what is there to prevent such a method from being applied to a wider range of countries? The greater the number of States that participate in a practical solution of the disarmament problem, the more tangible will be the benefit for the security of all peoples.
128.	Furthermore, we believe that the successes achieved on the path towards detente already make it possible for considerable additional resources to be made available to assist the developing countries.
129.	In view of all these considerations, the Soviet Union wishes to propose that the question of the reduction of the military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council of the United Nations by 10 per cent and utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries should be included in the agenda of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations as an important and urgent item.
130.	If our proposal meets with general agreement, and if the General Assembly adopts an appropriate resolution, a beneficial and useful step can be taken.
131.	The States which are permanent members of the Security Council of the United Nations are known to have the largest military budgets. This is taken into account in our proposal.
132.	In our view it would be appropriate to take as the starting-point for the proposed reduction the level of military budgets for the current year, 1973. That proportion of the funds made available by such a reduction which would be used to benefit the developing countries could, for example, amount to 10 per cent.
133.	Needless to say, such a step would require "the participation of all the permanent members of the Security
Council without exception. It would also be desirable for other economically and militarily powerful States to reduce their military budgets.
134.	We suggest that the funds made available for economic assistance to the developing countries should, first of all, be granted to those countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America which have experienced great difficulties this year because of grave natural disasters such as drought and floods.
135.	The distribution of these funds should be carried out on an equitable basis. The amounts to be granted to individual countries, and the time-limits within which they are to be provided, could be determined by an international committee appointed on an ad hoc basis from among representatives of the developing countries, the States which are permanent members of the Security Council and other countries which reduce their military budgets.
136.	It is obvious that the reductions in military expenditure would also benefit the States carrying out such reductions. They would be able to channel considerable funds towards the non-military needs of their own people and an improved standard of living.
137.	The United Nations has laid the groundwork for fruitful activities on behalf of peace in a number of important fields.
138.	Specifically, at last year's session, the General Assembly voted by a large majority in favour of the settlement of two major problems: the non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVIII], and the question of a World Disarmament Conference [resolution 2930 (XXVII].
139.	But has this clearly expressed will of the peoples of the world, this opinion of the overwhelming majority of the States Members of the United Nations been taken into account by all States? Unfortunately, that cannot be said to be true. It is a known fact that the Governments of some States have taken a position which prevents those decisions from being put into effect.
140.	The Soviet Union believes that the earliest possible implementation of the solemn declaration of the General Assembly, speaking on behalf of the members of the United Nations, concerning their renunciation of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, would be an effective means of ensuring that one of the principles of the United Nations Charter was laid down as a law of international life. To that end, a forceful decision in the matter must be taken by the Security Council.
43. For its part, the Soviet Union is ready to negotiate and to formalize reciprocal undertakings with all -and I stress, all — the nuclear powers on the non-use of force, including, at the same time, prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons.
44. The time has come to undertake practical preparations for the convening of a World Disarmament Conference. Arrangements must finally be made so that the Special Committee provided for in the General Assembly resolution relating to preparations for that Conference can carry out the functions entrusted to it. There is no need to prove how desirable it is for all the nuclear Powers to take part in the Committee's work.
145.	There are some who contend that the World Disarmament Conference could not be productive because of the large number of participants. But who ever said that complex problems must necessarily be settled by two or three States, or that a large-scale international conference will not reach agreement?
146.	We harbour no illusions that the World Disarmament Conference will do away with all problems at one stroke. Let it go on for several months, or even several years. How can there be any objection to that if the Conference makes a contribution to the practical solution of urgent disarmament problems?
147.	It is also argued that the Conference might hamper the efforts at solutions involving a smaller number of States. We feel that such fears are unfounded. Multilateral efforts can only help bilateral ones, and vice versa.
148.	Although detente and the development of peaceful co-operation are measured, not in decades, but merely in years, into this short period of time there have been compressed events which are significantly changing the face of the world.
149.	Memories are still fresh of a time when relations between the Soviet Union and the major capitalist countries were marked by tension and, in the case of some of them, by outright hostility. The fact that those times are now behind us is not welcomed by all. But all who are concerned for peace welcome the fact that those relations are now on a new track.
150.	The Soviet Union and France have been dealing with each other in a consistent and serious manner for a number of years. Both countries have acquired useful experience and are using the favourable trends of detente to develop both their bilateral ties and political co-operation in international matters, and especially European matters. The Soviet Union values that important achievement.
151.	The radical changes achieved by the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany in their relations demonstrate that the two States are guided not by considerations of expediency, but by the long-term interests of their peoples and the interests of peace in Europe. A spirit of realism has also prevailed in the approach of the Federal Republic of Germany to questions which had long divided it and the Polish People's Republic and the German Democratic Republic. Many obstacles to the establishment of normal relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the other socialist countries of Europe have been removed, although in the Federal Republic of Germany itself, from all indications, such a policy is not to everyone's liking. The influence of forces clinging to old, outworn policies can still be felt there even today.
152. A few days ago the General Assembly congratulated the representatives of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, two independent sovereign States, on their countries' admission to membership in the United Nations. This is one of the most important indications of the changes which are taking place in the world. We warmly welcome the presence in this hall of the delegation of the fraternal German Democratic Republic, and we are also gratified to see here the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany.
153.	It is not difficult to gauge the significance of the historic fact that the General Assembly of the United Nations, pursuant to Security Council recommendations, enthusiastically adopted the decision to admit these two States to membership in the United Nations. That fact shows merely that such a decision was long overdue. It is in keeping not only with the interests of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, but also the interests of all States throughout the world.
154.	In a mere 18 months or two years an enormous distance has been covered in relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. As a result of Soviet-American talks at the highest level — during the visit of President R. Nixon to Moscow in May of last year and the visit of the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, to the United States this year — a firm basis has been laid for the development of relations between the two countries in a way which is fully in keeping with the principle of peaceful coexistence and which opens up vast possibilities. A number of agreements in various fields have been concluded. All these agreements have been made public; they speak for themselves. And they have not remained mere pieces of paper; much work has been done to give them concrete expression.
155.	It is of fundamental importance that the improvement in Soviet-American relations is being achieved on the basis of mutual recognition of the opposition between the two States' social systems and ideologies, and on the understanding that the rapprochement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America is directed against no one and threatens no one's interests.
156.	The Soviet Union is convinced that if both sides unswervingly carry out all the obligations they have assumed, including the strict observance of a cardinal principle in international relations, that of non-interference in each other's internal affairs — a principle on which our whole approach is based-then Soviet-American relations will be a permanent favourable factor promoting international peace-a point which is of historic significance.
157.	Relations between the Soviet Union and Japan are not at a standstill. The Soviet Union intends to continue to work to ensure that these relations become relations of genuine good-neighbourliness and co-operation. That is quite feasible if both countries constantly bear in mind the fundamental long-term interests of peace and security in the Far East.
158.	The Soviet Union is ready to expand its relations of mutually advantageous co-operation with all countries of
Europe and the other continents which so desire, whether in the search for solutions to current international political problems, wide-ranging economic agreements, joint efforts to use the benefits of scientific and technological progress or the exchange of spiritual values.
159.	On the first day of the present session of the General Assembly the second phase of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe began. This is a great and unprecedented endeavour. For the first time all European States, together with the United States and Canada have sat down at the same table in order jointly to determine measures that would help to assure the peoples of Europe a peaceful future for as long as can be foreseen.
160.	The Soviet Union views the prospects for the work of the Conference with considerable optimism. Its participants have already to a certain extent found a common language; there are, at least, no differences between them in agreeing that the Conference faces tasks of great importance which will require business-like and constructive consideration. If such an approach prevails to the end, the participants in the Conference will be able to place their contribution to the strengthening of general peace in the scales of history with a sense of satisfaction. That will benefit not only States directly concerned with European affairs, but all peoples of the world.
161.	There is a possibility of achieving a good and, in terms of its potential consequences, even a historic success as a result of the Conference. All that is necessary for this is for all participants to display a responsible and serious approach to the problems before them. Nobody should yield to the temptation to teach others how to manage their internal affairs. It must be admitted that some would like to try to impose their own internal practices on others. No, internal practices, internal laws, represent the line before the threshold of every State at which all others must stop.
162.	Were we to embark on a course of imposing our own practices on other countries, whether in the field of economic life or ideology, it is probable that those who are trying to persuade us to adopt the laws .morals and customs of others would disagree. And that is understandable and justified. If States and their representatives to the United Nations tried to act in that way, none of us here would advance one step in important matters and people would, not without justification, draw an analogy between the activity of the United Nations and the Biblical legend of the Tower of Babel, where those involved ceased to understand one another and failed to complete what they had intended to build.
163.	Meanwhile, some in the West are not averse to launching noisy propaganda campaigns and even to resorting to the methods of blackmail in order to cover up their own attempts to interfere in the affairs of other countries. Matters have gone so far that they are attempting to arrogate to themselves the right to dictate right and left by whom and how the question of emigration from this or that country should be handled, how many emigrants there should be and when and just where they should go. In doing so, they do not hesitate to praise to the skies those who represent no one but who, whether deliberately or inadvertently, are merely an unwitting weapon in the hands of the forces opposed to the relaxation of tension in the world.
164.	The Soviet Union decisively rejects such an approach and condemns it. We will not allow anyone to interfere in our internal affairs.
165.	The question that inevitably comes to mind is this: do the organizers of these campaigns seriously think that only the Soviet Union, only the socialist countries are interested in international detente and in the development of trade, scientific and technical and other forms of co-operation and that others are merely doing them a great favour by agreeing to hold talks on these matters?
166.	Anyone who is interested in the slightest degree in seeing an improvement in the international situation is well aware that this is not the case, that this is a reciprocal process governed by the mutual interests of the parties concerned and, above all, by the interests of the people.
167.	The main thing now is not to let the basic, truly important problems facing States be overshadowed by a poisonous atmosphere deliberately cheated over trumped-up questions.
168.	The Soviet Union considers it desirable to supplement political detente in Europe by military detente. This cause may be served by yet another major undertaking by a number of States: the talks opening on 20 October 1973 on the mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe.
169.	As a result of the positive changes in the international situation, it is also becoming possible to view the situation in Asia in a new light.
170.	In Asian affairs, as in international affairs in general, the policy of the Soviet Union is a policy directed towards peace, security and co-operation. The Soviet Union extends its hand to any State which shares these goals. A shining example of this is the uninterrupted development of relations between the USSR and India, a great, peace-loving Asian Power. It is further demonstrated by the history of friendly relations between the Soviet Union and many other Asian countries. Our fundamental belief is that there are no problems in relations between the Soviet Union and the States of Asia which could not be solved at the negotiating table.
171.	The Soviet Union is the initiator of the concept of collective security in Asia. This idea is constantly gaining strength; scepticism is being dispelled and the unfounded suspicions are disappearing.
172.	In a recent speech in Alma Ata, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, L. I. Brezhnev, said that we support collective security in Asia because "we are seeking to eliminate war, armed conflicts and imperialist aggression on the continent of Asia; we want the conditions for unhampered development and national revival to be guaranteed every country and people; we want a spirit of trust and
mutual understanding to prevail in relations between the countries of Asia".
173.	The Soviet Union is in favour of equitable participation in the system of collective security by all Asian countries, without any exception. Any intention of directing collective security in Asia against any State is totally alien to us, despite allegations to the contrary.
174.	The positive changes which have recently become apparent on the Asian continent also include the emergence of new, constructive factors in the situation on the Korean peninsula and this is, first and foremost, to the credit of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. That being so, it would be all the more inadmissible for new, artificial obstacles to the peaceful and democratic unification of Korea to be added to the old forms of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people.
175.	There is, of course, no need to recall in detail in this Assembly the consistent support which the Soviet Union has given and continues to give to the developing States of Asia, Africa and Latin America. On more than one occasion the United Nations has been the arena for fierce political battles with colonialism of every kind, and the Soviet Union has always resolutely defended oppressed peoples and given all possible support to their struggle for national liberation.
176.	We are well aware that this is a difficult and grim struggle, and some very recent events remind us yet again that it may take tragic turns.
177.	In Chile, as we know, the lawful Government has been overthrown. The elected President, Salvador Allende, his country's most outstanding patriot, has been killed. The forces of reaction have struck a blow at the Chilean people's desire for true independence and freedom.
178.	There was serious provocation of another Latin American State, Cuba, whose embassy and one of whose ships were fired upon. Surely the heads of the military junta realize that such acts can only be described as international brigandage and acts of aggression?
179.	An anti-Soviet campaign has been stirred up in the country; there are instances of arbitrary and violent action against Soviet institutions and citizens who were sent to give friendly assistance to the Chilean people at the request of the lawful Government of the country.
180.	What can one say about this? There can be no doubt that history will bring to account those who attempt to prevent the peoples from breathing the air of genuine independence or to drown in blood their right to national freedom.
181.	For its part, the Soviet Government could not remain indifferent to the intolerable situation that was developing and took the decision to break off diplomatic relations with Chile, or, more precisely, with the regime of the military junta.
182.	There is no doubt that the just cause of the Chilean people will triumph in the end, despite the current tragedy.
183.	States which have embarked on the course of political independence have always found and will continue to find in the Soviet Union a friend ready to aid them in consolidating their economic self-sufficiency, to share its knowledge and experience and to assist them in their moments of difficulty. Expansion of co-operation with developing countries is an integral part of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union.
184.	It is our conviction that the relaxation of international tension is conducive to a situation where young States can, in peace, devote all their efforts and resources to economic and social progress, to raising the living standards of their people, and to shaping their own future without fear of outside interference.
185.	The healthier the over-all world atmosphere becomes, the more anachronistic are the remaining vestiges of colonialism and the reserves of apartheid and racial discrimination, the stronger is the condemnation they merit and the more vigorous must be the struggle to bring about their complete elimination. It is the clear duty of the United Nations to contribute to the speediest possible elimination of these shameful survivals of colonialism wherever they still exist, be it in Angola or Mozambique, Bissau or Southern Rhodesia, South or South-West Africa.
186.	It is our aim that the voice of the fighters should be clearly heard here, within the walls of the United Nations, that the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted by the fifteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly [resolution 1514 (XV)] should be fully implemented and that the racists and colonialists should be finally deprived of the opportunity to receive support from outside, in particular from certain Member countries of the United Nations, something which is still a feature of current international life.
187.	Those who struggle against colonialism and racism for their national liberation and for their inalienable human rights and dignity enjoy the unwavering support of the Soviet Union. Let there be no doubt that the Soviet Union will continue to do its utmost to ensure that this struggle ends in a decisive victory.
188.	In the struggle for peace, the Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community are one with the developing States and we value this highly. With some of these countries we have well established relations; with others, relations are only now beginning to develop. But apart from this, the platform of the struggle for further detente offers ever-greater opportunities for co-operation. We believe that the fullest possible advantage should be taken of them.
189.	Throughout its history, the United Nations has operated in varying political weather, and so far the fine days have been far fewer than the bad ones. What has enabled it not merely to survive but also to do many useful things? The fact that it was founded for the purpose of maintaining international peace. And this task remains permanently relevant. From another point of view, the United Nations Charter contains adequate provisions for the fulfilment of the Organization's lofty mission. The
United Nations has demonstrated its strength in those cases where the purposes and principles of its Charter have been strictly observed, and its weakness when departures from the Charter have been permitted. What matters is that this world Organization should remain in the mainstream of international politics, contributing to the solution of crucial problems.
190.	This does not in any way imply that the Soviet Union is inclined to neglect even one aspect of the diversified activities of the United Nations, whether of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian nature. It actively assists in putting into practice everything of value-1 repeat, everything of value — that the collective wisdom and experience of States can produce.
191.	Indeed, a few days ago, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR ratified two important international legal instruments pertaining to respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms and the protection of human dignity and the interests of society as a whole. These documents were carefully and thoroughly elaborated in United Nations bodies and were subsequently approved by the General Assembly. I am referring to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex] and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [ibid.]. These two Covenants do not merely contain wishes or recommendations of a declaratory nature, but provide for quite specific obligations on the part of States parties to them. We appeal to countries which have not yet signed or ratified these Covenants to follow our example and to take steps to ensure that they come into force as soon as possible.
192.	The peoples of the world expect from the United Nations measures which will contribute to a further improvement in the international situation. With favourable changes taking place in the world, opportunities are increasing for the United Nations to make its own, major contribution to the consolidation of detente and to making it stable and irreversible.
193.	For its part, the Soviet Union is sparing no effort for the triumph of the cause of peace on earth. This is the essence of its peace-loving policy and its peace programme, launched by the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Every State, every statesman can be confident that he will continue to find in the Soviet Union a faithful partner at all times and in all cases where action is taken to prevent the danger of war and contribute to peace.﻿35.	I should like to add my congratulations to those so well expressed by the Minister for External Relations of Brazil to our new President, Ambassador Benites of Ecuador, whose long experience at the United Nations and his many contributions to international law and to the inter-American system all ensure that this twenty-eighth session of the Assembly will have outstanding leadership.
36.	I come before you today  —  confirmed in office but two days ago  —  as probably the world's most junior Foreign Minister. That President Nixon should ask me as my first official act to speak here for the United States reaffirms the importance that my country attaches to the values and the ideals of the United Nations.
37.	It would be idle to deny that the American people, like many others, have sometimes been disappointed because this Organization has not been more successful in translating its architects' hopes for universal peace into concrete accomplishments.
38.	But, despite our disappointments, my country remains committed to the goal of a world community. We will continue to work in this Parliament of Man to make it a reality.
39.	Two centuries ago, the philosopher Kant predicted that perpetual peace would come eventually — either as the creation of man's moral aspirations or as the consequence of physical necessity. What seemed Utopian then looms as tomorrow's reality; soon there will be no alternative. Our only choice is whether the world envisaged in the Charter will come about as the result of our vision or of a catastrophe invited by our short-sightedness.
40.	The United States has made its choice. My country seeks true peace, not simply an armistice. We strive for a world in which the rule of law governs and fundamental human rights are the birthright of all. Beyond the bilateral diplomacy, the pragmatic agreements and dramatic steps of recent years, we envisage a comprehensive, institutionalized peace encompassing all nations, large and small, a peace which this Organization is uniquely situated to foster and to anchor in the hearts of men. This will be the spirit of American foreign policy. This attitude will guide our work in this Organization.
41.	We start from a bedrock of solid progress. Many of the crises that haunted past sessions of the General Assembly have been put behind us. Agreement has been reached on Berlin; there is a cease-fire in the Middle East; the VietNam war has been ended. The rigid confrontation that has dominated international life and weakened this Organization for a quarter of a century has been softened.
42.	The United States and the Soviet Union have perceived a commonality of interests in avoiding nuclear holocaust and in establishing a broad web of constructive relationships. Talks on stretegic arms limitation have already produced historic accords aimed at slowing the arms race and ensuring strategic stability; we have today resumed negotiations on this subject. The positive results we hope for will enhance the security of all mankind.
43.	Two decades of estrangement between the United States and the People's Republic of China have given way to constructive dialogue and productive exchanges. President Nixon has met with the leaders of that great nation; we have agreed to a historic communique  that honestly sets forth both our differences and our common principles; and we have each opened a liaison office in the capital of the other.
44.	Many other countries have seized the initiative and contributed, in substance and spirit, to the relaxation of tensions. The nations of Europe and North America are engaged in a conference to further security and cooperation. The two German States have taken their place in this Assembly. India, Pakistan and Bangladesh have begun to move towards a welcome reconciliation. North and South Korea are at last engaged in a dialogue which, we hope, will lead to a new era of peace and security between them.
45.	Yet these achievements, solid as they are, have only made less precarious the dangers and divisions inherited from the post-war era. We have ended many of the confrontations of the cold war; yet, even in this room, the vocabulary of suspicion persists. Relaxation of tensions is justified by some as merely a practical interlude before renewed struggle. Others suspect the emergence of a two- Power condominium. And as tension between the two original blocs has eased, a third grouping increasingly assumes the characteristics of a bloc of its own — the alignment of the non-aligned.
46.	So the world is uneasily suspended between old slogans and new realities, between a view of peace as but a pause in an unending struggle and a vision of peace as a promise of global co-operation.
47.	In 1946 James Byrnes, the first Secretary of State to address this Assembly, spoke of how the United Nations could "help to break down habits of thinking in national isolation and go far to bring about understanding and tolerance." 
48.	The United States will never be satisfied with a world of uneasy truces, of offsetting blocs, of accommodations of convenience. We know that power can enforce a resigned passivity, but only a sense of justice can enlist consensus. We strive for a peace whose stability rests not merely on a balance of forces, but on shared aspirations. We are convinced that a structure which ignores humane values will prove cold and empty and unfulfilling to most of mankind.
49.	The United States deeply believes that justice cannot be confined by national frontiers; that truth is universal, and not the peculiar possession of a single people or group or ideology; that compassion and humanity must ennoble all our endeavours.
50.	In this spirit we ask this Assembly to move with us from detente among the big Powers to co-operation among all nations, from coexistence to community.
51.	Our journey must begin with the world as it is and with the issues now before us. The United States will spare no effort to ease tensions further and to move towards greater stability. We shall continue, in the spirit of the Shanghai communique, our search for a new relationship with the People's Republic of China. We shall work to promote positive trends elsewhere in Asia. The uncertain peace in Indo-China must be strenghened; the world community cannot afford, or permit, a relapse into war in that region. We shall continue to pursue vigorously the building of constructive relationships with the Soviet Union. We shall strive to promote conciliation in Europe. In the negotiations beginning next month we shall seek a reduction of the military forces that have faced each other for so long across that divided continent. We shall give new vigour to our policy of partnership in the Western hemisphere. We shall honour our pledge to promote self- determination, economic development and human dignity across the continent of Africa. We shall press on with strategic arms limitations talks. We consider them crucial for security and stability in this period. We shall search for solutions to the world-wide problem of conventional weapons, which drain our resources and fuel the fires of local conflict.
52.	In all these efforts the United States will be guided by certain fundamental principles.
53.	We have no desire for domination. We will oppose — as we have consistently opposed throughout this century — any nation that chooses this path. We have not been asked to participate in a condominium; we would reject such an appeal if it were made.
54.	We will never abandon our allies or our friends. The strengthening of our traditional ties is the essential foundation for the development of new relationships with old adversaries.
55.	We will work for peace through the United Nations as well as through bilateral relationships.
56.	We recognize our special obligation, as a permanent member of the Security Council, to assist in the search for just solutions in those parts of the world now torn by strife, such as the Middle East. While we cannot substitute for the efforts of those most directly involved, we are prepared to use our influence to generate a spirit of accommodation and to urge the parties towards practical progress.
57.	But progress on the traditional agenda is not enough. The more we succeed in solving political problems, the more other and perhaps deeper challenges emerge. As the world grows more stable we must confront the question of the ends of detente. As the threat of war recedes, the problem of the quality of life takes on more urgent significance.
58.	We are, in fact, members of a community drawn by modern science, technology and new forms of communication into a proximity for which we are still politically unprepared. Technology daily outstrips the ability of our institutions to cope with its fruits. Our political imagination must catch up with our scientific vision. This is at the same time the greatest challenge and the greatest opportunity of this Organization.
59.	The pollution of the skies, the seas and the land is a global problem.
60.	The increased consumption of cereals has reduced world food reserves to dangerously low levels.
61.	The demand for energy is outrunning supply, and the need for technological innovation is urgent.
62.	The growth of the world's economy is inhibited by restrictive trading blocs and an insufficiently flexible international monetary system.
63.	The exploitation of the resources of the ocean beds, which is essential for the needs of burgeoning populations, requires global co-operation lest it degenerate into global contention.
64.	Challenges of this magnitude cannot be solved by a world fragmented into self-contained nation States or rigid blocs.
65.	I do not intend, today, to cover the whole agenda of international co-operation. Rather, I shall speak briefly of some illustrative areas for common action. I pledge the readiness of the United States to solve these problems co-operatively and to submit proposals Jmed at their resolution.
66.	First, a world community requires the curbing of conflicts. The United Nations, in its 28-year history, has not always been idle in this sphere. In Indonesia, the Indian subcontinent, the Middle East, the Congo, and Cyprus, it has shown its ability for effective fact-finding, mediation and peace-keeping missions. This central aspect of the United Nations work must be strengthened. On a small planet, so bound together by technology and so interdependent economically, we can no longer afford the constant eruption of conflict and the danger of its spread.
67.	Yet, in recent years, we have found ourselves locked in fruitless debates about the inauguration of peace-keeping operations and over the degree of control the Security Council would exercise over peace-keeping machinery — an impasse which has ensured that permanent peace-keeping machinery would not come into being. Each peace-keeping unit we have formed has been an improvisation growing out of argument and controversy.
68.	We should delay no longer. The time has come to agree on peace-keeping guidelines so that this Organization can act swiftly, confidently and effectively in future crises. To break the deadlock, the United States is prepared to consider how the Security Council can play a more central role in the conduct of peace-keeping operations. If- all countries concerned approach this problem with a desire to achieve a co-operative solution, the United Nations can achieve a major step forward during this session.
69.	Secondly, a world community must have the widest possible membership. The exclusion of any qualified State denies representation not only to Governments, but to peoples. Membership in this body should be a step towards reconciliation, not a source of conflict. The time has come for North and South Korea to be offered their rightful place here without prejudice to a future evolution towards unification. In this spirit also, we support the permanent membership of Japan in the Security Council.
70.	Thirdly, a world community must assure that all its people are fed. The growing threat to the world's food supply deserves the urgent attention of this Assembly. Since 1969, global consumption of cereals has risen more rapidly than production; stocks are at the lowest levels in years. We now face the prospect that, even with bumper crops, the world may not rebuild its seriously depleted reserves in this decade.
71.	No one country can cope with this problem. The United States therefore proposes that a world food conference should be organized under United Nations auspices in 1974 to discuss ways to maintain adequate food supplies and to harness the efforts of all nations to meet the hunger and malnutrition resulting from natural disasters and that nations in a position to do so offer technical assistance in the conservation of food. The United States is ready to join with others in providing such assistance.
72.	Fourthly, a world community cannot remain divided between the permanently rich and the permanently poor. Let us therefore resolve that this Assembly, this year, initiate a search, drawing on the world's best minds, for new and imaginative solutions to the problems of development. Our search must be candid and realistic, but it must also be free of peremptory demands, antagonistic propositions, ideological confrontation, or propagandistic rhetoric, or we will surely fail.
73.	The United States is prepared to join this new search, providing freely of the experience gained over two decades. We have learned not to exaggerate our capacity to transform nations, but we have also learned much about what progress is possible. We will participate without pre-conditions, with a conciliatory attitude and a co-operative commitment. We ask only that others adopt the same approach.
74.	In this spirit, the United States is willing to examine seriously the proposal by the distinguished President of Mexico for a charter of the economic rights and duties of States." Such a document will make a significant and historic contribution if it reflects the true aspirations of all nations; it will accomplish nothing if it is turned into an indictment of one group of countries by another. To command general support, and to be implemented, the proposed rights and duties must be defined equitably and take into account the concerns of industrialized as well as of developing countries. The United States stands ready to define its responsibilities in a humane and co-operative spirit.
75.	Fifthly, a world community must harness science and technology for the benefit of all. We must begin to match our remarkable technological skills with our equally remarkable technological needs. We must find the means for the co-operative and judicious development of energy resources. We must responsibly confront the problems of population growth, which are fast pushing humanity towards the limits of what our earth can sustain. We must embark on a new scientific revolution to increase agricultural productivity in all lands. No field of human endeavour is so dependent upon an open world for its advancement, no field is so in need of international co-operation to cope with its potential dangers.
76.	Are we prepared to accept the imperatives of a global society and infuse our labours with new vision? Or shall we content ourselves with a temporary pause in the turmoil that has racked our century? Shall we proceed with one-sided demands and sterile confrontation? Or shall we proceed in a spirit of compromise produced by a sense of common destiny? We are convinced that we must move from hesitant co-operation born of necessity to genuine collective effort based on common purpose.
77.	It is a choice no country can make alone. We can repeat old slogans or strive for new hope. We can fill the record of our proceedings with acrimony, or we can dedicate ourselves to dealing with man's deepest needs. The ideal of a world community may be decried as unrealistic, but great constructions have always been ideals before they can become realities. Let us therefore dedicate ourselves to this noblest of all possible goals and achieve at last what has so long eluded us: true understanding and tolerance among mankind.﻿56.	 This year the General Assembly once again looks to Latin America to provide a distinguished figure to preside over its proceedings. The honour, Sir, has fallen to you, and to your country. May I take this opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption of this high and responsible office, and also to express my confidence that our deliberations will be guided into constructive and productive channels with your experienced hand at the helm?
57.	The membership of the United Nations at this moment stands at 135. This is a large membership when compared with the 51 States which signed the Charter as founder Members In 1945, of which my country was one. One of the objectives then, and in the intervening years, was to strive for universality in the Organization so that "We, the peoples," of the Organization could justifiably speak as "We, the peoples" of the world. That desirable objective has been brought a step nearer realization by the admission during the current Assembly session of three new Members — the Bahamas, the Federal Republic of Germany, and the German Democratic Republic — representing between them a considerable population and a diversity of cultural, social, historical and political backgrounds and philosophies.
58.	The admission of the two Germanys is the fruit of a policy of detente actively pursued in Europe, and is a striking example of the fact that accommodation can be reached between parties with widely differing political persuasions and conflicting interests, provided that the will is there and the effort is conscientiously and patiently made. It is a lesson from which we can all profit for the lessening of hostility is conducive to the buttressing of peace, which is the raison d'etre of this Organization.
59.	The spirit of detente abroad was one of the main themes of the statements made in the general debate at last year's session of the General Assembly. The passage of time enables us to consider its consequences in better perspective and to take stock. Those countries which have adopted the course of detente appear to be consolidating their contacts and relationships to their mutual benefit and, in many ways, to the benefit of others. At the same time, some other Governments with seemingly irreconcilable differences have begun to follow their lead and to open up a cautious dialogue with one another. This attitude is highly commendable and ought to be endorsed and conscientiously emulated by all of us, for the single, overriding imperative of international relations is international peace. This is a fact which should be borne in mind, particularly by smaller countries, for they, too, have a duty to work towards a relaxation of tension after the example set by the major Powers. It would be a tragedy if the world should move out from under the shadow of major-Power confrontation only to be faced with the threat of increasing conflicts of smaller scale. Such a tragedy must be averted by responsible leadership in this Organization, as well as by the individual efforts of each one of us.
60.	In its external relations, South Africa, for its part, remains willing to pursue all avenues of contact and communication, with the object of relaxing tensions and creating conditions favourable for the solution of problems of concern to us. Where our efforts in this direction have been reciprocated the results have been encouraging. South Africa remains ready to enter into discussions with any country, on the African continent or elsewhere, which shares our approach, an approach rooted firmly in the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes. South Africa harbours no aggressive intentions against any country; hence our willingness to conclude non-aggression pacts with other States in Africa. Accusations that we have committed acts of aggression are totally unfounded. We are irrevocably opposed to the use of force and violence in international relations.
61.	It is deplorable that force and violence in the form of indiscriminate attacks against innocent, uninvolved and unsuspecting individuals and groups should have become a characteristic of our times. Terrorism takes many forms, but a common component is the utter disregard by the perpetrators for established authority and their determination to subvert, and if possible destroy, constitutionally established law and order, both national and international. It is doubtful that the international law of sovereign States can survive in a meaningful way if the international community should fail to discharge its responsibilities to curb this evil. It is a source of concern to my Government that so little progress has been made on this urgent world problem in the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism, which held its first session in July and August this year. My Government considers that the Assembly should urgently commence drafting a general convention on terrorism. We cannot afford to evade or to confuse the issue while terrorism is rampant.
62.	If we, the international community, resolve that we shall settle our political differences without having recourse to force, if we renounce irresponsible methods of terror and violence, and if we continue to make progress in disarming a world bristling with lethal weapons, we can direct our energies and our resources to the solution of the world's other pressing problems, which are many. A number of these are problems of a non-political nature, and confront mankind as a whole. I suggest that the most basic problem of all, and one which encompasses a host of supplementary problems, is how in the future we shall balance the world's rapidly increasing population against our planet's dwindling resources, taking into account the rising economic and social expectations of the very same people whose numbers are increasing at a phenomenal and unprecedented rate. We have, for example, already been given a disturbing reminder this year of the difficulties of providing everywhere the most elementary of man's needs: food. The spectre of famine was raised by the devastating drought in West Africa, end drought conditions, floods and other natural disasters elsewhere. Let me at once express South Africa's sympathy to those who have suffered as a result. These disasters and the consequential threat of famine should not be seen as isolated occurrences. They are a foretaste and a warning of the problems that will have to be dealt with in the future.
63.	Another serious problem with which mankind will have to deal is the potential energy crisis. It is necessary that there be the closest co-operation between the developed and the developing nations in the consideration of this matter, for, after making due allowance for the need to protect the quality of our environment, energy is the key to the material improvement of man's estate. We are faced with the possible gross depletion of the total known reserves of all sources of energy if energy is in future consumed at the rate forecast today. It is, therefore, essential for all of us that the different energy-producing resources of the earth be rationally exploited in the interest of mankind as a whole.
64.	Nuclear energy undoubtedly occupies a key position in supplying mankind's energy needs of the future. Nuclear power reactors which will supply only about 51,000 megawatts of electricity in 1976, are expected to contribute as much as 564,000 megawatts in 1985 and then to double their supply in the space of the next five years. In terms of total world requirements of electricity, nuclear energy is expected to supply 23 per cent by the year 2000 as compared with half of 1 per cent in 1970.
65.	South Africa is one of the world's major producers of uranium. We possess large exploitable deposits of low- grade uranium and we provide a stable supply of a portion of the world's uranium on a competitive basis. At the present moment we are engaged in assessing our capability of supplying this nuclear fuel in an enriched form since enriched uranium is the fuel for most nuclear powered reactors.
66.	Having said this, let me add that South Africa's atomic energy programme is devoted to peaceful purposes exclusively. It has always been our policy, and it remains our policy, to sell uranium only on condition that the uranium be made subject to International Atomic Energy Agency or equivalent safeguards to ensure that it is not diverted to military purposes. In the same spirit, the uranium enrichment project to which I have just referred will also be applied for peaceful purposes only. To that end, the South African Government proposes to negotiate, at the appropriate time, an agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency for the application of safeguards to the enriched uranium produced by the project, so as to ensure that the product is used solely for peaceful purposes.
67.	We believe that this development will not only herald a new era of industrial and economic growth in South Africa but will also enable us to make a contribution to the efforts of the international community to solve the potential world energy problem.
68.	May I at this point digress to refer in a few words to the unfortunate events at Carletonville of which mention has been made in the course of the general debate. The tragic loss of life is deeply regretted. Sympathy with the next of kin was expressed by my Prime Minister and others immediately after the incident. A memorandum compiled by my Mission, in the course of reproduction as an official document,  will place the matter in perspective. Meanwhile I would simply ask that judgement on the incident not be formed purely on the basis of emotion. What transpired at Carletonville will be determined by the judicial inquiry which has been instituted.
69.	Turning now to the question of South West Africa, may I say at the outset that my Government has noted with regret the repeated calls of the Security Council to terminate the contacts between South Africa and the Secretary- General. Those contacts represent a voluntary attempt to use the facilities of the United Nations for the pursuit of a peaceful settlement of the problem. That is one of the primary purposes of this Organization. Yet the call is now apparently to bypass and to set aside the machinery which the United Nations offers for the peaceful settlement of problems. This must inevitably serve as an encouragement to those who advocate confrontation, force and violence as a means to an end in South West Africa. And that course is being advocated despite the fact that in the 14 months between March 1972 and April 1973 during which contacts were made, more real progress was achieved in the search for a solution to the problem in the United Nations context than in all the preceding years.
70.	For the first time in the history of the Territory, directly as a result of the contacts, representatives of black, white and other groups from throughout the territory have been brought together around the table under the chairmanship of a Prime Minister of South Africa for the purpose of discussing and trying to resolve issues with Territory- wide implications. We consider that this is a significant and important development for, as my Prime Minister has declared, it is the inhabitants of South West Africa themselves who must decide their own future and not South Africa or the United Nations.
71.	We for our part do not consider that we have the right to impose a settlement on the Territory and we do not believe that the United Nations has the right or indeed wishes to impose a settlement on its inhabitants. We shall respect their wishes.
72.	We have indicated that any exercise to ascertain the wishes of the population will not be compromised by any existing political and administrative arrangements. And we have stated, with regard to the question whether individual population groups may suddenly become independent as separate entities, that we do not envisage such an eventuality. We expressed the latter position in dealing with a point raised by the Secretary-General whether the possibility could arise, in the light of South African legislation, that one or other of the population groups might acquire separate independence before the South West African people as a whole had exercised their right to self-determination.
73.	We believe that all this, taken together with the other points set out in the South African statements reproduced in the Secretary-General's reports, constitutes progress in the real sense of the word. South Africa, for its part, is ready to engage in further contacts, for we believe that we ourselves as well as the United Nations should persevere in searching for a solution.
74.	We realize that there are those who believe that progress has been too slow. On the other hand, they too should realize that this is a most complicated and intractable problem and that it cannot therefore be solved overnight. This is fully recognized by the Secretary-General, who stated in his report of 30 April of this year that:
"Should the Security Council decide to continue these efforts", — that is, the contacts — "it should bear in mind my earlier statement to the effect that time and protracted discussion will be required if any progress is to be achieved." 
75.	South Africa's presence in the Territory is accounted for by the undertaking we have given to ensure that its inhabitants are able and ready to exercise their right to self-determination and independence. We have no designs whatsoever with respect to any part of South West Africa's territory. In the meanwhile, we believe we have a duty to continue to assist in the development of South West Africa in all spheres: economic, social and political. We derive no financial or economic advantage whatsoever from our presence in the Territory. Every cent which accrues from taxation levied on income derived within the Territory, including profits on foreign investments and operations in the Territory, is reinvested in South West Africa for the benefit of all its inhabitants. In addition, South African taxpayers contribute to the Territory's advancement on current account alone — that is, excluding payments to finance capital projects — funds which in the last few years have varied between $60 million and $80 million per annum. It will be appreciated that our resources are not unlimited. Moreover, we have responsibilities also to our own peoples in South Africa, where there is an increasing need for funds for development purposes. Nevertheless, we make this Contribution to South West Africa in the genuine belief that it is our duty to do so.
76.	One cannot of course forecast the outcome of the Security Council's consideration of the Secretary-General's latest report. We recognize that the gap separating us, although narrower than it has ever been as a result of our contacts with the Secretary-General, still exists. But we would hope that the Council and this Organization as a whole will be guided by the imperative need for peaceful evolution by consent of those directly concerned, namely, the inhabitants of South West Africa, both black and white. We believe it is crucial that all the segments of the population of South West Africa should be enabled to get together to sort out their problems and to resolve them to their own satisfaction, in a manner consistent with the peaceful objectives of the Charter
77.	As I have indicated, a start has already been made in this direction. We have also been encouraged in this regard, by a series of discussions which have recently taken place and which are continuing between representatives of the white group in South West Africa and representatives of such groups as the Hereros, the Namas and the Damaras as well as of the organization known as the Voice of the People. The latter representatives are among those who are known to be opposed to the South African Government. Nevertheless, they have all in the course of these discussions expressed themselves as favouring dialogue in South West Africa and as being opposed to violence as a means to an end. As an example of these discussions, I may mention that Mr. Clemens Kapuuo of the Hereros and Mr. D. F. Mudge, a member of the Executive Council for South West Africa, met in Windhoek on 24 September. In a joint statement issued shortly thereafter, they declared that they were both in favour of contact and dialogue as a method of solving the problems of South West Africa and that they rejected violence. In the course of their discussions, according to the statement, they exchanged views on matters relating to South West Africa in general. It was clear, the statement added, that both of them wished to promote the interests of their respective peoples and of the peoples of South West Africa as a whole. Further meetings of this nature are envisaged.
78.	These meetings of individuals of differing views and attitudes are an indication of the desire of the inhabitants of the Territory to involve themselves jointly and directly in the future evolution of South West Africa, and we hope that they will receive encouragement to seek progress in this way. We for our part will afford them every encouragement.
79.	In this world of continual change, we recognize and accept the need for change also in areas of our own responsibility. Our policies are anything but rigid or static. My Prime Minister has stated in Parliament that the South African Government is a Government of change, and that it will continue to bring about change in a systematic and orderly way as warranted by changing circumstances and changing requirements. But we believe in change by evolution, not by violence. This is why we attach special importance to the consultations which are continually in progress between the Government and the leaders of the black and other peoples in South Africa.
80.	We have stated on many occasions that our policies provide-for the different black nations in South Africa to achieve self-government in the geographic areas of their jurisdiction and to advance to complete sovereignty and independence in the sense in which this concept is generally understood. In other words, each of them would qualify for membership in this Organization. They are aware that they can negotiate their independence, in the full sense of the word, with the South African Government at any moment of their choice, as the South African Prime Minister has repeatedly stated.
81.	Eight black nations, totalling more than 14 million people, have already achieved self-government in varying degrees. Six of them have their own Parliament, their own Cabinet and Prime Minister, the latter answerable to their Parliament. The two other black nations, including the 4 million Zulus, have Legislative Assemblies, with executive power vested in an Executive Council. During the course of the last two years, five elections have been successfully held to elect members of these Parliaments. A sixth election is still to be held.
82.	Arising from this political progress, the South African Government and the Prime Ministers and other leaders of all the various nations are continually in dialogue with each other. Frequent contacts take place at all levels from the Prime Minister downwards and in the private as well as the public sector. In fact, my Prime Minister has, during the seven years of his premiership, held more official discussions with the leaders of these nations than have all his predecessors together. Many of these leaders, moreover, travel abroad and state their positions publicly. Their opinions on matters of detail falling within the over-all objectives of South African policy do not always coincide with the opinions of the South African Government — but it is their prerogative and duty to put the position of their peoples as they see it. The South African Government regards these contacts and discussions as essential for the promotion of peaceful evolution.
83.	One of our concerns, in this evolutionary process, is the question of human dignity. The South African Government is fully conscious of the importance of recognition and acceptance of the human dignity of the individual, and my Prime Minister has publicly stressed the central position it must take in future political developments in South Africa. Earlier this year in Parliament he said he was at all times prepared to do away with unnecessary measures if these measures stood in the way of healthy relations in South Africa.
84.	There is nothing which exercises the minds of South Africans more than the solution of our own special political problems. It is after all our future we are building and it is our security that is at stake.
85.	We ask the international community to respect our desire to resolve our problems without interference. Let me repeat, however, that we are at all times ready to enter into discussions concerning our internal policies with anyone who is genuinely interested therein. But in the final analysis, it is we ourselves who must solve our problems and solve them we must and shall, whatever the sacrifice, if we are to continue to live in peace and prosperity in South Africa.
86.	This brings me to the end of my prepared statement. Before resuming my seat, may I refer briefly to the efforts made to prevent me from addressing the Assembly. I do not intend to deal with the accusations levelled against my Government in the course of these efforts, for they are irrelevant to the issues before the Assembly. I must, however, totally reject them.
87.	We have witnessed here an attempt to violate the principle of freedom of speech and expression in this august Assembly. It was an attempt to deprive the representative of a Member State of his inherent right to participate in the proceedings of the General Assembly and to state the case of his country. If it had succeeded it would have put the clock back 2,000 years. For it was the Romans who introduced the concept audi alteram partem: listen to the other party, a principle which has survived for over 20 centuries and is still observed and cherished in all civilized societies. The actions of some representatives were unworthy of the dignity and the status of this Assembly.
88.	Moreover, far from humiliating me and my country, they have succeeded only in furnishing proof of the length to which they will go to undermine a principle which forms one of the main corner-stones of the United Nations and without which it cannot survive.
89.	Finally, in view of what has happened here I must place on record my strongest possible objection to the unprecedented, illegal and unconstitutional action by the General Assembly concerning South Africa's credentials. My Government views it in the most serious light indeed.﻿Since the twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly, some notable events have successively taken place on the international arena. First, there was the cessation of the war in Viet-Nam and Laos. Secondly, there were the talks held and the agreements concluded between the two super-Powers-the United States and the Soviet Union. Thirdly, there was the convening of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. In. the meantime, the third world has further awakened and grown in strength, and the African, Latin American and non-aligned countries held a series of important international conferences. What is the characteristic of the present world situation? Is the international situation really moving towards a general detente? This is a question in which people are interested. The delegation of the People's Republic of China would like to state its views on this question and a number of other questions with which the current session of the General Assembly is confronted.
3.	First, what is the characteristic of the present world situation?
The Chinese Government has long held that our world is now going through a process of great turbulence, great division and great realignment. The basic contradictions in the world are all sharpening, in particular the contradictions between imperialism and colonialism on the one hand and
the oppressed nations and peoples on the other and the contradictions among the imperialist countries, especially those between the two super-Powers. Although no new world war has broken out since the Second World War, local wars resulting from imperialist aggressions have never ceased. The great victory of the heroic Viet-Namese people's war of resistance against United States aggression and for national salvation has once again proved that imperialism and all reactionaries are paper tigers. A small nation can defeat a big one and a weak nation can defeat a strong one, so long as they dare to struggle, are good at struggle and persevere in struggle. It is not the people who fear imperialism; it is imperialism which fears the people. Revolution is the main trend in the world today. Now that the war in Viet-Nam has ended, can it be assumed that the world will henceforth be tranquil? Obviously not. When the Korean war was ended in 1953, some people thought that no more gunshots would be heard in the world. Not long afterwards, however, the Suez war broke out and then the Viet-Nam war started. And even today, the war in Indo-China has not stopped completely, for there is still fighting in Cambodia. Tension in the Middle East has not relaxed in the least. The colonialists and racists are carrying out armed suppression against the African people and the African people are developing armed resistance against them. The aggression against, subversion and control of and interference in countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America by the super-Powers are continuing without end. A recent case in point is the military coup d'etat in Chile. President Salvador Allende died a martyr at his post. We express profound condolences on his heroic death. At the same time, we hold one should not forget how harmful the absurd theory of so-called "peaceful transition" is to the anti-imperialism revolutionary struggles of the Asian, African and Latin American people, a theory which has been advocated by another super-Power. The dismemberment of a sovereign country by armed force and the legalization and perpetuation of that division have also become a tendency on the part of the big Powers in their attempt to dominate the world. In the economic field, the gap is widening between the rich and developed countries and the poor and developing countries, and even among the developed countries there exist many contradictions, and hence detente among them is far from being the case. The recent Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-aligned Countries, held at Algiers, strongly condemned racism, Zionism, colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism and strongly demanded a change in the present state of affairs in the world, demonstrating a further awakening of the Asian, African and Latin American peoples. In a word, we consider that the characteristic of the present situation is one of great disorder throughout the world and not tranquillity. And the main trend amidst this great disorder is that countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution. 

5.	Second, why is there no tranquillity in the world today?
6.	We have always held that all countries in the world, big or small, should be equal; that all countries, irrespective of their social systems, should establish normal State relations on the five principles of mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual non-aggression, noninterference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence; and that international disputes should be settled peacefully on the basis of these principles without resorting to the use or threat of force. This should apply to relations between big Powers, to relations between a big Power and a small country, and all the more so to relations between a strong and a weak, or between a rich and a poor country. It was on these principles that China started to improve its relations with the United States and established diplomatic relations with Japan. In their joint communique issued in Shanghai on 27 February 1972, China and the United States further declared that they should not seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and were opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony. The same principle was reaffirmed in the Sino-Japanese statement of 30 September 1972 on the establishment of mutual diplomatic relations. In our view, the above-mentioned principles are the minimum criteria for the equality of all countries in international relations and indicate the correct way to achieve a relaxation of international tension.
7.	As sovereign States, the United States and the Soviet Union are fully entitled to take the measures they deem appropriate to improve and develop their bilateral relations. However, we cannot but point out that the Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War signed by them on 22 June 1973 goes far beyond the scope of bilateral relations. One may ask, Who has given them the right to enter into what they call "urgent consultations" in case of a dispute between either of the parties and other countries and even between any other two countries? The phrase about disputes which "appear to involve the risk of nuclear conflict" is open to any interpretation, and their so-called "urgent consultations" are bound to be followed by actions dictated by their own interests. Does not this mean that they may interfere at will in the relations among all countries on the strength of the huge numbers of nuclear weapons in their possession? China absolutely will not go begging for nuclear protection from any country, nor is she afraid of nuclear threat from any country. But we feel in duty bound to state our views on this matter since it concerns all the people of the world.
8.	The signing of such an agreement by the Soviet Union and the United States is by no means accidental, but is derived from the so-called principle which they agreed upon in 1972 that the Soviet Union and the United States have "security interests. . . based on the principle of equality". What is meant by "security interests.. . based on the principle of equality"? To put it bluntly, it means rivalry for world hegemony — wherever one goes, the other will do the same. What they are doing now is simply to wrap up this content in the form of an agreement.
9.	In fact, this Agreement is a mere scrap of paper. It contains no explicit undertaking on the non-use of nuclear weapons; still less does it envisage the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. The United States Government was more frank when it stated that the Agreement is only a general statement of policy which does not involve any particular positive actions that either side has to take, and pointed out that agreements are not always maintained and there is nothing self-enforcing about this document.
10.	However, the Soviet leaders have made a great fanfare, lauding that Agreement to the skies, alleging that it ushered in "a new era" in international relations and opened up "historical vistas for strengthening universal security as a whole," and that it was "indeed of historic importance for all mankind". They have their motives for so eulogizing the Agreement. One may recall Khrushchev's famous remarks: "Even a tiny spark can cause a world conflagration" and "We" — that is, the Soviet Union and the United States-"are the strongest countries in the world, and if we unite for peace there can be no war. Then if any madman wanted war, we would but have to shake our fingers to warn him off." In this way, if the Soviet Union could be bound together with the United States, would not the whole world have to cringe to them? However, in our view, things may not necessarily turn out that way.
11.	It is not so easy for the Soviet Union to bind itself to the United States. Shortly after the signing of the Agreement, the Soviet Union pressed forward with its underground nuclear tests and hastened the development of missiles with multiple warheads. The United States will not take this lying down. Why? Because the desperate struggle for nuclear superiority and world hegemony still goes on. The contention between the Soviet Union and the United States now extends all over the world. A vivid proof can be found in the recent subversion of a government in Asia and another in South America. Their scramble is becoming increasingly fierce. That is the reason why there is no tranquillity in the world today. So, what peaceful coexistence is there to speak of? There is. only a travesty of peaceful coexistence; the substance is coexistence in rivalry. But whether such coexistence can last is, of course, another question.
12.	The Soviet leaders noisily proclaim that as a "socialist" State the Soviet Union is the "natural and surest ally" of the developing countries. In the past, some people in China also believed this, because they saw the Soviet Union as the homeland of the great Lenin and the Chinese revolution, a continuation of the October Revolution. Therefore, how could the Soviet Union, as a socialist State, fail to give the developing countries whole-hearted internationalist assistance? But since Khrushchev rose to power, we came to realize, thanks to the long and direct experience we had gained as a result of the Soviet Union's demand for the establishment of a joint fleet in the China Sea, its withdrawal of experts, its tearing up of contracts, border intrusions, subversions, and so on, that this was not the case, and that what the Soviet Union practised was not internationalism but great-Power chauvinism, national egoism and territorial expansionism. Therefore we will not blame those friends who have so far failed to see this for lack of experience. How can a socialist turn into an imperialist? There is in fact nothing strange about it if one goes a little into the history of the international Communist movement. Was not Karl Kautsky once a somewhat well-known Marxist? But he later betrayed Marxism and capitulated to imperialism. It was Lenin who passed the final historical verdict on Kautsky in his well-known pamphlet Trie Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky.  People can change; so can a State. It has changed, and what can one do about it?
13.	Lenin pointed out on one occasion: "We judge a person not by what he says or thinks of himself but by his actions." That applies to a State as well. What has the Soviet Government done to other countries in these years? This is clear to the broad masses of the people of Czechoslovakia, Egypt and Pakistan, to the peoples of Cambodia who are fighting dauntlessly, and to other peoples who have been subjected to its aggression, subversion, control, interference or bullying. The actions of the Soviet Government have amply shown that it is "socialist in words, imperialist in deeds", as Lenin said.
14.	The Soviet-United States Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War cannot hoodwink many people or intimidate the peoples of the world, but can only arouse indignation, misgivings and disillusionment. The tide is mounting against the hegemonism and power politics practised by the super-Powers.
15.	Third, who is really against detente?
16.	Shortly after the war in Viet-Nam came to an end, the United States Government pronounced 1973 to be "the year of Europe". That was followed by the first stage of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe — a conference advocated by the Soviet Government for many years. All this indicates that Europe is the focus of contention between the two super-Powers — the United States and the Soviet Union — and that the so-called European Security Conference is nothing but one of the forms of contention. Its proceedings showed, however, that it went far beyond the scope to which the two superpowers wished to confine it. At that Conference many countries stated pointedly that deeds and not empty promises are called for in the matter of security; that European security must be based on the safeguarding of national independence and sovereignty; that one must not become mentally disarmed and off guard simply because the European Security Conference has taken place; and that in order to guarantee European security, military blocs must be disbanded, foreign military bases dismantled, and foreign troops withdrawn, so that the relations between European countries may be established on the principles of mutual respect for independence and sovereignty, complete equality and non-interference in each other's internal affairs.
17.	Moreover, some countries pointed out that the security of the Mediterranean and the security of Europe

were inseparable and that there could be no security for Europe when the Mediterranean is under the armed threat of, and contention by, the two super-Powers. All this is tantamount to a direct blow at those who seek by means of this Conference to consolidate the occupation of many European countries which resulted from the Second World War or the events thereafter, and to proceed further to disintegrate Western Europe and dominate the whole of Europe. The European Security Conference is still going on; but, judging from the proceedings of its first stage, it will further expose the ambitions of that super-Power which seeks to divide and disintegrate Western Europe.
18.	While stepping up its arms expansion and war preparations and its world-wide contention with the United States for spheres of influence, the Soviet Union is clamouring for "spreading the zone of relaxation to the whole world". Accordingly, it has lately picked up once again the long-ignored trash known as the Asian Collective Security System. This is most amusing. It reminds us of the American by the name of John Foster Dulles, who, after the war in Indo-China was brought to an end by the first Geneva Conference in 1954,  hastily rigged up the so-called South-East Asia Treaty Organization, which was directed against China and whose members were mostly non-Southeast Asian countries. The Soviet Union is a European country and the chief of the alliance deriving from the Warsaw Treaty. Why should it be so eagerly concerned about the "collective security" of Asian countries? Has the ghost of John Foster Dulles gone to the Kremlin? Actually, would it not be less devious and more direct simply to extend the Warsaw Treaty to Asia?
19.	Lately, the Soviet leaders have tried to pin an additional label on China, namely "opponent of detente". As the Chinese saying goes, this is putting Mr. Chang's hat on Mr. Li's head. Since you say you are so anxious to relax world tension, why do you not show your good faith by doing a thing or two — for instance, by withdrawing your armed forces from Czechoslovakia or the Mongolian People's Republic and by returning the four northern islands to Japan?
20.	We hold that imperialism means war. There is a danger of war so long as imperialism exists. Today, when the various types of basic contradictions in the world are sharpening, the danger of a new world war still exists, and the people of all countries must be prepared, and must not let themselves be misled by a temporary and superficial facade of detente. Only thus can we better strive for a bright future for the world. In the final analysis, the destiny of mankind is decided by the people in their hundreds of millions who persevere in struggle and unity, and not by the one or two super-Powers.
21.	Fourth, there is the Cambodian question.
22.	The Chinese Government resolutely denounces the United States Government for continuing to support in various ways the puppet regime in Phnom Penh and wantonly to interfere in the affairs of Cambodia. The regime of the traitorous Lon Nol clique, which is now installed in Phnom Penh, was imposed on the Khmer people by the United States imperialists and their allies and has been illegal from its very inception. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of the head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, is the sole legal government of Cambodia. The People's Armed Forces of National Liberation of Cambodia under its leadership have liberated over 90 per cent of Cambodia's territory, with over 80 per cent of the population. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia has been recognized by nearly 50 countries. The participants at the recent Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries, which met in September at Algiers, have declared that the Royal Government of National Union under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk is the only legal government of Cambodia and earnestly requested all countries which love peace and justice to give it formal recognition [see A/9330, p. 12]. This is a voice of justice. The Chinese Government holds that the continued usurpation by the traitorous Lon Nol clique of the seat in the United Nations is a contempt for all countries that uphold justice, for the Fourth Conference and for the United Nations itself. The Chinese Government firmly maintains that the present session of the General Assembly should take a decision immediately to expel the representatives of the traitorous Lon Nol clique from the United Nations and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of the head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, its rightful seat in the United Nations.
23.	Fifth, I turn now to the Korean question.
24.	There are now before the General Assembly two draft resolutions on the Korean question — one sponsored by the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan and other countries [A/C.1/L.645], the other sponsored by Algeria, China and other countries [A/C.1IL.644 and Corr.l]. Regarding the former draft resolution, the Chinese Government considers that the position for retaining the United Nations Command and the United States forces in South Korea and for the entry of both North and South Korea into the United Nations is unreasonable and contrary to the joint communiqué of North and South Korea issued on 4 July 1972,  although it contains the positive element of dissolving the so-called "United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea".
25.	The withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the Korean question are long overdue. According to the provisions of the Korean Armistice Agreement of 27 July 1953,  a high-level political conference for the settlement of the Korean question ought to have met within three months after the Armistice Agreement became effective. The conference was not held only because of the obstructions put up by the United States side at the time. Subsequently, the question was again discussed at the 1954 Korean Political Conference in Geneva. The then United States Secretary of State, Mr. John Foster Dulles, peremptorily rejected all reasonable proposals, thereby blocking once again a solution to the question of the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the Korean question. The United States was then absolutely unwilling to withdraw its forces from South Korea.
26.	What could be done about it? Well, if you would not withdraw, we would.
27.	In 1958 the Chinese People's Volunteers unilaterally and unconditionally withdrew from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Consequently, there are no foreign forces on one side in Korea, while large numbers of foreign forces, mainly United States forces, are stationed on the other side. This most unreasonable state of affairs cannot but constitute an obstacle to the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea.
28.	Is South Korea so lacking in national self-respect that it must rely on the support of foreign forces? Obviously, such a state of affairs cannot be tolerated by the people in South Korea. Subsequently, thanks to the initiative of President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, a joint communiqué of North and South Korea on the independent and peaceful reunification of the country was issued on 4 July 1972, leading to the start of a dialogue between the North and the South. This was a big step towards the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the problem of the reunification of Korea by the Koreans themselves. With the issuance of this communiqué, the Korean Armistice Agreement, signed 19 years ago, to a great extent ceased to play the role it once had. The Koreans in the North and the South have themselves agreed upon refraining from committing armed provocations, big or small, and upon taking active measures for preventing incidents of unexpected military conflicts. Is this not the best guarantee for the maintenance of the armistice?
29.	It is captious to say that the dissolution of the United Nations Command and the withdrawal of foreign forces would nullify the 1953 Armistice Agreement. It should be recalled that the Korean Armistice Agreement was signed between the Korean People's Army and the Chinese People's Volunteers on the one hand and the United Nations Command on the other. According to that kind of reasoning, would not the withdrawal of the Chinese People's Volunteers mean that the Korean Armistice Agreement had long been nullified? Since the Chinese People's Volunteers could withdraw from Korea, why cannot the foreign forces in South Korea under the signboard of the United Nations Command do the same?
30.	The continued presence of the so-called United Nations Command and of foreign forces in South Korea is at variance with the principles agreed on by the two sides in Korea on 4 July 1972 that "unification shall be achieved through independent Korean efforts without being subject to external imposition or interference". In point of fact, it is the very presence of this outside force that has emboldened the South Korean authorities to reject a number of reasonable proposals put forward by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, thus causing the dialogue between the North and the South to bog down. The Kim Dae Jung incident which occurred not long ago
has shown how abjectly the South Korean authorities depend upon foreign forces. In order that conditions may be created to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, the United Nations Command should agree to disband, and all foreign forces stationed in South Korea should agree to withdraw.
31.	As for the entry of both North and South Korea into the United Nations, this is plainly an attempt to legalize and perpetuate the division of Korea, which runs counter to the principle agreed upon between the North and the South that has a homogenous people, a great national unity shall be sought, above all as one nation, transcending differences in ideas, ideologies and systems". In his five propositions put forward on 23 June of this year [see A/9027, para. 19], President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has pointed out that the North and the South should not enter the United Nations separately and that if they want to enter the United Nations before the reunification of the country is achieved, they should enter it as one State, at least, under the name of the Confederal Republic of Koryo after the Confederation is enforced. This proposition is entirely reasonable and merits the sympathy and support of all countries that uphold justice.
32.	Sixth, there is the question of Bangladesh.
33.	At the time of the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly in 1971, the Soviet Union supported India in
 dismembering Pakistan by armed force. The General Assembly and then the Security Council adopted resolutions by overwhelming majorities calling for cease-fire, troop withdrawal and the repatriation of the prisoners of war by India and Pakistan f General Assembly resolution 2793 (XXVI) and Security Council resolution 307 (1971)]. At its twenty-seventh session, in 1972, the General Assembly further adopted two interdependent resolutions calling for the repatriation of Pakistan prisoners of war and expressing the desire for the admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations [resolutions 2938 and 2937 (XXVII)].
34.	It was not until 28 August of this year that an agreement on the repatriation of prisoners of war and civilians was reached between India and Pakistan at New Delhi. This agreement has come much too late, but its ultimate conclusion is to be welcomed. The agreement reached is on paper, and there will have to be a process before it can be turned into reality. Complications may yet arise. The Chinese Government holds that the question of admitting Bangladesh to the United Nations can be considered once the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council are implemented without qualification. But this can be done only after the thorough implementation of the United Nations resolutions, and definitely not before.
35.	Seventh, there is the Middle East question.
36.	Although the two super-Powers are both trumpeting about a general world trend towards detente, a tense stalemate of "no war, no peace" still prevails in the Middle East. When the Soviet Union dismembered Pakistan in 1971, no one said there was the risk of a nuclear war. Neither has anyone made a similar warning in connexion
with the current United States intervention in Cambodia. It is only in the Middle East that, at the mention of an attempt by Arab countries to repulse Israeli aggression and recover their lost territories, the air is filled with cries about a risk of nuclear war between the two super-Powers. Why is this so? Because the situation of "no war, no peace" created and maintained by the two super-Powers serves them best in their scramble for spheres of influence, oil resources and strategic positions in the Middle East. In. appearance the two super-Powers are each supporting one of the antagonistic sides, but in essence they are like two clay figurines which have been kneaded together and then remoulded, so that there is something of each in the other. Take the case of the aggressor Israel. Could Israel be so unbridled in its truculence if it received only supplies of American weapons but none of Soviet manpower? In our opinion, the so-called risk of a nuclear war has been deliberately fabricated to scare people. It is futile to count on the super-Powers to bring about a settlement of the Middle East question. Nor will the situation be changed by any resolution adopted by the United Nations. The only way out is to act independently and rely on one's own efforts. China has never had anything to do with the Israeli Zionists. China firmly supports the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle against Israeli zionism. We believe that so long as they uphold unity and persevere in struggle, the Palestinian and other Arab peoples, with the support of the people of the whole world, will certainly surmount all the difficulties on their road of advance, recover their sacred territories and regain their national rights.
37.	Eighth, there is the question of opposing colonialism.
38.	An excellent situation prevails in Africa. In the past year, the African people have achieved a series of new victories in their struggle to win and safeguard their national independence and to oppose racism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism. Through their struggle they have come to realize more and more the necessity of armed struggle and mutual support. The Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [OAU], at its tenth ordinary session held last May in Addis Ababa, issued the resounding call to "eliminate all forms of colonialism on the African continent". The conference documents fully manifested the unity and co-operation of the African countries and their militancy against the common enemies, as well as the determination of the African people in the territories which have not yet become independent to expand their armed struggle for national liberation. With imperialist and superpower support and connivance, the racist regimes and colonialist authorities in Africa are resorting to more insidious and brutal means in their desperate struggle to buttress their tottering rule. They have long refused to implement the United Nations resolutions which reflect the just demands of the African people. What deserves special attention is that while the old-line colonialists are on the decline, neo-colonialists of different shades are trying to take their place by means of cunning and deceptive manoeuvres. The super-Powers are sowing dissension among the African countries so as to fish in troubled waters. The African people are still faced with the task of a protracted, complicated and tortuous struggle. Africa belongs to the great African people. The Chinese people stand firmly by the African people. We resolutely support the peoples of Mozambique, Angola, Azania, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Guinea-Bissau, Spanish Sahara and other regions in their just struggle for national liberation. We warmly hail and give recognition to the new-born Republic of Guinea- Bissau. We resolutely support the just struggles of all African countries against aggression, subversion and the sowing of discord by colonialism and neo-colonialism and in defence of State sovereignty and African unity. We are confident that the awakening African people will continue to win new victories in the course of their coming struggle.
39.	Ninth, there is the question of opposing maritime hegemony.
40.	The determined struggle for the recognition of maritime rights in a zone of 200 nautical miles initiated by Latin American countries has won increasing support among the numerous small and medium-sized countries. Both the Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the OAU and the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held earlier this year, expressly declared that a coastal State is entitled to establish an exclusive economic zone or a zone of national jurisdiction with the maximum limit of 200 nautical miles. And land-locked States are also entitled to share sea-bed and fishery resources. On this problem of maritime rights, the numerous small and medium-sized countries are waging a gigantic and vigorous struggle against the maritime hegemony of the super-Powers. With a view to seeking hegemony on the seas and oceans, the super-Powers are trying in vain to preserve the outdated law of the sea and are doing their utmost to restrict the territorial sea and scope of jurisdiction of all countries. They insist that the three-nautical-mile or 12-nautical-mile rule for the territorial sea is sacred and inviolable, arguing that the expansion of the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction will narrow down the open sea. This is a bluff. What sacredness and inviolability! The three-nautical-mile rule was a man- made stipulation, and so was the 12-nautical mile rule. Both rules reflect the reality of the time when the seas and oceans were controlled by colonialism and imperialism. What is there that is so sacred and inviolable? As to the assertion that the larger the territorial seas and the zones of jurisdiction, the smaller the open sea, the question must be asked, What is the open sea? The so-called "open sea" has, in fact, always been the "private sea" of a few strong naval Powers. The numerous small and medium-sized countries have now stood up; they constitute the majority and demand a change in the so-called law of the sea, which is advantageous only to the imperialists. What fault can-one find with this? In a proposal submitted by the Soviet Union and its allies to the United Nations Industrial Development Board on 2 June 1972, they said that "the sovereignty over the natural resources is depending to a great extent upon the capability of utilizing these resources by the industry of the developing countries .. '.". 
41.	At the 101st meeting of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction held in Geneva on 22 August 1973, a Soviet representative said that the developing countries could not increase their catch even if they had a 200-nautical-mile zone, because they lacked the technical know-how, fishing capacity, and so forth. These statements simply mean that the greater the might, the greater the right. This is the logic of imperialism, pure and simple. Why are the super-Powers so violently opposed to the position of the small and medium-sized countries for enlarging the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction? It is not difficult to see the underlying motive if only one takes a look at the contention between the United States and the Soviet Union for maritime hegemony in the Mediterranean, the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean, the Caribbean, the Pacific and the Atlantic Ocean and their rivalry in setting up bases and plundering the fishing and sea-bed resources there. When the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction are enlarged, their "private sea" over which they act the overlords will contract. How can the super-Powers not desperately oppose this? However, their opposition will eventually prove futile. So long as the numerous small and medium-sized countries are united by seeking common ground on major points, while reserving differences on minor ones, and persevere in tenacious and protracted efforts, their struggle against maritime hegemony is bound to triumph.
42.	The struggle against maritime hegemony is an important aspect of the struggle waged by the numerous developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America to protect national resources and develop the national economy. It is also a new focus in the current struggle against hegemonism. In other economic spheres, the developing countries are also more closely co-ordinating their actions and strengthening their unity in the struggle against exploitation, plunder, dumping and monopoly by imperialism and big-Power hegemonism. The bilateral and regional economic co-operation of the developing countries is growing, and the various organizations of raw-material- exporting countries are expanding. More and more developing countries have come to realize that, in order to consolidate political independence, it is imperative to attain economic independence, and that in order to develop the national economy, it is imperative to rely on their own efforts and strengthen their mutual support and cooperation. It was by plundering and exploiting the people of Asia, Africa and Latin America that colonialism and imperialism accumulated their fortunes. Therefore, the people of these continents are fully entitled to demand repayment of this debt. However, in the light of China's own experience, colonialism and imperialism will never repay the debt and, what is more, they will create more difficulties for those countries which are defending their national independence and developing their national economy. It is futile to harbour any unrealistic notions about .them. We must persist in opposing imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. We must rely on ourselves, rely on the people, wage an arduous struggle and exert sustained efforts. We believe that, by so doing, the developing countries will certainly become prosperous.
43.	Tenth, there is the question of disarmament.
44.	The Chinese Government has always stood for disarmament. But what we stand for is genuine disarmament, not phoney disarmament; still less empty talk about disarmament coupled with actual arms expansion every day. At present, we face the harsh fact that the super-Powers are hawking disarmament, and the Soviet Union in particular is most energetic about it. Nearly every year it comes up with some sort of proposal on disarmament at the General Assembly. Last year, it boasted of the great significance of its agreement with the United States on the so-called limitation of strategic nuclear weapons. And this year, it is even more vehement in lauding the so-called epoch-making significance of the Soviet-United States Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. Meanwhile, it has sanctimoniously proposed a 10 per cent reduction of the military budgets of the five permanent members of the Security Council and the utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries [2124th meeting]. This is Krushchev's old war which has been peddled for more than a dozen years. It has not deceived many people. How are military budgets to be assessed? To study this problem alone, a committee will have to be set up and work for many years. Can military budgets really be reduced? Anyway, nobody has ever seen this happen. We think it is better to stop this kind of empty talk, and stop it quickly. If you are really the "natural and surest ally" of the developing countries you should come up to this rostrum and declare openly that your military aid to all developing countries which is used to resist foreign aggression is gratis and free of charge, that you will not be a merchant of death, and that, although you have charged previously, you will not press for the payment of debt and interest, especially in the case of the struggling Arab countries. Be forthright and simple. Declare publicly that you will cancel all the military loans, that there is no need for repayment and that you will let them be gone with the wind. Would not that be more practical?
45.	What general disarmament? Actually, in the world today, it is the two super-Powers that are engaged in an uncontrollable arms race. Their aim is nuclear superiority and the nuclear hegemony with which to dominate the world. To put it bluntly, any disarmament must first of all be the disarming of these two super-Powers. But can this be realized? On this point, the United States Government is somewhat more candid than is the Soviet Government. It admits that military expenditures cannot be reduced in the context of rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers. As to the numerous small and medium-sized countries, the real problem they face is definitely not disarmament, but the strengthening of their necessary and independent defence capabilities. Even Western Europe is inadequate in defence capabilities. How much more so are the large number of small and medium-sized countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America? What have these countries got to disarm? To talk about general disarmament in these circumstances is gibberish. If such proposals were really accepted, it would mean to ask the whole world completely to disarm itself in front of the two super-Powers and allow itself to be ordered about.
46.	The Chinese Government is in favour of convening a world conference on genuine disarmament. But there must be the necessary pre-conditions and clear aims for the conference. That is, all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against non-nuclear countries and in nuclear-weapon-free zones. For example, the Soviet Union should undertake obligations in respect of the nuclear-weapon-free zones in Latin America, and they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible for all countries big and small to discuss on an equal footing and with equanimity and to solve the questions of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and other questions free from any threat of force.
47.	Some people charge that China's position on the disarmament question is "either all or nothing". This is a distortion. One may ask, What difficulties are there for nuclear countries first of all to undertake the obligation, as the first step towards nuclear disarmament, that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against non-nuclear countries or in nuclear-weapon-free zones? Is this not a truly effective first step towards the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons? But these disarmament- advocating "saints" would not even agree to undertake this minimum obligation. Does this not suffice to show that they are actually imperialists who persist in arms expansion and aggression, menacing the people of the world and aspiring to world hegemony?
48.	The People's Republic of China is taking part in the activities of the United Nations for the third year. We wish to say frankly that what we have experienced in the United Nations has caused us to become worried. Speeches are multiplying and resolutions are piling up in the United Nations, yet the Organization has not been able to look into matters which it ought to — for instance, the question of the prevention of nuclear war — and it is impotent in the solution of many major world issues — for instance, the Middle East question. If things continue this way, what future is there for the United Nations? However, we are not disheartened. We believe that the present conditions in the United Nations should be changed and that the Charter should be revised. How can the United Nations go on working in the same old way it did more than 20 years ago, when the world has already changed? The third world has risen up. The United Nations must be able to give expression to the desires of the numerous small and medium-sized countries, truly to give effect to the principle of the equality of all countries big or small and to cease to be controlled by the super-Powers and their small number of followers if it is to be worthy of its name. China is ready to work together with all countries which love peace and uphold justice for the achievement of this noble aim.﻿Mr. President, let me begin by congratulating you most warmly on your election to this internationally very important post.

3.	I speak to you as a German and a European. To be more exact, my people live in two States, but they have not ceased to regard themselves as one nation. At the same time our part of Europe is as yet not much more than an economic community, but before the end of this decade it will grow into a European union.
4.	We-the representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany-are no strangers here. We have long participated in the work of the specialized agencies. We maintain good relations with nearly all Member States. Here, at United Nations Headquarters in New York, we have been shown much understanding in past years.
5.	I wish to take this opportunity to thank our friends who have spoken up for us in this forum when we were not in a position to speak for ourselves. We shall not forget on whom we were able to rely.
6.	But I would add immediately that we have not come here to use the United Nations as a wailing-wall for the German problems or to make claims we know cannot be met here in any case. Rather have we come to assume our
share in the responsibility for world affairs on the basis of our convictions and within the framework of our possibilities.
7.	The foundation of the United Nations and the most incisive break in German history were events which coincided in a dismal, though at the same time encouraging, manner. The recent history of my people is truly closely linked with the genesis of this world Organization.
8.	Since 1945, my people and the two German States have put a considerable distance behind them. And yet our gratification over the fact that we have been given a friendly welcome here is mitigated by the division of Europe, which is glaringly manifest in Germany and which, almost three decades after the end of the war, still claims its victims.
9.	Certainly, starting from that part of Europe which has been the source of so many tensions, we have initiated and developed a policy of understanding which was, and still is, to fill in the rifts left behind by the cold war.
10.	We have, I feel, seen in the meantime that not only tensions but also detente can be contagious.
11.	As the Federal Republic of Germany we shall-as our Foreign Minister emphasized here last week in internationally binding terms [2119th meeting] -seek to create a state of peace in Europe in which the German people also can regain their unity in free self-determination. I say this knowing very well-with all respect — that the United Nations cannot really help us in this matter.
12.	The two German States, belonging as they do to different political groupings and facing the problems resulting there from, have learned that their interrelationship is today of greater importance than what is known as the "national question". This applies to Europe in general.
13.	In spite of their different social and political systems, bound by treaty and conviction to different alliances, the two German States have resolved to embark on a policy of peaceful neighbourliness, coexistence and, we hope, cooperation. We shall therefore try to spell out peaceful coexistence German-style. But in view of the thoroughness which is said to be a German characteristic, I cannot promise that this will always be easy.
14.	More importantly, the consistent renunciation of force as a means of achieving aims, of furthering one's interests, and of settling differences, was the decisive factor needed to sow the seed of detente in the heart of Europe. The
Treaties of Moscow  and Warsaw,  the Treaty on the basis of our relations with the German Democratic Republic, the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin' of 3 September 1971, and soon, I hope, the treaty with Czechoslovakia, which has already been negotiated, are based on the renunciation of force.
15.	Berlin, in particular, displays constructive opportunities. It no longer needs to be a source of tension in the heart of Europe. West Berlin can bank on its interests being looked after by the Federal Republic of Germany and on its protection being ensured by the three Powers that, being the supreme authority, remain directly responsible for the city's security and status. If there is anyone to appreciate what this change means, it is most certainly the one who carried responsibility as Governing Mayor of Berlin during a critical phase of its history.
16.	Renunciation of force was one element of our peace policy; acceptance of the realities the other. Accepting things as they are has been a bitter pill f6r some, but it was necessary for the sake of peace. For the renunciation of force and the right attitude to reality are the two basic elements of concrete efforts to safeguard peace.
17.	This prepared the way for the next step. A new foundation is to be laid for security and co-operation in Europe.
18.	The bilateral renunciation of force encourages us to enter a second, multilateral phase of European diplomacy, the purpose of which will be to produce a real change in the relationship between the European States on the basis of what has come about. It will do so through growing security from military threat, through intensive economic and technological exchanges, through human contacts, through better knowledge of each other-in other words, through a state of everyday peace.
19.	It would indeed be a good thing if the work done in Helsinki and now being continued in Geneva could soon end with a conference convened at a level that is commensurate with the results achieved.
20.	What I am talking about here will one day be understood as a significant experiment: how States can learn to master conflicts and eliminate the use of force.
21.	And if we even succeed, by means of confidence- building measures, in reducing the tremendous wastage that has been the outcome of mistrust between antagonistic systems, we should then have set a historic example.
22.	Security cannot ensue from trust alone. This, too, is a reality. The reverse is also true. Confidence ensues from security.
23.	A distinguished American spoke in this city of the-as he called it-impending "nuclear death-dance". Well, the two super-Powers, which have in their hands by far the most powerful means of destruction, recently signed an agreement which some are still trying to fathom but which is quite certainly intended to obviate the death-dance. That agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union is oriented to the principle of renunciation of force and the recognition of realities. It is, as I understand it<a piece of active coexistence and surely also a response to the demands made by the non-nuclear-weapon States at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, held at Geneva in 1968. On that occasion, five years ago, the nuclear- weapon States were called upon to assume concrete obligations of their own. I still hold the view today that those who have power, particularly nuclear power, do not on that account have morality, or wisdom, on their side. Big dangers to mankind emanate from the big Powers, not from the small.
24.	A code of responsibilities should be defined to which the nuclear Powers should subject themselves.
25.	But if the two super-Powers do not guarantee peace, who could do so in their place? The responsibility of neither of the two I have mentioned can today be assumed by anyone else, and neither of them can relinquish that responsibility.
26.	Thus our world today finds its balance. But it cannot achieve that delicate balance without the specific weight of the People's Republic of China, of Japan and of the European Community. In such a system the specific role of Latin America, of the African countries, of the Asian subcontinent and the other partners in Asia becomes effective.
27.	Power, I feel, cannot be quantified at will. There is a limit to its expansion-a limit where power becomes transformed into impotence. But detente is not synonymous with disengagement, and it must by no means turn into disinterest if fresh tensions are not to be created.
28.	At the end of the cold war there can, in my view, be neither conquerors nor conquered. Truly, peace, if it is to be secured, must not call for victory of the one and defeat of the other, but only for the one victory of reason and moderation.
29.	Incidentally, the use or threat of force should be renounced by all States-regardless of whether they possess nuclear weapons or not. If we have the determination, and the luck, this can be achieved by means of an appropriate system of international agreements.
30.	The only legitimate exception would remain the right to individual and collective self-defence as embodied in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
31.	My Government is willing -- and I wish to state this clearly — to help bring about an agreement which is being prepared in the Atlantic Alliance in order to make possible a balanced reduction of forces and weapons systems. This will not be possible overnight, but we must get down to the job seriously and consistently.
32.	It is not only a question of giving Europe an opportunity. It is a question of giving the world an opportunity to create conditions which will permit us to turn our attention, and to devote our national energies, to the massive problems of tomorrow. If I may pose the question, If the world does not succeed in quelling force and violence and effectively proscribing it, how will it then be capable of resolving the problems of peace which — free and remote from force — will demand the employment of all our energies?
33.	In a world in which we are all increasingly dependent on each other, a policy for peace must not stop on our own doorstep. Small steps can, as experience has shown, take us quite a long way.
34.	To mediation and conciliation in disputes we attach special importance. The strengthening of international jurisdiction, the consolidation and further development of international law, require, in our opinion, the active attention of this Assembly.
35.	Our world is going through a process of rapid change. Many of its explosive problems and conflicts spread like epidemics, owing to the increasing proximity of States and continents. Conflicts can, as shown by the terrorism of the present time which either does not want to use or is incapable of using political means, have unforeseeable consequences owing to the vulnerability of highly developed societies.
36.	The catch phrase "preventive conflict research", the prerequisite to "preventive diplomacy" as it is called, is born of the realization that it is no longer sufficient to investigate the so-called classical motives of disputes — and here I mean motives such as territorial claims, ideological domination, nationalistic ambitions, the temptations of imperialist dominance, the flaws in security systems, disturbances of the balance of power.
37.	I am not preaching an existence free from conflict and free from tension. That would be an anaemic illusion. What I have in mind is the fruitless and negative conflicts which confirm to us every day that man, afraid of man, is capable of destroying himself. This opens up new and deeper areas of responsibility for conflict research.
38.	I wish to state with all due clarity that human distress is conflict. Where hunger prevails, there can be no peace in the long run. Where bitter poverty prevails, there can be no justice. Where a man's very existence is threatened for want of basic daily needs, it is not permissible to speak of security. There must not be resignation in the face of destitution.
39.	"Non-violence" is a concept we owe to the man who awakened a great Member country in this Assembly; the force of that doctrine has not diminished. But the realities of today require it to be complemented by an opposite statement of fact, namely, that there is violence through tolerance, intimidation through indolence, threat through passiveness, manslaughter through immobility. We must not stop on this threshold, for it may be the threshold between survival and decline.
40.	I did not make the personal acquaintance of that President of a Latin American country who lost his life through the recent coup. But I wish to emphasize most strongly that this type of solution is not the answer. Or, if you like, unfortunately it can be. But then one day it will be said that reform could only come from revolution because changes were not otherwise accepted.
41.	We are becoming more and more conscious of the limits of the globe. We must not ruthlessly exhaust its resources lest we condemn ourselves to slow suicide. We must not allow the globe's biological cycles to be poisoned any further.
42.	It is surely no coincidence that man today, having seen his planet from out of the depths of space, is becoming conscious of the material and biological dependence of the inhabitants of this so very small spaceship, Earth. Not only within individual countries but also on a world basis we shall — if we want to live in freedom and security-in future have to go without some things which, though economically profitable, are of questionable social value. And some of the things which appear to be economically unprofitable have become indispensable to the existence of a modern society.
43.	I know that there is a tendency in some developing countries to regard the dearth of raw materials as a special kind of political opportunity, for it may here and there swing the pendulum in highly industrialized countries from surplus to shortage. But I say this: this is no ground for satisfaction. These are problems which concern us all, and not just those who come after us.
44.	We must soberly appreciate that the resources of this world will suffice to give posterity an existence worthy of the modern concept of the quality of life only if we keep population growth within responsible limits and only if we achieve a larger measure of social justice in the world.
45.	The depressing food situation in many parts of the world requires us to draft a world food plan so that, if in any way possible, catastrophes can be prevented by means of an integrating strategy for the production of food and its distribution.
46.	Let me emphasize that we must not only establish, and very quickly, what food is needed to keep large sections of mankind from hunger, but also whether States are prepared to accept the rules required to that end.
47.	On the other hand, and at the same time, we must establish what raw materials we need in order to guarantee the quality of our civilization and to improve it where possible.
48.	Let me say quite frankly that, morally, it makes no difference whether a man is killed in war or is condemned to starve to death by the indifference of others. I repeat: it makes no difference morally. We shall have to decide to break with the ritualistic traditions; who proscribes war also has to proscribe hunger.
49.	The United Nations, built in response to the challenge of an almost total world war, is the mirror of an age-old dream of mankind. That dream closely matches the hopes of eternal peace cherished by the nations.
50.	But the Members having some 30 years of United Nations training here know at least as well as we newcomers that 1945 did not see the start of the millennium. Unfortunately, the United Nations has not-at least not yet-crystallized into the nucleus of a world government.
51.	And yet mankind has brought into this Assembly of nations not only its goodwill but also many of its problems. There is not a single Member nation that left its history at home when it came here, indeed did not find its identity confirmed to some extent in this unwieldy design for a republic of nations.
52.	I perceive here a convergence of the perspectives of all continents. To comprehend and to respect the diversity of life and its systems, to enable it to present itself freely, to set up standards to that end which are binding for all — this seems to me to be the mandate of the United Nations for civilization, also in future. That is our hope, at any rate.
53.	It is this very diversity which gives us the right to speak of a world society. This diversity is bound up in the tension between equal sovereignty and mutual dependence in this one, troubled world.
54.	Some of the criticism directed at the United Nations sounds bitter and cynical, is filled with an almost jubilant pessimism, as if it stemmed from a secret hope that the weaknesses of the Organization would refute the idea of it and its purpose. But setbacks in pursuit of an ideal do not necessarily prove that that ideal is wrong, but often merely that the road to it could be better.
55.	In this respect many of the goals which the Organization has set itself have not been achieved — the goals set in the Second World War and in 1945.1 want to say that in all frankness. But we also know that this Organization has been able to prevent a great deal of misery, misfortune and death.
56.	Here in this institution arguments of reason and morality have time and again and untiringly been proclaimed, arguments which have prohibited this step into the abyss. The United Nations is not a clinic where our peoples can be cured of their neuroses by patient world doctors. Yet it can help to create more solidarity among nations.
57.	That solidarity is the fundamental requirement of a world society, and it is the prerequisite to its survival. That is my deep conviction. I am not speaking of the Utopian realm of the equality of all nations and of all men. But anyone who has never dreamt this dream of equality knows little of the will for justice which, beyond all barriers of continents, race and religion, is perhaps the true binding power among us human beings.
58.	There is solidarity, but not enough of it. I ask for more sympathy for the victims of armed conflicts that threaten to break out anew in this or that corner of the world. But neither should we forget the victims of non-war which sometimes can be just as brutal. On the road to world citizenship we must practice solidarity. We shall not be able to speak of a humane world order until the principle of justice is universally understood.
59.	Permit me to say on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany that we shall support United Nations resolutions aimed at liquidating the anachronistic remnants of colonialism. This applies not least to our neighbouring continent of Africa. Without any addition and without any reservation I declare that we condemn racism as inhuman and as the cause of the most terrible crimes. Our own history has been a bitter experience on that score.
60.	Moreover, those who take their place in this Assembly must also adopt a position on the moral aspects of international coexistence even when their own national interests are not directly affected. In this process they come face to face with two recognized principles both of which serve the cause of peace: the first is the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of others; the other is the principle of the universality of human rights. Not only States but also individual citizens can invoke the fundamental rights embodied in the United Nations Charter. It is peace that benefits if people and information can move as freely as possible across boundaries.
61.	I would add that if we speak our mind on violations of individual human rights, on the suppression of the freedom to express critical opinions, on artificial barriers at national frontiers to the exchange of people and information, the decisive criterion for that attitude will not be whether the offender is an ally or one with whom we have friendly contractual ties, or whether it is a less friendly Power. What matters is that we do not remain indifferent on these questions — even if some details should at first sight or in general be hard to assess,
62.	A policy of peace, solidarity and renunciation of force is indivisible. The conflict in South-East Asia has not yet burnt itself out and the smouldering conflict in the Middle East has not yet been defused. In both cases the main thing is that those concerned should talk, not shoot.
63.	I wish to stress our interest in a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Middle East. That is the interest of the Federal Republic of Germany. My Government shares the hope that the international community will not relinquish the possibilities of mediation. My Government also feels that it is primarily direct peace talks between the Arab countries concerned and Israel that v will  best secure a balance of the elementary interests of both sides.
64.	The struggle for peace and the fight against misery require us to recognize that in the one world we live in our fate is, after all, indivisible. Here, too, mankind is therefore under the compulsion to establish solidarity. Where else than in this United Nations should we be able to discuss freely new forms of vital co-operation?
65.	No nation should live at the expense of another. Anyone who refuses to accept this principle may be the instrument of our having to pay dearly for. it. National egoism is no shield. On the contrary, it is an obstacle to that very solidarity which, in the last report, is the best guardian of natural and legitimate national interests as well.
66.	We should not speak of "young" and "old" nations. It is more realistic to distinguish between young and old nationalisms. Ours, in Europe, are old, although a century or two are only a couple of short breaths in history. But believe me, the wild dream that the destiny of a nation can be fulfilled only in unbridled nationalism has in our case completely faded away. We learned from painful experience that there have to be more rational, more reliable forms for the lives* of nations-and that such forms actually exist, namely, good neighbourliness.
67.	The countries of Western Europe have resolved to establish the first regional community that is more than a classical alliance and at the same time does not imply that its members subject themselves to a ideological rules. Our aim is to achieve if possible in this decade the union of our economies, our currencies, our social systems and our foreign policies, and - as dictated to us by the signs of our time -- our security.
68.	The membership of the Federal Republic which I represent, also strengthens the presence of Europe in the United Nations. We are sure it will also be of benefit to others.
69.	The European Community, we hope, can become an example of economic achievement and social balance. It establishes itself as a power without imperial pretensions. The European union will be a power of peace and will be outward-looking.
70.	The Federal Republic of Germany has declared in its Constitution its willingness to transfer sovereign rights to supranational organizations and it has placed international law above national law and made it directly applicable. This expresses the realization that the sovereignty of the individual and of nations can be secured only in larger communities, that the meaning and fulfilment of history can no longer be attributed to the nation-State.
71.	Thus I end my speech with a plea: let us all together be on our guard against making sacred a concept which I regard as perhaps the most dubious legacy of European history: nationalism, which has claimed millions and millions of human lives and under whose banner fertile country has been devastated, thriving cities destroyed, peoples exterminated, and a whole civilization — our own- nearly swept away.
72.	Europe has ceased to pretend that it is the measure of things for the rest of the world. But it has occasion to warn the nations of the world about the great error which almost brought about its destruction: negative nationalism. And I believe we have to a large extent shaken off that hypnosis.
73.	The nation no longer finds its security in isolated sovereignty. In actual fact, isolation creates dependencies which have ceased to have anything to do with enlightened sovereignty. We need the larger community which gives us peace, security and, hence, freedom.
74.	There is, perhaps, not yet "the world free from war" nor "the world-wide rule of reason" enunciated by the President of the United States on 26 June 1945 after the proclamation of the United Nations Charter in San Francisco's opera house. But mankind must not allow itself to become paralysed in the face of gigantic, seemingly insoluble problems. What we need now is a programme of new confidence in man's abilities.
75.	Therefore, I make this plea.
76.	Let us courageously and jointly venture forth on a new road to the great goals of eliminating conflicts, bringing armaments under control, making peace safer.
77.	Let us courageously and jointly fight for universal recognition of the renunciation of force as a principle for the solution of political problems.
78.	Let us courageously and jointly-and I hope we will be many-work untiringly to ensure that human rights and fundamental freedoms are respected and may be exercised all over the world.
79.	Let us courageously and jointly-and I hope we will be many-fight to defend the right of nations freely to decide their own destiny and to ensure that the remnants of colonialism are removed and that all forms of racism are banned.
80.	Let us courageously and jointly promote the further development of international law, in particular by an effective convention against terrorism.
81.	Let us courageously and jointly do what is necessary to sustain the viability of the world we live in by protecting the natural environment and-partly by intensifying and widening scientific exchanges — securing for mankind conditions of a quality that will make life worth living.
82.	And let us courageously and jointly, in addition to our endeavours to foster the further development of world trade, make fresh efforts to intensify economic cooperation and development; and, above all, let us in this way combine all our energies and declare war irrevocably on hunger around the world.
83.	Man's ability to apply his faculty of reason has made the United Nations possible. Man's propensity for being irrational makes it necessary. Reason will have won the field if one day all States and regions come to live and work together as world neighbours in accordance with the principles of the United Nations.
84.	That will not happen in my lifetime, but I want to do what I can to make it possible. And I exhort us all to give every assistance we can, progressing step by step, to ease the task of future generations.﻿1. Mr. President, in these last days of the general debate I should like to pay a tribute to the authority and distinction with which you are presiding over our work.
2.	I shall be relatively brief, for I wish to avoid repetition and, besides, I have no taste or desire for making propaganda. But I would prefer that the truth should prevail even if it should emerge as the truth which is obvious on the banks of the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne and the Rhone, the four principal rivers of my country.
3.	This debate is drawing to a close without surprises, except those that we have ceaselessly warned against, and without excesses. Everyone is gratified by this, even if, in order to achieve it, one had to keep silent on many questions and take for granted what is merely adumbrated in the same way that a fad secures a grip upon minds before it prevails in the streets.
4.	You will no doubt understand what I am referring to. To speak of peace does not call for any great precision. On the other hand, to invoke detente, to believe in it as one would believe in spring when one suddenly comes upon it around the bend after winter, would seem to warrant more assiduity and curiosity. Who does not wish for detente, or could reject it?
5.	At the risk of causing irritation, I would remind you that we have had a long experience of detente and the concept thereof. For the last 15 years it has been the concern of our foreign policy. Judge for yourselves: decolonization; the establishment of East-West relations; friendly and active co-operation with the Soviet Union; the fundamental treaty between France and Germany in 1963; the building of a European entity; as early as 1964, understanding of, and respect for, China, to which the President, of the French Republic has, as you know, just completed a trip; unfailing support for the third world, for the independence of nations and for a more equitable distribution of resources, and, to take a current example, for the harmony of the Comoro islands with their destiny. All these things protect us from naivete, but they have shown us that lucidity and generosity should always go hand in hand.
6.	Meanwhile, we learn that 1973 is to be primarily the year of detente. And reference is made to this at every turn, as if a single year were sufficient to meet its needs and as if this year promised exceptional developments. To be quite truthful, I see but two such events — much discussed, but the full expression of which is not yet completely manifest and of which the consequences, you will agree, are not yet entirely known.
7.	In the first place, I see the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. It is, of course, as we all know, not yet concluded. Its principal merit consists in its having gathered together 33 European countries and the United States and Canada. Apart from this essential fact, the results, if they are good, will be, as it were, thrown into the bargain. They will, furthermore, serve the concept of detente mainly by representing compromises between opposing stands that could not have been developed at leisure. In the long run, the contents will matter less than the way in which they were obtained. For our part, we are doing all we can to ensure the success of the Conference, and I am sure that this is well known.
8.	This Conference is therefore an important fact, an unaccustomed event, unusual in recent international practice; it is a development that is comforting to note. For all that, it is not the Eden of detente, it does not represent the alpha and omega of conciliation. It is a joint effort, an arduous effort that is the business of all. It is a state of mind that is being born — a miracle indeed! — among the poisonous flowers of the arms race, which remains, however, fraught with the mistrust and the ambitions to which it gives rise.
9.	Let us therefore be reasonable in our appreciation, cautious in our enthusiasm, and realistic in our behaviour. Let us not allow ourselves to be trapped in the all-too-easy syllogism: the Conference serves the idea of detente; detente can serve to nourish all speeches; therefore, he who refers to the Conference is, assuredly, one who practises detente.
10.	Furthermore on 22 June last, the United States and the Soviet Union published the news of an agreement they had reached on nuclear strategy. That agreement is but a 
beginning and is to be followed up, so it is stated, in 1974. Its authors were gratified and they invited the whole world to share in their gratification. Why? Because this undoubtedly is an agreement between two very great Powers and it consequently concerns us all — or rather it affects us all, because it can be clothed in the chaste cloak of detente. Those two reasons are not sufficient to mask the reality that has gradually become apparent to all. In order to avoid bankruptcy, and with political considerations in mind, the two Powers have preferred to limit the development of some of their nuclear armaments while at the same time maintaining a sufficiently strong mutual vulnerability to deter each other from upsetting the balance.
11.	Thus, this type of detente would be limited to such an exercise in balancing between the two treaty partners. When children fight, one often notices that the strongest avoid a head-on clash with each other and instead attack the lightest-weight members of the other gang, who can be easily knocked down by a few simple blows. It is the same with nations. And if the light-weight nations are at present worried, how can anyone be surprised? The only surprising thing is that it has taken them so long to become nervous, finding themselves with a mere rifle in their hands while the pressures and presences remain the same at their frontiers. All that one very famous actress wore was perfume. I fear that, so scantily clothed by detente alone, we still run the risk of shivering.
12.	My analysis of the recent months would perhaps have been rather less cruel in so far as detente is concerned —  detente is, after all, a French word which we have endowed with its full significance by our actions — had it not been for the fact that certain slanderous campaigns have sought to cast slurs upon our very idea of national independence, shared by so many others.
13.	The past and geography have taught us lessons that we are not likely to forget. We are like prey that has been so often hunted that the hunter can no longer approach. Illusions, wars, more illusions and war again: this has been our fate. Henceforth, we rely primarily on ourselves, on our own efforts. I cannot imagine anyone, unless he is under an illusion, who could think of making us renounce this.
14.	We have been distressed, I would say hurt, to hear from our friends or from peoples for whom we have affection statements made here or there whose lack of reality in comparison with the facts or the actual situation in the world seems surprising to me. Even more surprising are the steps which have been taken to convince us that the questions at issue are mere figures of speech that we are wrong to feel uneasy about, but merely justified by the domestic considerations of a sovereign State.
15.	Can one really deal so lightly with a serious matter of concern to us all? Because it is a matter of national independence for a nation which does not want to be the pawn of world strategy. In its turn, after many others, and left to its own resources France provided itself with nuclear armaments, not in order to indulge in dreams of grandeur, but because its every existence was at stake. Alone, we covered the ground of difficult research, with a considerable time lag. And today some people are indignant that we have dared to tread this path, which is presumably the royal way reserved to those who today hold power; that we have placed our footsteps in their tracks, such deep tracks. And yet what protests did their actions give rise to? I look for them in vain.
16.	Nowadays one is less modest, doubtless because one knows that with France, a peaceful Power whose only ambition is to live in harmony with all and not to be taken by surprise, one does not run a great risk. Well, one does in fact.
17.	I shall not refer to the risk of ridicule. But a risk one is essentially exposed to is the risk of not understanding that one is being manipulated, used, propelled against one's own interests. And more serious still is the risk of being wholly mistaken in one's analysis of the world situation, to have understood nothing, with gaping mouth and, unfortunately, closed eyes. Finally, there is the risk of opposing the will for independence, which should be that of all peace- loving peoples and which France is convinced it is serving while ensuring its own destiny as a free nation.
18.	We shall at least preserve a vivid memory of the moment of collective blindness in which some have foundered, dragging down with them, by means of false evidence, some quarters of public opinion whose irrational fears were nursed at leisure. And we shall therefore abide by our conduct so that our fate cannot be settled except by ourselves, since from now on everyone can realize that we cannot disappear without damage to others.
19.	And again, we are convinced, we are sure, that by so doing we are strengthening the ground on which Europe must be built by affirming our steadfastness, our independence, our determination not to slacken our defence efforts.
20.	How could I avoid, after all, referring to Europe? Everyone quite rightly wonders, does Europe already exist, and particularly in the consciousness of others rather than in the consciousness of Europe itself? Is it something that is really going to exist? I refer to it only as a citizen of one of the States that go to make it up, attached like so many others to those landscapes and those shores which have borne witness to such diverse activity and been the scene of so much meditation. I speak about Europe only from a certain memory of the past and with the reasonable hope of a more just, more secure and fuller life.
21.	I am sure that this is the deep aspiration of all those European peoples who live on an exiguous territory, densely populated, closely partitioned, the internal boundaries of which are crumbling a little more each day, yielding to the thrust of time — a universal phenomenon.
22.	There is no collective will or power here; only the certainty that in joining forces everything will eventually become simpler, even if the path towards it is not entirely mapped out. This effort might perhaps also warrant the fair name of detente, the effort that nine States, often so different, pursue tirelessly in order to bury antagonisms, adjust their policies, and ensure their well-being. It would warrant being hailed often from this rostrum, and even better to be encouraged from the bottom of people's hearts. It would warrant an organization such as the United Nations showing it henceforth less indifference. Finally, it would warrant an appreciation of the extent to which Europe undoubtedly would be useful to the international order because, besides the virtues of its own joining of forces, Europe would become a pole of peace in a world drifting from one spell of vertigo to another.
23.	Recently in Copenhagen, "the Nine" — as they have become known these days — agreed to define their common identity among themselves and to express with one voice their opinion on an important matter — their relationship with the United States — as they have already done in other cases, for example the Conference on European security. There is nothing unwonted in such behaviour nor is there in the approaches which are to follow, because some State or other will also have wished to establish such a dialogue. There is nothing unwonted either if, in the weeks to come, a common view is expressed within the framework of the Atlantic alliance, where thinking is going on in the light of world developments.
24.	Perhaps even, but I do not want to dream too much, the latter will have to take into account this common will which may animate European countries so that a more equitable and better shared universal order may prevail.
25.	A more equitable and better shared universal order: it is there that genuine detente will truly be able to flourish.
26.	As long as the independence of everyone is not fully recognized and respected, as long as the living conditions of every country are not made more secure, where indeed is detente?
27.	Does it not lie in the restoration of international monetary regulations, which would give equal opportunities to all, and in a stability without which the weaker will be trampled underfoot?
28.	Does it not lie in the establishment of normal trade practices that would limit emergency measures which have an unexpected effect on markets?
29.	Does it not lie in a rational, generous and far-reaching concept of production and trade, which would share major commodities equally between producers and consumers?
30.	Does it not lie in the establishment of an international code defining the rights and obligations of each State in the world commercial order?
31.	There is nothing new left to be said about these topics. Should one be irritated at the fact that nothing can yet be put down to the credit of international co-operation? Should one be irritated that the monetary organization has been smashed to smithereens under the pressure of its own deficiencies? Should we be irritated that the selfishness of nations hinders any progress towards agreements on primary commodities? Should we be irritated at the fact that shortage is replacing affluence, that the forecasts of technicians are not borne out by the facts and that humble and innumerable lives, often wrecked by hurricanes and droughts, are also suffering from unforeseen vicissitudes, the origin of which they do not know, and that even squander the slender resources of days of starvation?
32.	Should one allow onself to become disheartened enough to accept the false pretences, the abortive texts, the proposals which aim at politics and not at the well-being of our fellow men?
33.	For our part, we shall continue crying out certain truths, perhaps in the wilderness of some meetings which are too densely packed with words. We shall continue, by our national action, and also in Europe with our partners,, and everywhere in the world where we are bound by ties of history and friendship, we shall continue to affirm that stability, generosity, responsibility, respect for others are concepts without which there can be no monetary or commercial future for the world, without which there would be just one single prospect: that of bitterness and violence.
34.	In this year of 1973, it would have been easy, had one wished, to restore equanimity to the whole world. Away from dialectics which cause one to lose sight of realities and which deflect the deep inclination for peace of peoples, could not those who claim to bear the highest responsibilities have found the path to true glory?
35.	However, only interested motives, too well-understood and thoroughly weighed, seem to have guided their thoughts and actions. Take South-East Asia — where the fighting is taking so long to be extinguished after having been endless — and on other frontiers where it is still the eve of battle, with sudden outbursts.
36.	There is the Middle East where the situation, one had been told, was under control. And so why should it change? And being so sure of tomorrow one had left until tomorrow what should have been done today. And the results are there for all to see. Did not so much certainty, such assurance, warrant the present being dealt with before the irreparable occurred?
37.	Let us hope that those conflicts of another era —  anachronistic to the point that they last without causing inconvenience except, unfortunately, for the suffering populations — will cease. Let us hope that the collective conscience will be heeded before they go astray who, in keeping with their tremendous present responsibilities, must quickly understand the friendly and urgent message that we put to friends that they be inspired by tolerance and prompted by the will to concerted action not only in their own meetings, but also in their relations with all peoples who, in their powerlessness, follow the progress of such merciless games.
38.	On the subject of those absurd, ruthless, unfair wars, my country has long since, over and over again, voiced its views and stated its policies. Therefore I shall not dwell on that.
39.	In this assembly of nations we have many friends. We feel a community of thought with many peoples, many States, young or old, which, like us, are seeking their way in order to assert their dignity by themselves assuming the responsibility for their destinies.
40.	We believe with them that this rostrum, this international gathering, this periodic and organized pooling of world preoccupations are indispensable so that peoples souls may sometimes throb and that some cries may be uttered here and there; and these, heard by the multitude, may so animate them that nothing will ever be as before; so that falsehood may lose its assurance, that indifference may finally come to be tinged with concern; and that those who make demands and claims may also heed the voice of responsibility; that friendship may cease to be a matter of subservience and influence cease to be burdensome; that the veiled but ever-present threat may no longer weigh on people's minds and hearts, and that from now on, nobody may dare to give expression to it.
41.	I myself, prepared this speech several days ago. Before coming here today I changed nothing except the tenses of two verbs, from the present to the past, and inserted two phrases quite spontaneously.
42.	This address is a statement of our policy, a statement of its concepts, duration and determination. I delete nothing. I add nothing to it.
43.	But since last Saturday, fighting has been resumed and all the evidence indicates that it is particularly bloody. I offer the assistance of my country so that the war may quickly subside and not flare up again. We could make suggestions to contribute to a peaceful settlement on condition that everyone wants this and really wants a just and lasting peace. I am convinced that our European friends share this wish. I hope that these sincere wishes are not offered in vain﻿118.	Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to join with my colleagues in congratulating you on your high office. Ecuador will rightly feel a reflected glory.
119.	Sir, I have spoken on many occasions in this Assembly and have usually felt it right to deal with the main topical and urgent issues in the field of international affairs. I do not intend to do this today. Many of them, it is true, remain as difficult and contentious as ever, but they will feature on the agenda of the various Committees of this Assembly and the views of the British Government will be explained when they come up for discussion. All of them should be soluble by patient bilateral diplomacy, assisted as the need arises — and it arises more often day by day-by the conciliation machinery of this United Nations organization for conciliation. This must be the order of the day in the middle of this twentieth century. Now, however, I wish to concentrate only on two major long-term problems in the world, both profound and in the long run decisive in terms of what I shall call in shorthand the problems between East and West and North and South.
120.	The first duty laid upon the United Nations is to maintain international peace and security. We have had a deeply troubled century. Twenty-one years after the First World War the world was just beginning to recover from the appalling carnage when it all started all over again. It is now 28 years since the ending of the Second World War. So far we have avoided a global holocaust, although at all times the situation has been saved only by knife-edge diplomacy. But there are signs at long last that we are just starting to learn. Whether peace has been forced upon us by the realization of the ultimate horror of the nuclear weapon, or whether the miseries of two world wars have taught us the bitter lesson that war solves nothing, unless it is that in the main the innocent pay the penalty, or whether the United Nations, if it has not preserved peace, has helped men to talk themselves into a more sober mood in which they realize that there are no slick answers to the modern problems of this world. Perhaps it is in fact a mixture of all three. But the hope must be that one way or another at this moment of time-late, it is true, but better late than never-the lesson of the futility of violence is being learned.
121.	Herr Brandt just now said that we should talk, not shoot, and as a European I stand here to say that it was that failure in Europe which very nearly led to the destruction of our continent; and that, surely, should be a lesson for all.
122.	In his thoughtful introduction to his report on the work of the Organization the Secretary-General rightly reminds us that while it is easy to criticize the limitations of the United Nations in matters affecting peace and security, the Organization, and particularly the Security Council, does have to its credit real achievements in defusing disputes. Of that at least we should remind ourselves lest we lose heart. But he would be a bold man who would say that an era of universal peace is within our grasp. War, although contained, is still with us. Man has not solved his basic needs for security, for food and for shelter. At this time of the twentieth century I think we ought to remind ourselves that there is no excuse for these shortcomings apart from prejudice, fear and suspicion, for we have all the technical means that we need to provide for man's very modest needs.
123.	Since 1945 the international scene has been dominated by the problems arising from the totally different social, economic and political systems of the East and West and from the aftermath of rapid decolonization. In East- West relations there have been periods of comparative calm and moments of acute peril. Coexistence has been preached. But it has meant different things to different people and the shock waves of tension between the Communists and the rest have spread, and the impact has been felt world-wide. Those who have wished to avoid the contagion of the rivalry of the great Powers have not always been able to do so. The rigid confrontation of the major Powers and the continuing escalation of force and counter- force was not only a source of grave danger in itself to the countries in the Northern Hemisphere but, worse perhaps, also paralysed the use of common resources and stultified the economic development of nations much further afield - nations that otherwise would have been able to do something to bridge the gap between the developed and the developing countries.
124. Now, at long last, these preoccupations seem to be yielding to a wider perspective. It is not, of course, easy for Communists and the rest to live together and work together when philosophy and practice are so different, but, at long last, at least there are signs of flexibility. The United States has established a relationship with China. The Soviet Union and the United States have softened the edges of their bilateral relations. It became possible for serious negotiations to begin between the Western Allies and the East over the future of Berlin. The two German States have made real progress in their joint discussions and are now both Members of this Organization-a historic step, which my Government welcomes-and if it is followed up with tolerance and with generosity this will undoubtedly have beneficial effects in Europe. The European Community, now enlarged, is finding its own identity and looks outward to fruitful contacts with the rest of the world; and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has met and defined an agenda for work leading towards detente. Up till now it is no more than that, but lest we are to despair, we must recognize it as a start in reconciliation and try to build further upon it. That being said, I must make it clear that detente must be real and not an illusion. Lip service to detente which evaporates at the first test is a trap. Like so much in life it is the will to work together for the highest common factor that counts and certainly as far as my Government is concerned the will is there. Our strong desire is that, however difficult it may be, the two political systems should live together not only without enmity but in broad accord. We will therefore take risks for peace, but at the same time we will not be duped by empty declarations into jeopardizing our security and our chosen way of life which goes with it. I would echo the words of Mr. Kissinger a few days ago [2124th meeting]: my country, like his, seeks true peace, not an armistice. Let us, therefore, share our ideas, share our resources and share our cultures. Let us resolve not to undermine but to understand, not to confront but to reconcile. We-that is, the East and the West-will have the chance to put these sentiments to the test in phase two of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. I trust that the Communist countries will be able to prove that they care for the basic freedoms of people everywhere; for, I say with great respect, it is people, not bits of paper, that politics, national and international, are about. We will try to respond in a constructive spirit in phase two of that
Conference, remembering always that, as Mr. Andersen has just reminded us-and I think it is too often forgotten-that politics are also about the quality of life.
125.	The other division in the world-the division between the rich and the poor countries-is just as profound and just as likely to breed tension. This is essentially an economic rather than an ideological division. Even if there was no conflict between East and West, and even if this conflict had not sometimes spread to the third world, we would still face the great human problems caused by the vast difference between the living standards of the developing and the developed countries because of the accidents of time. I understand the emotions which break out from time to time in the wake of the colonial era. But we have a situation now in this modern world which requires not slogans, however tempting, but cool, rational analysis and a realistic assessment of what can be done under a number of headings: investment, credit, commodity arrangements, debt, aid and trade. They are all relevant to the relationship between the rich and the poor countries and during this session of the General Assembly we shall be discussing the first review and appraisal of the progress of the Second United Nations Development Decade, and I hope it is these things-and I will repeat them: investment, credit, commodity arrangements, debt, aid and trade-which will be the subjects of analysis and, if possible, of agreement. We shall not agree on every aspect of these and of other subjects. Important interests of both developing and developed countries are involved and prima facie at times they seem to diverge but, again, if one looks at each one separately under those headings that I have listed, it will almost always be proved by careful analysis that the interests of the developed and the developing are complementary and not antagonistic. Our common deliberations, therefore, will be fruitful only in so far as we make a deliberate attempt to find the common interest and act on it to a point where we all can see that we can gain as well as give. We must simply not allow politics to intervene to hamper or cripple the fine economic prospects for ordinary people in developing and developed countries. I conclude from this that the key word for the future of economic development is "partnership". Let us recognize the situation for what it is and work together to put it right. In short, the less emotion there is, the quicker we shall get on. For partnership to work it is necessary that each understand the realities which limit the possibilities for action of the other.
126.	We are-and again I make no apology for reminding the Assembly of this-we are dealing with human beings, not with units on the economist's slide rule. So the developed countries must understand the right of the newly emerging countries to be master of their own fate, to control their economic, political and social destinies. What else is nationhood about? And in turn it should be clear that politicians in countries like my own which are governed by a parliamentary democracy have to satisfy their electors that the money which is deliberately being diverted from them is not only being well spent for the benefit of the recipients but to the long-term advantage for all. We in the Western countries-and here I can speak especially for the enlarged European Community-are tackling these questions with energy. The European summit conference last autumn gave to the outside world a high place in its programme. But we can be really successful only if we can move forward with the developing countries in a spirit and practice of partnership and create an atmosphere of mutual purpose and of mutual trust. So I repeat, partnership in this age and day is the key word to success.
127.	We also have undertaken to transfer economic resources and expertise to developing countries and are doing so on an expanding scale. But the word "transfer" means just what it says, at least in the short term. Money and resources, in other words, which would otherwise be available to the donor country are transferred for the benefit of another and I would invite the developing countries to recognize the problems of presentation which, for example, we in the United Kingdom have when we are speaking to our own electors. We could do a lot ourselves with the £300 million or so which we agree to transfer to others. We are willing to forgo these advantages for ourselves, but the transfer of resources must be seen to be directly related to the achievement of general prosperity all round. That is the only condition we make, but I think it is reasonable.
128.	My country continues to attach high importance to aid. Our official aid flow has steadily increased. In the two years between 1970 and 1972 it rose by nearly half &s much again and it is our intention that it should continue to grow. I was interested, in this context of aid and investment, in what Mr. Gromyko had to say yesterday [2126th meeting], and in particular in his proposal for a 10 per cent reduction in the military expenditure of the leading Powers [A/9191]. My recollections in this Assembly go back some way, and I thought I had recollected having heard this before. I was right. In 1958 the Soviet spokesman stated:
"The Soviet Government's proposal is to reduce the military budgets of the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France by 10 to 15 per cent and use part of the savings so effected for assistance to the under-developed countries."
That was debated. It did not at that time find favour, for reasons which I think were then valid — how do you measure, for example, military budgets?  — and which may still be valid now but I am not concerned in prejudging what the decision on this proposal may be not in 1958, but in 1973. But I would not like it to be thought that in other countries things have stood still on this front of aid and investment. For example, in terms of international aid our contribution in the United Kingdom is many times greater than that of the Soviet Union and, incidentally, it so happens that our total aid is already about 10 per cent of our expenditure of defence. In other words, as far as the United Kingdom is concerned, this is a field in which we should welcome more competition from the Soviet Union and from other countries.
129.	There is, of course, the question of how much of the total flow of resources could be met by official aid and how much by private investment. Whatever the proportions achieved, it will remain true that the private investment will play a significant role in development and I would remind this Assembly of the Pearson report, which says as follows and I quote:
"There can be no doubt about the contribution which private capital can render to economic development. Indeed, dollar for dollar, it may be more effective than official aid . .. ."
It is of course important that private investment should be properly integrated into the development plans and priorities of the host country. Investors should involve the nationals of the recipient State to the maximum, strive for maximum participation of local capital and reinvest a fair proportion of the profits in the enterprises of the country's enterprise which is concerned. But there is a reverse side to any coin and, as the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade put it, developing countries should bear in mind the importance of the attraction of foreign capital of conditions conducive to sustained investment. The plain fact is that private investment will not flow to the countries which do not provide the conditions in which it can bear fruit. It is therefore necessary once again to underline and emphasize that it is necessary to create an atmosphere of partnership if enough resources are to be transferred from those who have them to those who have not to make any real impact at all on the gap between the developed and the developing countries; and this applies both to official aid and to private investment.
130.	A pre-condition, therefore, of success is that we must get away from the concept of conflict, whether ideological or racial. We have a common and a material interest in this and it is our joint responsibility as leaders of opinion to see to it that our peoples understand the destructive implications of actions and words which are designed to fuel the fires of intolerance and, by contrast, realize the benefits which flow from partnership which is open and trustful.
131.	I cannot accept that the greater East-West detente must somehow be at the expense of the developing world. The reverse should be the case. If detente means anything, it must entail a liberation of resources from both East and West  —  a liberation of resources for more constructive ends. In a sense, the problems of the relationship between East and West and between the developing and the developed countries are linked, and success in dealing with the one will ease the anxieties of the other. When problems exist they can either be approached in an atmosphere of tension and conflict, as if a solution can be reached only by the victory of one side and the defeat of the other, or they can be faced in the belief that reconciliation and partnership is possible and should be pursued with relentless purpose and vigour. This Organization-I believe we ought to remind ourselves - was founded on the latter premise. That was the basis and the inspiration of the Charter. Until now it has

been confounded by political distrust and, for the reasons of which I have spoken, we have left undone much that ought to have been done together. It is in the basic belief that man has the capacity to reject his baser instincts and accept the disciplines inherent in reconciliation that we in this Assembly should formulate our policies and lead our peoples.﻿122.	Mr. President, I bring to you and to all our colleagues assembled here the greetings and good wishes of the Government and the people of India. I extend to you our warmest congratulations on your accession to the high office of President of the General Assembly. In selecting you as its candidate for President, the continent of Latin America has shown its appreciation of your ability and experience and has helped the Assembly in choosing a man whose faith, competence and devoted services to the United Nations can assure us of a successful session. You can always depend on the full co-operation of my delegation in carrying out your tasks as President.
123.	I should like to record our appreciation of the outgoing President, Mr. Trepczynski of Poland, for the skill and patience with which he discharged his responsibilities. With his leadership we accomplished much that was valuable in the work of the United Nations.
124.	Our distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, has now been in office for nearly two years. We have admired his dynamism, and the sense of purpose he has brought to his work. We look forward to his wise counsel and assessment on many of the issues we shall deal with during the current session.
125.	We deeply mourn the death of the President of Chile, Dr. Allende, in such violent and tragic circumstances. I do not intend to comment on internal developments of a sovereign State. In the wider context, however, I must express profound regret and concern over the setback that the democratic tradition of the people of Chile has suffered as a result of his overthrow, and over the violence, bloodshed and deprivation of human rights and infringement of diplomatic obligations which have recently been reported from that country. We earnestly hope that peace and harmony will be restored soon so that the people of Chile can resume their work of national reconstruction and reconciliation without any outside intervention and without further violence.
126.	The Secretary-General, in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/9001 /Add. IJ, has indicated the value of the United Nations in the present-day world, and has emphasized once again that the United Nations can only be what its Member States wish it to be. Few delegations will disagree with that assessment; the universal desire to render the United Nations a more effective instrument for promoting international peace and co-operation will depend on the willingness and ability of the States represented here to appreciate and reconcile different points of view and to arrive at decisions which serve those interests which are shared by most of us. Surely, our effort should be to extend the area of co-operation through identification of those interests. At the same time, in discussing any problems we must look at them in their totality and apply the Charter provisions in all their aspects and not selectively or in a piecemeal fashion.
127.	The year that has just passed since we last met has seen important, though uneven, developments, but, on the whole, the world has moved forward, however haltingly and however slightly, towards our goal of peace, justice and progress. The gradual reduction of tension between rival blocs, which many of us had long been urging, is now clearly noticeable. The recent improvement of relations between the great Powers and the increase in contacts between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America, and the United States of America and China, are important in themselves, and also as an indication that the trend that developed last year has maintained its momentum. The Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War, concluded between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in June of this year, and the understandings between them in several other fields are welcome. We are also gratified that this steady search for international peace and security has led to important developments in Europe: in the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, in the treaties between the two German States and between the Federal Republic of Germany and other countries in Eastern Europe, and in the convening of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
128.	We join others in welcoming the process of mutual accommodation and co-operation and the consequent reduction of tension. However, this spirit of detente has yet to extend to all parts of the world and should not be limited to mere coexistence among the major Powers. Regrettably, such concepts as the balance of power, spheres of influence and power vacuum are yet to be discarded. Unfortunately also, the great Power rivalry continues to show itself in many ways and in many areas; this brings severe stress and strain in international relations. The power of the strong is still to be placed at the common service of mankind. Only through genuine co-operation can the peoples of the world move forward towards a better future, in accordance with their own wishes and without any feeling of subordination and dependence, or of imposition or pressure from outside.
129.	I was privileged to take part in the Fourth Conference of Heads of State and Government of Non-Aligned Countries in Algiers, where those problems received the most careful and comprehensive examination from the largest gathering of Heads of State or Government ever held. The most significant feature of that great Conference was the confidence it created and the will it generated to work together for realizing our common objectives. Those States are determined to achieve, together with all nations of the world and with a spirit of constructive co-operation, equality among all nations and an equitable exploitation of resources of the world. We shall thus encourage the march forward of man for peace and for a better life. Political understanding and economic co-operation among major
Powers are therefore to be so arranged and channelled that they do not become, even unintentionally, instruments of new forms of domination and dependence.
130.	The maintenance of world peace and security will depend to a large extent on the speedy removal of economic and social disparities, both nationally and internationally. The non-aligned countries wish to build, together with other developing States, a collective self- reliance within the framework of international understanding. They are determined to remove all forms and manifestations of injustice and inequality, discrimination and oppression wherever they may exist. Their dedication to this cause should not be mistaken as a confrontation with any particular country or a group of countries. They have reaffirmed their firm resolve to strengthen the United Nations, which remains the best available machinery for world-wide co-operation.
131.	The world has changed a great deal since our Charter was signed in San Francisco nearly 30 years ago. The Charter must evolve with the times in order to remain an effective and dynamic force for peace and progress. Thus, there is an understandable desire for a comprehensive review of it. We believe, however, that in the prevailing climate of international politics, it would be premature to do more than examine the Charter in certain fields.
132.	We welcome this year three new Members: the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Commonwealth of the Bahamas. We have excellent relations with those States and look forward to working with them in the United Nations. The Bahamas joins us as the newest Member State from the Caribbean within a few weeks of attaining freedom. We cannot forget in this connexion that there are still a number of countries which are to be freed from colonial rule.
133.	The simultaneous admission of the two German States to the United Nations may well signal the disappearance of tensions and hostilities of the past and the beginning of a new era of understanding and co-operation in Central Europe. We welcome the new pattern of relationship. The two German States, as Members of this Organization, could indeed make a significant contribution to world peace and development.
134.	The admission of these States marks an important step in achieving the goal of universality of membership of the United Nations. This makes it all the more regrettable that Bangladesh, a sovereign State recognized by over 100 Members of the United Nations and with a population of over 75 million people, has not yet been able to take its rightful place among us. I should like to emphasize the call made by the Algiers Conference for the admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations. Member States will no doubt recognize that the continuing denial of Bangladesh's right to be in the United Nations injures, if not defeats, the purposes and principles of the Charter of this Organization.
135.	India seeks friendship and co-operation with all nations on the basis of equality, reciprocity and mutual respect. With over 75 States of the different continents of the world we share the common ideals of non-alignment. Together with these and many other developing countries we face the common problem of economic development and are working for a better world order.
136.	With western Europe our links go back for centuries and the future holds bright prospects for greater exchanges in various fields. Our political and economic relations with the countries of eastern Europe have shown steady and fruitful development. With the Soviet Union we have achieved a close and co-operative friendship, based on mutual trust and understanding, which we greatly cherish. Both the United States and India have a strong faith in democratic systems and we share many common values. Our contacts and associations with Britain have lasted for hundreds of years and now continue to develop on a basis of mutual respect and equality. Our common cultural values and liberal traditions provide a strong base for our growing friendship with France. As close neighbours, India and China have to live in peace and amity, and we hope that our relations will soon move in that direction.
137.	Japan's rapid industrial advance is a lesson for us, and we welcome that country's co-operation in various fields. We are glad that Australia, Canada and New Zealand an: sharing, more and more, our values and attitudes and are showing greater awareness of Asian and African aspirations. In Ottawa, we had a successful meeting of the Commonwealth countries about six weeks ago.
138.	With our most immediate neighbours-Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma, Nepal and Sri Lanka — we maintain and seek the closest friendship and wide-ranging co-operation. We are making all possible efforts to end the era of confrontation with Pakistan.'
139.	The most significant development in our subcontinent has been the search through direct negotiations for normalization of relations. The New Delhi Agreement of 28 August 1973 provides for the settlement of the humanitarian problems left over from the conflict of 1971. It represents yet another step in the fulfilment of the Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972, which had set out the framework for the establishment of durable peace in the subcontinent.
140.	Ever since independence, India has tried its utmost to live in peace and friendship with Pakistan. In spite of many setbacks and frustrations, this has remained, and will remain, a fundamental objective of our foreign policy.
141.	The tragic events in the subcontinent in 1971 were a direct consequence of the short-sighted policies and adventurist actions of the Pakistani military rulers to which the President, now Prime Minister, Mr. Bhutto himself has made repeated references. The military oligarchy, having failed to crush the determination of 75 million Bangalis, involved India in a war by suddenly bombing from the air several places in western India on 3 December 1971.1 state these simple facts only to give a proper perspective, and not with any desire to dwell on the past. Our purpose is to look forward.
142.	The war lasted about two weeks and the fighting stopped in Bangladesh on 16 December 1971. From that moment onwards, we took a series of steps to restore normalcy and achieve durable peace in the Indian subcontinent.
143.	In the eastern sector, all Indian troops were withdrawn from Bangladesh within a period of 90 days by agreement between the two Governments; all the prisoners taken in Bangladesh were transferred to India as a result of a decision by the joint Indo-Bangladesh command; and all the refugees-nearly 10 million of them — returned from India to Bangladesh in three months' time, by the end of March 1972. In the western sector, the unilateral cease-fire declared by India came into effect on 17 December 1971.
144.	Soon after the cease-fire, we sought negotiations with Pakistan. As a result of the initiative taken by Prime Minister Mrs. Indira Gandhi a summit meeting was held in Simla. An agreement was arrived at on 2 July 1972, which, among other things, provided for, first, a line of control in Jammu and Kashmir, secondly, evacuation of territories occupied during the conflict; and thirdly, troop withdrawals. All these decisions were implemented in less than six months. An area of over 5,000 square miles occupied during the conflict was vacated and restored to Pakistan. In addition, all the prisoners of war taken by either side in the western sector returned home.
145.	Our next initiative was to make a joint declaration with Bangladesh on 17 April 1973 for solving the major humanitarian problems which arose as a result of the 1971 conflict. Three groups of people were affected: (a) hundreds of thousands of Bangalis stranded in Pakistan and prevented from returning to Bangladesh; (b)  hundreds of thousands of Pakistanis in Bangladesh whom Pakistan was refusing to receive; and (c) about 90,000 prisoners of war and civilian internees held in India. Bangladesh showed a spirit of accommodation and statesmanship in delinking the humanitarian problems from the unresolved political issues between Bangladesh and Pakistan.
146.	Following negotiations with Pakistan on the basis of this joint declaration, an agreement between India and Bangladesh, with the full concurrence of Bangladesh, was arrived at and signed in Delhi on 28 August 1973. This agreement provides for simultaneous repatriation of all the three groups I have just mentioned.
147.	As regards the 195 prisoners of war, all three Governments agreed that they should be kept in India pending a final settlement. The Delhi Agreement further provides, and I quote:
"On completion of repatriation of Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian internees in India, Bengalis in Pakistan and Pakistanis in Bangladesh referred to in Clause (v) above, or earlier if they so agree, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan will discuss and settle the question of 195 prisoners of war. Bangladesh has made it clear that it can participate in such a meeting only on the basis of sovereign equality."
148.	We hope that the Delhi Agreement will be fully, speedily and smoothly implemented with goodwill on all sides. The first steps in this direction have already been taken. Simultaneous repatriation of Bengalis from Pakistan, Pakistanis from Bangladesh, and prisoners of war and civilian internees from India has already started.
149.	I doubt if there is any comparable instance in modern history where a cease-fire, demarcation, troop
withdrawal, evacuation of occupied territories and repatriation of persons detained or stranded, following an international armed conflict of significant character, has been brought about within such a short period. All this has been achieved through direct negotiations, and as a result of the understanding shown on all sides, after taking into account all aspects of the problems. Therefore, to discuss now piecemeal and in isolation any of these problems from the point of view of any single party would be, to say the least, of little profit.
150.	These concrete facts clearly show that our search for normalization of relations and the establishment of a durable peace in the subcontinent has continued and has produced significant results. Our commitment to this goal is unequivocal. If we succeed in making the subcontinent an area of peace and co-operation, it not only will lead to a better life for over 700 millions of its people, but also will have a salutary impact on other areas as well.
151.	The Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Viet-Nam was signed in Paris this year. For many years we had repeatedly expressed our conviction that a military solution in this area was not feasible. Therefore, the massive and what seemed to be avoidable destruction of life and property in Indo-China shocked and pained us. The final terms of settlement, including provisions for the withdrawal of foreign forces from Indo-China and for bringing about a workable cease-fire in that area, are not much different from what we have been advocating all these years. The tragic sufferings of the people of Viet-Nam must come to an end and the full implementation of the Paris Agreement offers a challenge as well as an opportunity; every effort should be made to ensure lasting peace and to promote full and speedy reconstruction.
152.	As with the people of Viet-Nam, so with the people of Laos and Cambodia, India has always had close historical, cultural and emotional links. They can always depend on our sympathy, understanding and support. In this context, we welcome the recently concluded agreement
 among the parties in Laos. We hope that the people pf Laos will soon be able to set up a national coalition government in accordance with their legitimate aspirations without any outside interference.
153.	The peace in Indo-China will not be complete until the war in Cambodia has also been brought to an end. We are deeply distressed at the suffering which the people of Cambodia are still undergoing and the heavy toll of lives that is still taking place. We would urge that the people of Cambodia should be enabled to determine freely, and without any outside interference, their own future so that peace can return to that unhappy and tortured land. The international community can best assist this process by respecting fully the legitimate right to freedom, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the States of Indo-China.
154.	The comprehensive debate on the situation in the Middle East in the Security Council this summer showed once more, and most convincingly, that there can be no solution to this problem until Israel withdraws from the territories it has occupied by force as a consequence of the 1967 war. Israel's persistent refusal to vacate the occupied Arab lands and its violation of the rights of the inhabitants of the territories occupied by force are the direct causes of tension and conflict in this area. A just solution based on the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and the recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians can lead to an enduring peace in this region. The Secretary-General's visit to the Middle East must have brought into clearer focus the views of the contestants. His analysis may well help the parties and the Security Council to continue the search for a just and speedy solution to this explosive situation. We, on our part, will be guided by the principles we have always followed in regard to the problem of the Middle East; they are: the non-acquisition of territories by force of arms, the right of all States in the area to exist, and the inalienable rights of the Palestinians.
155.	We have noted with satisfaction the direct dialogue established between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea for the intensification of contacts to solve humanitarian problems and the eventual reunification of the Korean people. In these talks, as indeed in the whole of Korea, the less outside interference there is the better will be the chances of the parties leaching agreement. Any proposal before the United Nations on this subject will be examined by us with these considerations in mind.
156.	The twin phenomena of colonial domination and racial bigotry in Africa are the greatest burden on the conscience of the contemporary world.
157.	The situation of the people under Portuguese domination was tragically highlighted by the disclosures in the international press of the gruesome massacres in Mozambique. We must continue to expose the criminal character of Portuguese colonialism.
158.	We welcome the declaration of independence by the people of Guinea-Bissau and extend our support to Partido Africano da Independencia da Guine e Cabo Verde in its work of national integration and consolidation. We have no doubt that the peoples of Angola and Mozambique will soon succeed in their struggle for independence.
159.	The will to be independent must be sustained by the United Nations not only in the areas I have specifically mentioned, but in many others which we shall consider during these three months. We were disappointed, therefore, that when the question of terrorism was discussed in the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism, the
 refusal by some to admit the possibility of freedom fighters using all means to achieve their objectives, prevented the Committee from coming to any conclusion.
160.	In Zimbabwe, the racist regime continues to maintain its illegal administration in defiance of world opinion. We regret that the Security Council has been prevented from taking any .decisive action for applying the existing sanctions. In addition to improving the effectiveness of sanctions, their extension and strengthening is necessary. The breach of sanctions by some countries and trading interests is most regrettable, particularly when we recall that the sanctions were imposed by a unanimous decision of the Security Council.
161.	Nowhere are the obligations of trust vested in the United Nations more binding than in Namibia. The people
of Namibia have demonstrated the greatest courage in asserting their own rights by boycotting the recent so-called elections in Ovamboland. Clearly, the South African Government is not willing to work with the United Nations in bringing about Namibian independence and unity. The efforts made through the United Nations Council for Namibia, its High Commissioner, and the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa could, if their activities are planned and co-ordinated in a well-thought-out manner, contribute effectively to the political independence of the Namibian people as a whole.
162.	In this session, the General Assembly will consider the adoption of the Draft Convention for the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid [item 53 (b)/. We shall support all measures to intensify and widen action for outlawing this intolerable and inhuman doctrine which has brought so much suffering to millions of human beings in South Africa. Only recently, the world was shocked with the brutal killing in Carletonville.

163.	Today is the birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, and I recall that he was the first man to rise and revolt against the cruel practices of the Government of South Africa. He led a movement for improving the lot of the coloured people in that country, even before he launched the civil disobedience movement in India for obtaining our freedom and independence. Since India raised this question in the United Nations in 1946, practically every Member of this Organization, including South Africa's allies, has denounced apartheid. We shall continue to co-operate with all other Member States until South Africa gives up its intolerable policies of racial discrimination.
164.	While recent developments on the limitation of nuclear armaments and the prohibition of certain categories of weapons of mass destruction are important, enduring world peace and security can be based only on total disarmament. However, the goal of general and complete disarmament, including, in particular, nuclear disarmament, remains as distant as ever. We have long urged the convening of a world conference on disarmament with the participation of all countries so as to focus attention on this urgent problem. Unfortunately, the Special Committee on the World Disarmament Conference, set up after the last General Assembly session, could not proceed with any substantive work. Given goodwill on all sides, the difficulties which arose can be removed by the present session of the Assembly so that a world conference on disarmament can be prepared for and convened as early as possible.
165.	My delegation has noted with interest the new item proposed by the delegation of the USSR for a reduction in the military budgets [item 102]. The intention seems to be that the permanent members of the Security Council and other militarily significant States should use a part of the savings for providing assistance to developing countries. We have been stressing that savings from disarmament should be diverted to development assistance. We shall therefore co-operate with other delegations in a constructive effort to consider how this proposal, which will no doubt be elaborated in course of discussion, could serve the interest of disarmament and also enhance development assistance.
166.	The declaration of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)J was a significant step in our efforts to reduce great Power rivalries and tensions in the different regions of the world and forms a part of our desire to eliminate military alliances and bases. I should take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the statesmanship of Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka in mobilizing international opinion for this purpose. Useful work has been initiated by the 15-member Ad Hoc, Committee on the Indian Ocean established by the last session of the Assembly [resolution 2992 (XXVII)] for considering measures for implementing the Declaration. This Declaration cannot be effective unless the great Powers and other major maritime Powers co-operate fully with the littoral and hinterland States.
167.	We look forward with utmost interest to the forthcoming plenipotentiary Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The meetings of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction this year have brought out certain difficulties, none of which need prove insurmountable. By working together with all other countries we could achieve a just and equitable law of the sea and sea-bed which would provide for and ensure an orderly exploration and exploitation of the sea-bed beyond the limits of national jurisdiction and a rational management of its resources, bearing in mind the special needs and interests of the developing countries, whether coastal or land-locked. A fair and viable law of the sea should also provide a framework of regulations for other uses of the sea, including those relating to the exploitation of its living and other resources by establishing an exclusive fishery and economic zone for the coastal States.
168.	The concept of world-wide partnership in economic and social development has been accepted. However, the progress towards full implementation of the International Development Strategy for the 1970s [resolution 2626 (XXV)] has been extremely disappointing. Some developed countries, particularly the smaller among them, have responded well, but little success has been achieved in even its most publicized goals. The dismal fact is that the Second Development Decade is going the way of the first, and with far less excuse. The growth of most developing countries is well below the targets set. The growth in the least developed countries has been slower still. The benefits of world economic growth are not being shared equitably and the rich societies are becoming richer and the poor poorer. Full recognition of the interdependence of the world community and adoption of measures conducive to the attainment of a more balanced growth in the world economy is still lacking.
169.	Many developing countries have already spoken of a real and imminent danger that, owing to the preoccupation of developed countries with readjustment of their mutual relations, the urgent need to implement policy measures in favour of developing countries may not receive the attention it deserves. The first biennial review and appraisal of the Strategy has so far been inconclusive. If agreed conclusions could be reached during this session, remedial measures to improve performance in the remaining years of the Decade would be easier to take. In the developing countries the struggle for greater equality and justice must
continue. Equally, we have to seek wider economic co-operation among the developing countries themselves. The important measures outlined recently at Algiers for this purpose should prove most useful.
170.	Contrary to earlier expectations, agreement on international monetary reform has not been reached. Stability in international monetary arrangements is not yet within our grasp. The issues are undoubtedly complex. Non-aligned countries have reiterated that the new international monetary system, in the establishment and working of which the developing countries should participate as equals, should be universal. The system should guarantee the stability of international trade flows and conditions of financing; it has to recognize the specific situation and needs of the developing countries for preferential treatment.
171.	The growth of world trade and the rightful share of the developing countries in it will be facilitated by the establishment of special drawing rights as the principal reserve asset, for the phasing out of the monetary role of gold, for an adjustment mechanism which is both efficient and equitable and, above all, for the establishment of a link between the special drawing rights and development finance, in order to provide for the adequate transfer of additional real resources to the developing countries. All these measures will create an orderly arrangement for adequate liquidity.
172.	The Declaration adopted a few days ago at Tokyo will soon be followed by a round of multilateral trade negotiations. The trend towards liberalization of world trade is to be welcomed, but the developing countries should not emerge from these negotiations as net losers. Specific measures must be taken to secure additional benefits for the international trade of developing countries. This has indeed been agreed to in Tokyo.
173.	To achieve this, the concept of preferential treatment for developing countries in all sectors of the negotiations has to be accepted. Moreover, we must ensure that the enlargement of the preferential arrangements among the
 developed countries, as well as the reduction of industrial tariffs following the multilateral trade negotiations, do not erode the meagre benefits which the developing countries have secured under the generalized scheme of preferences. To make this scheme fully operational will require its implementation by those who have not yet done so and substantial improvements in the arrangements already in operation.
174.	The delicate and precarious balance between-world food supply and demand during the last few years has emphasized the urgent need for a global strategy for food security. Widespread drought in several countries has brought to the forefront the problem of matching world resources and technology for production of food with global needs, in normal as also in abnormal years. We support the initiative of the Food and Agriculture Organization to work out an effective solution to this problem.
175.	In stressing the essential link between economic development and environmental improvement we have
consistently underlined that there is no contradiction between the solution of ecological problems and the interests of developing countries. We have, therefore, spoken against ecological considerations being used to curtail aid, erect trade barriers and prevent the transfer of technology. This could be the result of a short-sighted desire to protect economic advantages: restraints on economic growth must not be adopted to the detriment of the developing world.
176.	We are confident, therefore, that the United Nations Environment Programme under Mr. Maurice Strong will keep all these aspects in mind in working out a plan of action for the betterment of mankind as a whole. In this context, the development of human settlements is of particular importance to developing countries.
177.	I have followed with great interest the many important views expressed by distinguished ministers and leaders of delegations gathered here. Today, I have taken the time of the Assembly to set forth our ideas on some of the important issues before us. We must ponder over the many valuable ideas presented to us by men of thought, and we must bend our energies to collective effort as men of action. The Charter provides the mechanism for translating these ideas into action. Let us, if we can, gather enough courage and wisdom and seize this opportunity to serve our fellow men.﻿52.	 Mr. President, those of us who know you well take a special pride in your elevation to the presidency of the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session. The people of Ecuador share the honour which your personal qualities have justly earned.
53.	The international climate is charged with confidence and hope. Attitudes of hostility which once seemed to bean organic part of our generation's life are now giving way to patient dialogue. The Viet-Nam cease-fire, the American-Chinese encounter, the summit meetings at Moscow and Washington, the German agreements and the European treaties have been succeeded by a cease-fire in Laos, by talks between North and South Korea, and by contacts between the three States of the Indian subcontinent. The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe is at work, bringing a tragic era of confrontation to its end.
54.	Let us leave the historians to define the precise point at which the international journey took a new direction — and the causes which inspired the change. In the meantime the results are tangible and impressive, although not yet universal. In some discussions — but not in all — the old vocabularies of abuse are being softened by a welcome air of civility. It is generally understood that coexistence must be based on a separation between viewpoints and relationships. Even when Governments differ in their ideas, their viewpoints and their policies, in their social structures and in their international orientations, they can, nevertheless, foster good relations even across the gulf of their divergences. It was the cold-war philosophy that insisted on ideological agreement or political harmony as the condition of good relations between States. The detente accepts and admits no such condition. It respects and transcends diversities of interest and outlook. Indeed, the logical conclusion of the detente is the universality of international relations. Fidelity to detente requires all States to cultivate normal relations with each other, irrespective of differences and even of conflicts in their interests or policies. At a time when States which have real conflicts of ideology, policy and interest are establishing relations with each other, it would be a grotesque paradox if States which have never had any reason to quarrel about anything were induced to weaken or to sunder their mutual ties.
55.	But we shall not do service to the spirit of detente if we carry our satisfaction beyond the point of reason and truth. Free dialogue and compromise have prevailed in many disputes, but they are still rejected in others, and the victories of international conciliation in the past few years have all been won outside the United Nations structure. This indicates that the growth of world community is painfully slow, Indeed, our Secretary-General, with admirable realism, has found it necessary, in the introduction to his annual
report o n the work of the Organization [A/9001/Add. 1], to warn us of some of the shortcomings in the work of the United Nations so far. The truth is that, while quiet, bilateral diplomacy has recorded many triumphs, strident, polemical, public debate has not brought any good result on any issue at any time. The lesson is plain. The central role of this Organization should be to promote agreements between parties to a conflict irrespective of their voting strength, and not to try to adjudicate between conflicting views on the mere basis of numerical weight. The United Nations, in short, should have a diplomatic and not a parliamentary vocation. This point was stated with great precision by the Foreign Minister of Canada. I quote his words:
"... we must try to avoid barren and abrasive confrontations, which are frequently the result of formal voting processes. Consensus is another and often surer route —  Consensus does not mean the imposition of the will of the majority on a reluctant minority which feels its vital interests are at issue; it means the shared recognition of what should and can be done." [2126th meeting, para. 60.1
56.	Now here, in a few words, is a basic evaluation of what may be wrong with United Nations techniques. The result is not only that successes have come outside these walls; failures have abounded within them. The discussions on international terrorism by our Ad Hoc Committee ended in fiasco, as had the debate in the General Assembly after the Munich outrage last year. In Rome the International Civil Aviation Organization sat for many weeks without being allowed to agree on any amendments to the Hague or Montreal Conventions. All Members of the United Nations are united in their ability to discuss each other's imperfections. There are majorities to be had for selective political judgements against those who do not belong to a large voting bloc. But majorities cannot always be found for objective, temperate statements free of denunciation and invective.
57.	The Secretary-General's introduction to the annual report reminds us that the efforts of the United Nations in political conciliation are, in his words, "complementary" to "the normal bilateral dealings of Governments" [A/9001/ Add. 1, p. 5]. That is true. I also think that it is true that an attempt by all the Arab Governments to escape from the duty of engaging in "the normal bilateral dealings of Governments" to a constant reliance on public debate is one of the sources of the continuing deadlock in the Middle East. Indeed, every procedure and attitude that has proved its efficacy in other disputes has so far been ignored or rejected in our region.
58.	Would we not do well then to listen to the counsel of two statesmen whose names are pre-eminent in the history of the recent detente. Chancellor Willy Brandt of the Federal Republic of Germany has told this Assembly that
".. . it is primarily direct peace talks between the Arab countries concerned and Israel that will best secure a balance of the elementary interests of both sides." [2128th meeting, para. 63.]
And Mr, Kissinger, Secretary of State of the United States, has reminded us that not even the strongest of great Powers can "substitute for the efforts of those most directly involved" [2124th meeting, para. 56],
59.	The absence of negotiation in the Middle East is the gravest obstacle to the termination of regional tension. But it is not the parent cause of the tension. The root of the conflict lies deeper; the root of the conflict lies in the refusal of Arab Governments to come to terms with Israel as a sovereign nation rising from the depths of Middle Eastern history to resume its place in the universal community. Not one of the Arab Governments whose representatives have spoken from this rostrum about withdrawal from territories held since 1967 has said that in order to achieve their territorial claims the Arab States would recognize Israel's rightful place amongst the free nations of the area and establish permanent peace, friendship, commerce and normal relations with Israel similar, for example, to the relations which exist between the States of Western Europe, which only a short time ago were locked in hostility and war. Many Arab spokesmen say the opposite. The Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. El Zayyat, has stated in the Security Council and elsewhere that beyond the 1967 armistice lines lie the frontiers proposed in a United Nations recommendation of 1947 [resolution 181 (II)], which Egypt and other Arab Governments destroyed, as they had promised, "by blood and fire", and these in his learned view are the only legal frontiers. Nor would this be the end of Israel's dismantlement. An article in the official Cairo newspaper Al Gum-huriya only several days ago tells us that
"The withdrawal of Israel from all the conquered Arab territories is an initial demand of the Arab States presented as a part of the comprehensive programme aimed at putting an end to the Zionist settlement in Palestine."
60.	From such statements it is not hard to deduce the meaning of the phrase about the "legitimate aspirations of the Palestine Arab people" when employed by those in whose eyes the sole representatives of that people are the organizations which carry out murder and banditry all over the world but usually at a discreet distance from the Middle East,
61.	The plain fact is that the present Arab leadership is not satisfied with the verdict of history which has led to the constitution of 18 Arab States in an area of II million square kilometres with a population of 100 million. Arab leadership seems to be in an excited imperialist mood. It demands the elimination of Israel, a non-Arab nation, older in its roots within the Middle East than any other, more venerable than any other in the lineage of spirit and tongue that ties it to that soil, unexampled in the persistence of its national identity.
62.	Israel is the very heart and core of Middle Eastern history; but Israel is a Jewish and not an Arab entity. Therefore, there are Arab leaders who cannot sustain its sovereign presence: it must be either physically eliminated or swallowed up in something else so that its "Israel hood" would vanish under some Arab combination or domination. In its philosophy national freedom in the Middle East is an exclusive Arab right — to be monopolized, and not to be shared. There are other expressions of this hegemonistic and exclusive spirit —  in Arab policy in the Persian Gulf and in the posturing of Colonel Qaddafi as he flaunts his opulent purse across the world. But it is in the Israeli context that the tendency to see sovereignty in the Middle East as an Arab monopoly has had its most ominous effects.
63.	Now, what I have said is admittedly a stringent view of what Arab Governments seek to achieve. But unfortunately it is sustained by a great array of official statements. It is confirmed by the implacable warfare to which Israel, alone amongst all the States of the world, has been subjected since its birth. It is nourished by outrages such as the shooting in the head of the 11 Israeli athletes, tied hand and foot, on the floor of a helicopter in Munich one year ago. Such acts are possible only if the victims are regarded by the assassins as lying outside and beyond any human context. And, indeed, the Arab hostility towards Israel today joins hands with another and deadlier hatred to which it is akin. For where else, Members of the United Nations, other than in Cairo, can you imagine the publication by writers close to the seat of power of an article which I hold in my hand and from which I read the concluding extract:
"In the whole world people have ended by understanding that Hitler was right, for the Jews are vampires which suck the blood of humanity. They wish to destroy the world, but the world vomits them. They have been chased from land to land; they were burned in the ovens of Hitler — 1 million, 2 million, 6 million. Would that he had accomplished it fully!"
That is what Al Akhbar wrote on 19 August this year.
64.	"Would that [Hitler] had accomplished it fully!" This particular extract is only one example of hundreds of Nazi publications that have made Cairo a world centre of anti-Semitic ideology. As we listen to these obscenities on Cairo Radio, as we bury our dead after Munich or Lod, as we recall wars, assaults, boycotts and threats over these 25 years, as we read of the Covenant of the so-called "Palestine Liberation Organization", which asserts that only Arabs have sovereign rights in the Middle East, can we be reproached if we see ourselves as the target of a particularly virulent hatred, at variance with all humane values and vastly removed from anything that can be called detente?
65.	In short, one of the components of Israel's policy —  and I say this in great frankness —  is a profound scepticism about the basic intention of Arab States to respect Israel's sovereignty, its national identity, its cultural legacy, its place in the Middle East and the world. There is one thing, and one thing alone, that could undermine that scepticism: negotiation.
66.	For recent international experience teaches us that negotiation is not simply a procedural method: it is a principle of coexistence. Negotiation does not merely photograph established positions; it leads them towards mutual accommodation. It puts hopes and suspicions to their only viable test. At the negotiating table the discourse between the parties ceases to be rhetorical, abrasive and polemical. It becomes pragmatic, concrete, empirical. A unique kind of solidarity asserts itself between the negotiators, who become subject to the mystique of potential success and put forth their maximal effort to avoid a final break. Precisely because negotiation has such far-reaching effects, the Arab refusal to negotiate without prior conditions arouses far-reaching suspicions.
67.	We have long been convinced of the need to undertake a detailed negotiation ranging freely across all the problems at issue. If this aim has not been fulfilled, we share the
universal regret — but we disclaim culpability. We have accepted Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which calls for the establishment of permanent peace by agreement between Member States in the Middle East, including withdrawal of forces from territories occupied since 1967 to secure and recognized boundaries to be determined in the peace agreement. We proposed detailed agendas for discussion with Egypt and Jordan, We accepted Ambassador Jarring's proposal, rejected by Egypt in March 1968, for convening Israeli and Egyptian representatives in conferences under his auspices to discuss a peace settlement. When four eminent Heads of African States visited our region in 1971, they submitted six proposals in writing, to which my Prime Minister made written and appropriate response on 28 November 1971.5 The African Presidents reported that this reply, together with that of Egypt, constituted a sufficient basis to justify negotiation. We stand by those replies today. In particular, we responded to the suggestion of the African Presidents which reads as follows:
"Acceptance by the two parties that 'secure and recognized boundaries' be determined in the peace agreement".
68.	In 1971, when it was pointed out that direct contact might not yet be easily acceptable to Arab Governments, we agreed to the United States procedure for proximity talks. When it was then suggested that it might be difficult to conceive a sudden transition from total deadlock to total peace, we accepted the idea of a Suez agreement involving the opening of the Canal under Egyptian administration, with a limited, agreed withdrawal of Israeli forces, even ahead of a peace settlement. We stipulated that this would not be the final withdrawal, but a phase leading to further negotiations in which the permanent and final line would be agreed upon between the parties.
69.	Throughout all this period we abstained — as we still do — from changing the political and juridical status of the administered territories, and have not closed any options for a negotiated peace. We opened the river crossings and cease-fire lines to a free movement of hundreds of thousands of Arabs from areas outside Israeli jurisdiction — and indeed from all over the Arab world. We placed the Holy Places of Christendom and Islam under the administration of Christian and Moslem authorities and proposed that this principle be given appropriate statutory expression in a peace agreement. In October 1972 I suggested a meeting with Foreign Minister Riad in New York "in order to break out of old deadlocks into a new vision and a new hope". We utilized the good offices of foreign statesmen and other visitors to convey to Cairo and other Middle Eastern capitals our proposals for contact and dialogue in any form and at any level agreeable to the other side. We welcomed the Secretary-General of the United Nations on his visit to Member States in the Middle East, and appreciated his testimony to the will for peace that, in his words, he found in his contacts with the Government of Israel.
70.	That is not an exhaustive list of all the soundings and gestures that we have made in an effort to generate a process of negotiation. Nor have we decided to despair of the
prospect. But can anyone seriously believe that all these initiatives, all these responses — none of which was put in ultimative form — offered no opening whatever through which Arab Governments genuinely desiring peace could seek or accept a dialogue with us?
71. The Arab reactions to these and other initiatives have always included refusals to negotiate; or refusals to acknowledge Israel's statehood at all; or an insistence that Arab positions be accepted in advance by Israel as a condition of negotiation; or a demand that the situation which preceded and in large measure provoked the war of 1967 be meticulously restored.
72.	Now, there is one important thing to be noted about those positions. If all or any of them had been adopted by Governments in America, Europe and East Asia in the past few years, there would be no agreements for the General Assembly to welcome and no detente for anybody anywhere lo celebrate.
73.	I turn from the past to the future. It is natural for the Israeli Government to use this opportunity of making a precise definition of the principles which move its policy. That policy is frequently and grossly misrepresented, especially at conferences from which we are excluded while our adversaries command the scene. Our policy is to seek peace and security. If the Israeli mind is intensely preoccupied with the problem of security, it is because of the particular memories that converge upon us. On one level of recollection we come face to face with a recent experience that no other family of the human race has ever undergone. The fires are out in the gas chambers, and the ashes are silent in European fields. But the memory of our 6 million kinsmen, brutally wiped off the slate of life, and the terrible agony of the million Jewish children butchered in the year of martyrdom abide with us, vivid, stark, unforgotten. And on the other level of memory there is the experience of 25 years in which our nation's progress has been secured only at a heavy price of suffering and death,
74.	A people that has undergone such affliction and borne such loss is bound by historic duty lo insist on a very precise craftsmanship in the construction of peace. It will not do simply to reproduce the vulnerable and explosive situation which threatened world peace six years ago. Israel's statehood, its Jewish vocation, its name and flag and tongue are a part of the international reality now and for all time. They are axiomatic, and it is our business to maintain them in growing security.
75.	We are asked whether we seek peace. The answer is, Yes, that is our central aim, the destination of all our policies and hopes. Peace does not only involve a documentary acknowledgement of rights. It signifies the permanent end of conflict, and the proof of its authenticity must be sought in human terms. Peace means open frontiers across which peoples can seek commerce and contact with each other in mutual accessibility and thus give depth and meaning to formal governmental engagements.
76.	Should we not look hard and long at the European example? The aim should be a community of sovereign States in the Middle East, as in Benelux and the European communities. With our eastern neighbour, once the boundary is determined, we should seek a system of relations based on separate sovereignties but with a high measure of social and economic integration. The remarkable ease and cordiality of access between Israelis and the mass of Palestinian Arabs today should be preserved and consolidated in a peace settlement. The squalid conspiracies of Arafat and Habash, with their grenades, daggers, bombs and guns, do not represent the views or interests of the million non-Israeli Arabs west of the Jordan living in peaceful interaction with Israelis today. That is why terrorist violence has no expression there.
77.	We are asked if we accept negotiation. The answer is, Yes, by any procedure mutually agreed upon. The negotiation is between the sovereign States of the area. We must be concerned to insulate our region from the rivalries and competitions of the Powers. The Middle East, after generations of servitude, is now free. It should not seek new. hegemonies and new servitudes at the expense of its newly won independence.
78.	What about Security Council resolution 242 (1967)? The answer is, Yes, we accept it as the basis for negotiation with Egypt and Jordan, and our memorandum of 4 August 1970 remains in force. It is vital to understand what the resolution says and what it does not say. The resolution rules out withdrawal except in the context of a "just and lasting peace". It does not require any unconditional Israeli action without balancing actions on the Arab side. And it specifically makes provision for the establishment of secure and recognized boundaries by agreement between Member States. When Arab Governments persuade international conferences to say that resolution 242(1967) requires immediate and unconditional withdrawal from all the territories, they commit a triple forgery within a single sentence and put our documentary consensus in jeopardy. But as it stands and as it is written it is a documentary basis for negotiation,
79.	Do we accept the principle of withdrawal? Yes. In the context of a permanent peace Israeli forces would withdraw to the positions and boundaries determined mutually by the peace agreements. Our policy is not unilateral annexation but the negotiation of agreements on the final boundary. That position is in full accord with the intentions of those who drafted and sponsored Security Council resolution 242 (1967). One of them, Assistant Secretary Sisco, said publicly in 1970:
"That resolution did not say withdrawal to the pre-June 5 line, The resolution said the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final, secure and recognized borders. In other words the question of the final borders is a matter of negotiation between the parties."
80.	We are asked about the Palestinian Arabs. If the idea is Palestine instead of Israel, our answer, of course, is, No. There is nothing "instead" of Israel either in universal history or in modern political reality. The question whether the Arabs have 18 or 19 States does not stand on an equal plane with Israel's solitary domain of nationhood and existence. But if the issue is Palestine side by side with Israel, the answer is that in peace negotiations with Jordan Israel's permanent boundary would be determined. It is not our governmental consensus to seek such boundary changes as would bring all or most of the Arabs of the West Bank and
their populated territories under Israeli sovereignty or citizenship. The majority of Jordan's population are Palestinians, and most of the Palestinians are Jordanian citizens. Thus an Israel-Jordan peace settlement would enable most of the Palestine Arabs east and west of the Jordan to affirm their identity and citizenship within an Arab framework. It is for Arabs and not Israelis to determine the precise constitutional structure of our eastern neighbour. In a peace settlement the area of the former Palestine Mandate on both sides of the Jordan between the desert and the sea would have two States — Israel and an Arab State which would be a Palestinian Arab State in its composition whatever its name or constitutional structure. It would be normal for Palestinian Arabs to be included in the Jordanian delegation that would negotiate peace with Israel.
81.	The principles I have outlined today would, of course, have to be submitted to negotiation with the other side. Here I seek only to emphasize that our positions are legitimate, normal and conducive to a wide range of peaceful solutions. Indeed, they are identical with the principles adopted by many States which have been praised here for their contribution to the new detente. It is possible to agree with those positions or to differ from them. But we see a moral and intellectual affront in any tendency to portray them as eccentric, as immoderate and, more grotesquely, as intransigent, when they are quite clearly nothing of the kind.
82.	Least of all is there any justification for making them the basis for abusive or punitive formulations in obedience to the pressures of Arab States which decline negotiation, refuse peace, encourage international terrorism and seek to impose their own hostilities on other States in a manner prejudicial to the sovereignty and dignity of newly emerging nations.
83.	Whatever has divided them in the past, the Israeli and Arab nations cannot escape their common destiny. History and geography ensure their proximity. Experience teaches us that there are no irreconcilable conflicts. If the Arab Governments will take example and inspiration from the prevailing spirit of detente, they will find in Israel a willing partner for regional development and co-operation. There would be more benefit and, above all, more honour and dignity for them and for us in the exploration of a peaceful future than in the pursuit of an ineffective and sterile rancour, which has achieved and will achieve none of its objectives but which degrades our region's name and obstructs its better visions.
84.	We shall respond affirmatively to any efforts, such as those indicated by the United States, to assist in the search for just solutions and to generate a spirit of accommodation.
85.	Israel's relations with the European community will enter a new phase with the conclusion this year of an agreement constituting a free trade area within the Mediterranean context. If the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe succeeds in its task, the Mediterranean and Middle East will benefit from the resultant growth of continental harmony. We welcome the decision of the Conference to invite Israel to present its views on matters inscribed on the Conference agenda,
86.	A central theme of the dialogue on detente in Europe, in the European Security Conference and elsewhere is liberty of movement and freedom of intellectual expression. Unless some success is registered here, there will be scepticism about the authenticity and depth of the change in the international climate. Our concern for detente should not lead us to ignore the desperate bid for freedom by men such as Solzhenitsyn, Sakharov, Levich and other scientists and thinkers who fall under governmental harassment and oppression.
87.	The saga of Soviet Jewry belongs to this theme,
88.	During his visit to the United States this summer, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Union of Soviet Socialists Republics, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, made a number of declarations implying that there are almost no rejections of requests by Soviet Jews to be permitted to leave for Israel. To our regret, we cannot confirm such statements at a time when so many Jews in the Soviet Union are held against their will and call out to us daily in despair. They face powerful authorities in a struggle to exercise the right, granted fortunately to many thousands of others, to join their people and their families in Israel. Applicants for emigration have in some instances been dismissed from work and left without any means of livelihood. Media of information have incited against them. Administrative molestation has made their life unbearable. Dozens of Jews, amongst them a young woman, have been condemned to long years of suffering behind barbed wire. The penalties inflicted on these people are especially surprising in view of the fact that the right to leave for Israel has been recognized in principle and that other Jews have exercised it. It is difficult to understand or condone a policy granting exit permits to some Jews while at the same time creating cruel obstacles for many others.
89.	Nor can we pass in silence over the anti-Jewish incitement conducted openly or under the cover of propaganda directed against religion or against Zionism. This campaign is still carried on through governmental media of information and by means of propaganda publications and pseudo-scientific literature. In this manner anti-Semitic ideas are disseminated and injected into the masses of the Soviet Union's population.
90.	On 26 March this year a tribunal in the French capital determined that information material distributed by the Soviet Embassy contained slanders on the Jewish faith and incitement to racial discrimination, and found those responsible guilty. But the Soviet authorities have not applied the Soviet law against the disseminators of anti-Semitic propaganda,
91.	At the same time, the Jews of Syria and the remnant still left in Iraq are living in constant torment. Israel again appeals to world opinion which has already alleviated the plight of these helpless small minorities whose only salvation lies in emigration and the pursuit of a new life.
92.	This season of the year was darkened for us in 1972 by the fearful affliction and murder of our sportsmen who went to Munich in the shelter of the Olympic flag. This year the horizon is clouded again. The kidnapping of Jewish refugees by terrorists in Austria is a reproach to international institutions whose sterile discussion of International terrorism must have given more encouragement to terrorists than they would have derived even from the absence of discussion. The decision to close the camp at Schoenau defied our belief. I recall an unforgettable day there a few months ago. In a world convulsed by nihilism and violence, it was moving to see this oasis of humane values, dedicated to the impulses of compassion and solidarity which have so often become submerged in the torrent of twentieth-century life. The very name Schoenau was recited with pride by every Austrian whom I was privileged to encounter. Those who have passed through its gates have known great suffering and torment in the tempests which have shaken Europe in this generation. To abandon such an enterprise in deference to a pair of brutal gangsters has a terrifying meaning, It raises the question where the final human victory belongs. Can law and civility triumph if they are not strongly defended? Can a decent and rational public order take root in the world if indulgence beyond their own expectation is shown to those who put a pistol to the head of unarmed wayfarers? What will be the effect of the constant suspension of European legal systems in favour of early release and impunity for those who come to kill and maim and leave their trail of innocent blood behind?
93.	The issue is not only how the safe transit of Jews from the Soviet Union to Israel will be arranged, once the emigration has been authorized and the immigration approved. This is an acutely grave question, but it arises in an even graver context. What is the future of a world in which two pirates and criminals can bring a, proud nation, can bring sovereign governments to the acceptance of their terms? What are the implications of transactions and engagements between civilized governments and violent extortionists? Who is going to rule our world, governments or gunmen?
94.	The Council of Europe in its resolution entitled "Report on the responsibility of the Member States of the Council of Europe regarding the free movement of people in Europe", adopted on 1 October 1973, rightly expressed the hope that no government will regard itself as bound by a promise secured by extortion to terminate facilities for the transit of emigrants from the Soviet Union. All these human predicaments emerge from the developments in Vienna this week. When the civilized world stands with bowed head, along comes President El-Sadat to celebrate joyfully the triumph of the young gunmen over a few aging, weary Jews and over the sovereignty and law of an enlightened European State.
95.	Once it was an international offence to aid pirates. They were defined as humani generis hostis, enemies of the human race. Are we approaching a time when it will be an offence to resist them?
96.	Chancellor Brandt called from this platform for an effective convention against terrorism. But experience shows that if in this matter we aim at universality we shall not have the necessary parliamentary success. There is — let us face it — no effective anti-terrorist majority in the United Nations. That is an ominous truth, but nothing is gained by ignoring it.
97.	I ask myself therefore whether it would be more effective to follow the general traditions of international law by
convening like-minded interested States to discuss and formulate a convention against terrorism. The law of the seas and other instruments of international law and international co-operation evolved from the common action of a few States to which others came to adhere. Most of the historic international conventions were constructed in this way. Formulated by the few, they became the consensus of the many. The 43 States whose votes indicated their dissatisfaction with the results of last year's debate on terrorism might well consider meeting for common action, which would in the first place engage themselves and later attract a gradual but broad consensus.
98.	For it becomes more evident each day that the United Nations, frustrated in its activity in regional disputes, should concentrate more of its efforts on matters of planetary concern which require a unitary framework. Mankind has a long past and an uncertain future. Revolutions in science, in technology, in the use of energy, in industrial productivity, in demographic growth have moved forward at a rhythm too quick for the mind to absorb. Man is not at ease with his environment. The intellectual and spiritual consequences are deep. Our culture is dominated by a sense of fragmentation and instability. It expresses the special pathos of the twentieth century condition — the confidence of power and yet the sharp premonition of vulnerability both living within us, together, side by side.
99.	The United Nations may recapture some of its lost prestige and resonance if it gives first priority to those issues which have a planetary dimension. The law of the air and of the seas, the defence of air and water against pollution, the stimulation of economic growth in developing countries, the conservation of resources, the fight against famine, the establishment of a reserve of cereals in years of abundance for use in years of scarcity (following may I say, the thrifty example of our Israeli ancestor Joseph in ancient Egypt), the response to the call of hunger south of the Sahara, the response to the important initiative of President Echeverria of Mexico calling for a charter of economic rights and duties of States — those are some problems which can only be discussed and solved on a global scale. Too much of the time of the United Nations may have been spent on the regional disputes in which individual Governments have the last say — for the simple reason that they have the ultimate responsibility. In the meantime, problems have collected which because they belong equally to all nations, end up by belonging to none. Each of our national societies has its custodians and spokesmen. The question is who except the United Nations can speak for the City of Man? Who speaks in responsible tutelage of the atmosphere, the soil, the oceans, the unique life-supporting Earth?
100.	Perhaps mankind's dilemma is the United Nations opportunity. Let us, therefore, tread this ground firmly but with precision for this is the only planet that we have.﻿60.	Mr. President, it is no mere duty but a real pleasure for me, in coming to the rostrum, to pay a tribute to you, the distinguished representative of Ecuador, and through you to the great Latin American community. I greet your country also as a good Pacific neighbour in the southern hemisphere, and we express the hope that every success will attend your efforts.
61.	This is a session of the Assembly at which we will be assessing the growing relaxation of tensions and the breaking down of the old barriers between East and West.
62.	The debates and the welcome action taken here on new Members are, of course, both a symbol and a practical result of these developments. But other results of the new relationship among the great Powers have still to be translated into practical benefits for the smaller countries and for this Organization. That new great Power relationship, that relaxation, has been brought about by a concert of convenience among the few. But we, the smaller nations, who need stable peace, co-operation and international order cannot rest satisfied with such a temporary and fragile situation. We have to find a way to build upon the relaxation, to bring it within a larger, more constructive and more permanent framework of international order.
63.	A "balance of power" among the great Powers has doubtless contributed to the new spirit of relaxation in international affairs; and to that extent we of course welcome it. But we are not naive. "Balance of power" in the past has been merely another term for the continuation, in a different guise, of competition and rivalry. The great Powers have continued their efforts to shift the balance in their direction; and in due course they have miscalculated, the balance has collapsed and major wars have occurred. In so far as similar elements are inherent in the present situation the world will continue unstable and the detente will be fragile. For, let us not forget, the great Powers still remain free to undertake their unilateral actions. And some of those unilateral, often sadly misguided, actions have brought great suffering in recent years and set back the progress of wide sections of the whole human family. In this nuclear age unfettered freedom on the part of the more powerful members of the family of nations is too dangerous. The great Powers are beginning at last to show signs of recognizing this. We, and they, in their interests as well as ours, must move to repair the damaged structure of international order. They are establishing some sort of balance among themselves; our task is to build a framework for a healthier relationship between the so-called great and the small.
64.	As the head of a newly elected Labour Government, I come to the international scene new; but the needs of the day seem startlingly obvious. Leaving aside the question of international security and international order, the chief need among nations is the same as the chief need within individual nations  —  that is, to achieve economic and social justice. That is the principal concern of my own Government at home; and I am convinced that it must also be the focal concern of the United Nations.
65.	We view with profound concern and dismay a situation in which, more than a quarter of a century after the United Nations was founded, the most critical of issues show no sign of improvement. I refer to the immense and growing gap between standards of living in the industrialized countries and the developing countries. I refer to the world food situation, which is more difficult than at any time since the aftermath of the Second World War. I refer to the rapidly multiplying world population and the other pressures on available resources. These are the obvious ills of international society, complicated still further by an international monetary instability that jeopardizes the development plans of all countries, by the rapid price inflation in much of the world and, this year, by crop failures and famines.
66.	We are in no doubt about the need to tackle more seriously the deepening division between the rich and the poor. It is depressing and deplorable  —  indeed it is intolerable  —  that most of the international conferences of the last decade or more have ultimately evolved along lines dividing the developed from the developing and in ways and with results in some cases which have reflected no credit on countries which were better off than others. Somehow-and sooner, not later  —  resources must be more equitably shared.
67.	A few countries, a minority of the human family, are using the bulk of the world's resources-resources which we now increasingly realize are exhaustible. Yet, ironically, the ever-increasing consumption of these resources is steadily bringing less and less real enjoyment to the favoured few. An increasing number among them are realizing the dead end  —  the literal dead end  —  of a philosophy and a way of life favouring the accumulation of material things to the point of greed and senselessness. It is a philosophy that in its time brought immense material benefits; but the cost to society of its pursuit to excess is now being plainly revealed. Rich countries, at some time, must appreciate that enough is enough. The richer countries must turn consciously towards improving the more intangible qualities of life for themselves while making their energies and skills available to improve, to a far greater extent than ever before, the material level of life for the majority of poorer countries.
68.	I mean, in other words, that a change in attitudes is required. If not, we run the risk that solutions will impose themselves by means of famine, pestilence, the exhaustion of resources and every form of social unrest and war. There is no need to manage so foolishly the resources of this beautiful planet. If this smacks of Idealism I make no apology for it. If there are no ideals there is no hope. We could do with more of the idealism with which we entered the post-war era  —  an idealism which has been pressed out by the weight of paper and speeches and resolutions and, yes, by the many sobering practical experiences of the last 28 years. One could, I can see it. be disillusioned and cynical. But it is imperative that we should act as if we believe the human race has a future. This may be idealistic, but I am not talking idealism, I am talking practicalities. The world has to move on to new courses if we are to survive. It is a matter of practical common sense.
69.	My Government, since taking office, has been trying to put its convictions into effect  —  though I speak in no boastful way, for I am conscious of how small our efforts are when measured against the needs of others. But we are trying to translate into international terms the vision of a decent and humane society which motivates our domestic policies. We have reviewed our mutual assistance programmes against the internationally accepted targets which now form part of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)]. We did so because it seemed to us that there was no greater or more urgent priority confronting us in international affairs  —  at least among those priorities which we, as a non-great Power, were in a position to do anything about. We were especially concerned about the possibility of failure of the Strategy for the Second Development Decade implicit in the decision of many countries to maintain reservations about the targets of the Strategy. In a world where millions continue to go hungry New Zealand has not felt able to rest on its achievements despite a steady growth in the size of our aid programme in absolute terms.
70.	My Government has therefore withdrawn previous reservations  on the Strategy targets. We shall seek to meet them. Notably, we have drawn up a programme of government aid which aims to increase more than threefold the existing flow of aid over the next three-year period. We hope to play our part through membership in the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme next year in ensuring expanded and equitable policies of United Nations aid for countries in need of it.
71.	The process of working to improve conditions of life can never be one-sided; it is a mutual one. In the South Pacific in particular and in South-East Asia, which are areas of close interest to us, we look forward to continued co-operation with the countries of the region. Their resources and skills and the efforts of their peoples are an all-important factor and will deserve the major credit for success if the Second Decade's targets are gained. We have seen the way self-government and independence have drawn forth those skills in small South Pacific territories for which New Zealand was once responsible  —  Western Samoa and the Cook Islands. We look forward to the same constructive development and co-operation in the case of the island of Niue, whose representatives will be discussing their plans with you at this session.
72.	What I have been saying grows out of my Government's strong feeling of the necessity-and, one can say increasingly, the inevitability-of social cohesion in the world today. This is not a unique notion of Labour Governments everywhere, but is rather the root idea of the United Nations Charter itself. We are all part of the one human family. Some of us welcome this, but the plain fact is that all of us have no choice but to adjust ourselves to this central fact of human existence.
73.	Obviously a great deal more than aid is needed. Action has to be undertaken on many fronts. For instance, we heard with interest the proposal of the Secretary of State of the United States of America for a world conference on food [2124th meeting]. Such a proposal naturally interests a country like New Zealand, which is deeply involved in the production of food, and we welcome it. But immediately we consider such a proposal we realize afresh how interconnected all the problems of the world are. People are hungry, but in some countries farmers are paid not to produce, and land is taken out of production. Other food-producing countries, like ours, have difficulty in getting access to northern hemisphere markets, because agricultural arrangements have been established which have nothing to do with efficiency but a lot to do with politics and protectionism. Unless fanners can sell their products at fair prices more food is not likely to be produced. Without freer trade in agricultural products it will be difficult lo get Imore food to the people who need it. Thus we hardly start to talk of food before we are face to face with the fundamental issues raised by the new round of negotiations among the States parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). And the GATT round takes us to a series of other interconnected issues. Yet the basic problems are not really mysterious at all or incapable of resolution if the will is there. Somehow the resources of this planet and the needs of the human family have to be matched. It can be done and it can be done in a way that would benefit all and harm very few.
74.	Both the proliferation of nuclear weapons generally, and the testing of nuclear weapons and devices in the atmosphere, notably in the. South Pacific, have caused New Zealand deepest concern. We view with disquiet the whole attitude of mind by which nuclear weaponry is preserved and indeed fortified as the years go by. In every way possible  —  by protests to the Governments concerned, by action in the General Assembly, by application to the International Court of Justice  —  we have made every effort to bring about the cessation of nuclear testing. But ,the testing in the Pacific zone has still persisted.
75.	In the more general context we have heard with dismay recently of the reported acquisition by the Soviet Union of a more advanced weapons delivery system which will increase the danger of a new round of nuclear weapons escalation. This news underlines the urgency of achieving further progress in disarmament.
76.	This Organization has recently marked the tenth anniversary of the partial test-ban treaty. But there have been more explosions on the average each year since the Treaty was signed than in the years of the nuclear age that preceded the Treaty. Testing continues unabated. Two nuclear Powers have deliberately ignored the Treaty and have continued with intensive programmes of nuclear testing in the atmosphere, with scant regard for the environment in which we all live or for the growing outcry from world opinion. The remaining nuclear Powers which are parties to the Treaty have continued with underground tests, thereby affording the two Powers that are not party to the Treaty with a pretext for pressing ahead with their own programmes. There has been a lamentable lack of progress in the preparation of a Treaty which would impose a comprehensive ban on all testing, in spite of the undertaking contained in the preamble to the 1963 Treaty to work for such an agreement.
77.	In the absence of a comprehensive agreement, accepted by all the nuclear Powers and backed by the overwhelming weight of world opinion, there must remain an acute and continuing danger that still more countries will seek to acquire nuclear weapons. The proliferation of nuclear weapons - measurably advances the certainty of nuclear war, and only a universal ban on weapons testing can eliminate this grave threat. I am convinced that the people of every country are sick of war and the threat of war. They do not want nuclear weapons and their attendant threats. They want peace and they want more progress towards it. Is it impossible for Governments to be moved by the desires of ordinary people?
78.	Just as we shall not solve the problems of pollution, or the exhaustion of the planet's resources, or the growing gulf between the rich and the poor, unless we change our attitudes towards the accumulation of things, so we shall not solve the problems of war and of international order unless we change our attitudes towards power and the accumulation of power. Arms are the potential for war, for mass slaughter, for the human family to destroy itself. Let us keep in the forefront of our thinking a conviction that war is now unacceptable as an instrument for achieving national aims.
79.	Might we not then deduce the consequences of this truth? Shall we continue to recognize nations as "great Powers" merely because they have the capacity to inflict greater damage than any other nation? Of course if they acted, under the Charter, as protectors of the human family, they might be so recognized; but in the last 28 years they have demonstrated convincingly their incapacity to rise to such a role; they have failed to match power with responsibility. Sometimes the shepherds have preyed upon the sheep. Might we not therefore respond by questioning the scale of values that puts power at the top? Might we not insist on a different scale of values, a human scale, a civilized scale, a scale based on the belief that the truly great country is the country which shows concern for the quality of life both of its own people and of its neighbours? We have to eliminate the very institution of war from international dealings. Let us therefore start adjusting our attitudes and bring that changed approach to this very Organization. In that way we might prepare the ground for the changes which are required if the United Nations is to meet the needs of human beings here and now and in the challenging years immediately ahead of it.
80.	For-and do we doubt it? -so long as the old attitudes persist, so long will those nations that aspire to so-called greatness strain and swell themselves to reach the critical bulk and dignity. To attain the honour of sitting at the "top table" they will waste natural resources and cause damage and concern to their neighbours. But let us see for what it is the absurdity of a lonely few sitting at their top table with their obscene weapons which they can use only by committing suicide. That "honour" is surely now an empty one-if it ever was otherwise. Let us develop values that are relevant to the real world and get to grips with the real business of mankind.
81.	In the case of at least one of the great Powers many citizens are realizing the basic truth about power in the nuclear age and are moving to work out its implications. But in the meantime, what do we, the smaller Members of the United Nations, do  —  we whose requests and pleas are arrogantly brushed aside, perhaps not even listened to?
82.	The small Powers should demand a more effective voice in disarmament negotiations. Let us begin at this session of the Assembly with a concerted call for the earliest possible conclusion of a treaty to ban all forms of nuclear-weapons testing. If no significant progress is made through the existing machinery within one year, the Assembly should, I suggest, consider calling a general conference to draft such a treaty.
83.	We have also to confront the simple fact that in the last 10 years or so international law and international organizations have been the casualties of the cold war. We face a desolate landscape within the United Nations. Some Powers have either ignored the United Nations or brought threats to it only when diplomacy had failed and it was too late for the United Nations to act effectively. How often have they then blamed the United Nations and justified their own unilateral actions by its alleged ineffectiveness? It is now for the smaller countries to take up the task of making this Organization work. If the great Powers will also show a change of approach, the United Nations, and mankind with it, will get back into business.
84.	I have already mentioned the possibility of a concerted call for a treaty to ban all nuclear-weapons testing. The small Powers may also wish to consider carefully the possibilities of partial disarmament or demilitarization on a regional basis where circumstances and geography make it appropriate. One of my Government's first acts after election last year was to change New Zealand's vote at the Assembly in order to express its sympathy with the concept of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean. At the Conference of the Commonwealth Heads of Government in Ottawa in August, New Zealand joined in a unanimous endorsement of the action of the Foreign Ministers of the Association of South-East Asian Nations in adopting a declaration to make South-East Asia a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality. In the words of the Commonwealth communique of 10 August 1973, we regard that initiative as a positive contribution towards peace and stability in that region. New Zealand looks with favour also on the establishment by treaty of nuclear-free zones such as that accorded by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), and we intend to consult with our Pacific neighbours about the feasibility of establishing a similar kind of nuclear-free zone in the South Pacific region.
85.	In the field of the settlement of disputes the small nations could achieve gains by showing a readiness to submit disputes to the International Court or to arbitration. There is a disturbing tendency for some influential countries to pay lip-service to the importance of international law and the role of the Court, but in practice to take all possible steps to avoid its jurisdiction. The more countries that accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court the more internationally unacceptable such evasive practices will become and the greater will be the pressure for the unreserved acceptance of the Court's jurisdiction.
86.	Small nations can help to prevent wars and to assist the peaceful resolution of tense situations by strengthening the peace-keeping role of the United Nations. They can do this by earmarking units on which the United Nations may call for peace-keeping purposes. My own Government has decided to train units of its defence services in readiness for participation in future United Nations peace-keeping operations. Small nations may, I believe, express justified disappointment at the lack of progress hitherto recorded by the Assembly's Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations. Recognizing the valuable contributions made by Canada and one or two other members, they should press for the completion of the Committee's mandate set out in resolutions dating from 1967. There is no doubt that the Secretary-General must be given moral and practical support in the initiatives he may have to take in the exercise of his responsibilities in regard to peace and security.
87.	If we think of ourselves as a single family, and if we are going to work together for economic advancement, for the prevention of pollution and other ills, and to escape the threat of war, it follows that we must work together on racial discrimination, which is, justly, one of the major preoccupations of our Organization. This has been a year in which a number of situations affecting human rights have constituted gross affronts to the ideals of the United Nations. In some countries with serious racial problems great efforts have been made and substantial progress achieved in the direction of racial equality, as has happened, for example, in our host country during the lifespan of the United Nations. In other countries racial segregation continues, notoriously, to be enshrined in government policy. In still other countries members of a racial minority who wish to emigrate are subject to onerous conditions and delays, and in yet* another country, members of a racial group have been expelled at short notice and stripped of their possessions without compensation. To these and other situations the response of the United Nations membership has varied widely; some have virtually ignored them.
88.	My own Government is opposed to racial discrimination and oppression no matter where it is practised, by whom, or in whatever form. We have been combing through United Nations resolutions and taking whatever action is appropriate to ensure that our own house is in order. Above and beyond those obligations we have voluntarily accepted a visit from a United Nations representative investigating the problems of indigenous populations. New Zealand is, as far as I know, the first country to show a United Nations mission all aspects of its internal racial situation. We hope that the report of this mission shortly to be presented  will be of value not only to New Zealand but to the United Nations as a whole.
89.	In concert with others, New Zealand will work towards re-establishing the Organization as a protector of the interests of the majority of States, and in particular of the small States. The calls for justice and equity made by the huge new membership must be listened to and heeded. The aspirations of the smaller Powers, their fears, their determination to build a world without war, a world where the rule of law prevails, a world where the weaker will not be subservient to the political and economic interests of the stronger-these demands cannot be ignored. We agree with the Secretary-General that we need action, innovation and determination if mankind is not to be overtaken once again by the dark destructive or selfish side of human nature. We are eager to play our part in creating a true family of man.
﻿1.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the Soviet delegation I should like to congratulate you on your election to the post of President of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly. In discharging your duties, you may be assured of our firm intention to help make this session a successful one. The Soviet Union seeks to ensure that every session of the General Assembly yields practical results in strengthening peace and the security of peoples.
2.	The past year has been crowded with major international events. Some of them, even if viewed separately, represent historic milestones. However, what chiefly characterizes this entire set of events is the development and strengthening of the shift from an extended period of tension in the world to detente and business-like co-operation. From this standpoint, the past year can in a sense be described as having marked a turning-point.
3.	The war in Viet-Nam was brought to an end. The flames of one of the most dangerous breeding grounds of war were stamped out. The just cause of the Viet-Namese people gained a major victory.
4.	In southern Asia, steps are being taken to bring about a further easing of the tension which several times in the past has led to open hostilities. It is gratifying that all three of the States on the subcontinent-India, Pakistan and Bangladesh-are involved in this process.
5.	The positive changes in the situation in Europe are even more clearly apparent. The task of normalizing relations between the States of Eastern and Western Europe is virtually complete, and we hope that no one will create artificial obstacles to the completion of this process. The convening of the all-European conference'' marked the opening of a new and extremely important stage in the work of guaranteeing security and organizing peaceful co-operation on a continent-wide scale.
6.	The danger of a global clash between the two world-wide social systems which would inevitably result in a terrible catastrophe for all mankind has been lessened. That is how the entire world views the Agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the Prevention of Nuclear War,  which was concluded during the visit to the United States by L. I. Brezhnev, tire General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
7.	Today, the principle of peaceful coexistence is not only recognized as the only possible basis for relations between the socialist and capitalist countries but is increasingly being given practical effect and embodied in treaties and agreements. The process of detente is a broad and deep one which is involving an increasing number of States and affecting more and more important areas of the relations between them.
8.	This gives us reason to hope that, as Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev noted in a recent statement, "the present detente is not a temporary phenomenon but the beginning of a fundamental reorientation of international relations".
9.	The changes for the better in international affairs arouse particular satisfaction in the Soviet Union. Not, of course, that other peoples are any less interested in peace than the Soviet Union, It is just that to us the increasing trend towards detente and co-operation is also confirmation of the correctness and consistency of the foreign policy pursued by the Soviet Union.
10.	Peace and friendship between peoples have always been the watchword of Soviet foreign policy and its unchanging goal. That goal was defined by V. I. Lenin, the founder of the Soviet Socialist State and head of its first Government. It has been and continues to be the basis of the foreign policy guidelines laid down at all Congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Our country has taken this position under all circumstances, regardless of the configuration of the international situation. It must be clear by now to any unprejudiced person that this is the long-range, permanent policy of the Soviet Union and is not merely a response to immediate circumstances. It is determined by the very nature of our social system.
11.	The shift in the course of international events in the last few years indicates clearly that ensuring a lasting peace on earth is not simply a noble but remote ideal; it is, rather a completely attainable goal of practical politics.
12.	Another fact is no less obvious. The positive results that hive been achieved up to now did not come about of themselves.
13.	A great deal of intensive effort has gone into the various international measures which led to detente. Sometimes the result is a treaty of agreement drawn up on a page or two of official stationery, but how much labour has gone into every article and paragraph! These agreements are generally preceded by an intensive process of feeling out, by discussions and intensive negotiations. A State visit or international conference lasting no more than a few days crowns the labour of many years.
14.	Obviously, there is no Government that will not say it wants peace, lasting peace, indeed eternal peace. If such pronouncements are not to remain an idle dream, however, they must be backed up by unremitting efforts that go on day after day.
15.	The Soviet Union exhorts its allies as well to follow this course. Indeed, we go beyond exhortations; acting in close co-ordination and in the light of international developments, we take concrete initiatives. At the recent Crimean meeting of leaders of the Communist and workers parties of the socialist countries, it was emphasized that all the States concerned must now join efforts in consolidating the favourable changes that have come about in international affairs, must consistently give practical effect to the treaties and agreements that have been concluded and must advance steadily towards the main objective, which is that of ensuring a lasting peace.
16.	It is a secret .to no one that detente has its enemies whose resistance must not be underestimated. There is also a certain inertia to be overcome. After all, what we are trying to do is to solve problems that have built up over a period of years or even decades.
17.	However, the supporters of detente are more numerous, and what matters is that their efforts should increase and not slacken.
18.	In a number of capitalist countries, a trend towards broader co-operation with socialist States has emerged and is becoming increasingly apparent. Far-sighted political figures in those countries, taking a realistic, responsible view of the world situation, show a willingness to join efforts in working out solutions which give equal weight to the interests of all concerned. It goes without saying that this benefits not only the States directly concerned but the entire cause of peace.
19.	Detente gives the non-aligned and neutral States a greater opportunity to exert a positive influence on international developments, A good many useful ventures, including some within the framework of the United Nations, got their start because of the political influence which these countries exercise. The results of the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries at Algiers showed once again that when the Conference participants speak out in favour of detente and co-operation and against the forces of aggression and oppression of peoples, their voice is convincing and authoritative.
20.	By its very nature, detente cannot simply be a matter of improving relations between a few States or certain geographical regions. If it is to become irreversible, it must be a matter of concern to all States and ultimately become universal.
21.	The United Nations has 135 Member States, all of which, when they joined the Organization, assumed an obligation under the Charter to maintain international peace and security. If that entire potential for peace was translated into action, it would indeed give powerful impetus to the advance towards a reliable system of security for all peoples.
22.	One sometimes hears it said that now that the Soviet Union and the United States are improving their relations and concluding important agreements which help to lessen international tension, there is nothing left for other States to do but to stand by passively. Some go further than that and try to foster the false notion that all of this damages the interests of other countries.
23.	Apart from the fact that such assertions,, whether intentionally or unintentionally, distort the actual state of affairs, their practical effect can only be to paralyse initiative and hamper detente.
24.	Is it possible to conceive of a broader sphere in which energies can be brought to bear than that of peace? Peace offers vast scope for all countries. Every State, large or small, bears responsibility for maintaining security throughout the world. The whole question is where its policy leads to — whether it helps detente or hinders it.
25.	It is important to mark out the political paths to further detente. However, it is no less important that meaningful activities should be undertaken. These efforts cannot remain shut up in government offices. They must be supported by broad, tireless work on behalf of peace by the most varied social forces. Parliamentarians and businessmen, political parties and trade-union, youth, women's and veterans' groups, scientists and artists-all can play a part if there is a determination to work for peace. Millions upon millions of people must be drawn into the movement for a lasting peace.
26.	Yes, the situation in the world has definitely improved in the past year. It is incomparably better than 5 or 10 years ago. But does that mean that all is bright on the international horizon? No, not by any means.
27.	In several parts of the world, the danger of war still exists. In some the guns are already speaking, while in others the finger is poised on the trigger.
28.	The situation in Indo-China is still a complicated one. Military operations are now of a relatively limited nature, but tensions cannot be completely cleared away in that area unless the political settlement if fully implemented in keeping with the legitimate rights and interests of all the peoples of Indo-China.
29.	The key to this lies in strict compliance by all parties to the Paris agreements on ending the war and restoring peace m Viet Nam. in respect for the agreements reached in Laos, and in permitting the people of Cambodia to settle their internal affairs as they see fit and without foreign interference.
30.	True to its internationalist convictions, the Soviet Union will continue to give the necessary aid and support of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and to stand beside the patriotic forces in Indo-China.
31.	Again and again we find ourselves returning to the situation in the Middle East, which, it must be stated bluntly, presents a danger because of the continuing Israeli aggression. Surely we cannot lake comfort in the fact that right now the breeding ground of war is not aflame but merely smouldering. The flames of war may shoot up at any moment, and who can say what the result will be'?
32.	The aggressor seized foreign lands before the eyes of the entire world and is holding on to them by force. In doing so, he is flagrantly violating the rules of international law. One need only recall the latest acts of provocation against neighbouring Arab countries, which were just recently the object of renewed condemnation by the Security Council. Furthermore, all this is not simply a gesture of recklessness or desperation by a handful of people, but the calculated policy of the State of Israel.
33.	No Arab can be made to believe that he must reconcile himself to the existing situation. The Arab States, which have been the victims of imperialist aggression, want only one thing - the restoration of what was taken from them by force -and they are right.
34.	The Soviet Union remains convinced that the Middle East problem can be solved. The basis for a solution exists in the form of the well-known Security Council resolutions, which as was confirmed once again by the recent discussion of the Middle East question in the United Nations are supported by an overwhelming majority of Stales Members of our Organization. The aggressor is becoming increasingly defiant in his refusal to agree to a settlement.
35.	Every effort must be made to see that Israel and the countries and circles that support its present policy understand at long last the need for a more sober approach and that they truly *et out on the path leading to a solution of the problem.
36.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, its position is clear, the situation in the Middle East must be resolved un the basis of the complete I repeat, complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from occupied Arab territories and of respect for the independence and inalienable rights of the States and peoples of the area, including the Arab people of Palestine. Our main, decisive interest in the Middle Fast is to promote the achievement of a just and lasting peace. The Soviet Union wishes to state tins once again from tins rostrum in the most categorical terms.
37.	In order to obtain a proper perspective in a situation characterized by the extreme complexity of the interplay of various factors, one must appraise events in all their fullness and constant flux. That is particularly true at the present stage of the situation, which is dynamic and full of contrasts.
38.	If one views unsolved problems without reference to the positive results that have already been achieved, it is easy to take an extreme position and deny the very possibility of resolving acute, controversial issues. In our opinion, however, there is no place for this approach to international phenomena, including the activities of the United Nations.
39.	Equally unproductive is the other extreme that of presenting the situation in rosy hues and failing to see that what remains to be done is far more than what has already been accomplished.
40.	Both extremes are bad. All States, all Governments and all political figures must, if they are conscious of their responsibility, regard it as their first duty in (he international arena to work actively for peace.
41.	A whole series of problems are clamouring for solution. It cannot be said that the United Nations is not dealing with them. It may well be asked, however, how many of them are really being solved, and the answer is not a comforting one. It must be acknowledged that some problems become harder rather than easier to solve as time goes by, but they may become even more difficult if they are put off further.
42.	The problem of problems is that of the continuing arms race. The development of techniques of mass destruction and the stockpiling of weapons have long since gone beyond the point where using them becomes an absurdity, for, as V. I. Lenin foresaw half a century ago, this process is "undermining the very conditions for the existence of human society". It must be obvious to all how ruinous it is to go on replenishing the arsenals. Yet. only in recent years has it become possible to take the first I repeat, the first step towards limiting the arms race.
43.	It would be wrong to underestimate the importance of the measures that have already been taken. These measures serve to impede to some extent the unrestrained proliferation of armaments, particularly the most destructive types.
44.	Ten years have passed since the signing of the Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, which was the first in a series of agreements. The fact that some countries have not acceded to the Treaty does not nullify the indisputable fact that it is beneficial to the peoples of the world.
45.	The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons  has gained wide recognition, and it has also been extremely helpful in curbing the unclear arms race.
46.	Success has been achieved in preventing of the emplacement of nuclear weapons in several important natural environments, namely the sea-bed and the ocean floor and outer space. Bacteriological weapons which are among the most deadly, have been banned and eliminated.
47.	 Just recently, an important frontier was crossed when, as a result of agreements reached between the Soviet Union and the United States, mutual limitations were imposed on strategic arms and principles were formulated for negotiations on further such limitations. In conjunction with the historic conclusion of the Agreement between the Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the Prevention of Nuclear War, these accords contribute significantly to an improvement in the international atmosphere.

48.	However, further efforts are needed, and they cannot, of course, be confined to two nuclear Powers, even though those two may be militarily the mightiest in the world. We could, in particular, find it gratifying if other States were willing to adhere to the principles jointly laid down by the Soviet Union and the United States for renunciation of the use of force and decisive action to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war; that would be of exceptional importance in ensuring lasting peace throughout the world.

120.	Huge sums continue to be spent for military purposes, and military planning goes on.
121.	Since the United Nations first began to function, the Soviet Union has consistently sought to turn events in the direction of disarmament. We have always urged that it is of the utmost importance to ban nuclear weapons and ensure that nuclear energy is used exclusively for peaceful purposes. I might recall that back in 1946, the first year of our Organization's existence, the Soviet Union placed on the negotiating table a draft international convention to prohibit the production and employment of weapons based on the use of atomic energy for the purpose of mass destruction; it did so in the belief that the aspirations and the conscience of nations called for such a convention.
122.	How much discussion there has been since that time, and how many resolutions have been adopted by the Security Council, the General Assembly and various committees and commissions! If this were not such a serious matter, one could speak sarcastically about the mountains of paper that have been used up in the process. The essential point, however, is that there has been little change in the situation.
123.	It would not occur to anyone to deny that the solution of the problems of disarmament involves great difficulties. And yet the international questions which have been successfully resolved up to now also appeared forbidding at the outset. Consequently, references to objective difficulties do not reveal the main point. The crux of the matter lies in political considerations. And responsibility for political considerations rests primarily with the people who are invested with power, those who stand at the helm of government.
124.	There is hardly any point in digging about in the past, in analysing all the proposals which have been made or in dwelling on the positions of individual States. All that is quite well known. The walls of the United Nations have heard many speeches on the subject of disarmament.
125.	Today, however, we all have more experience in settling international problems than we had yesterday. And it suggests to us that even in the field of disarmament real progress can be achieved in some areas. All that is needed is to follow in practice a truth which in theory is certainly recognized by all: not to proclaim "all or nothing", but to single out one after another those problems on which agreement can be reached even at the present stage, and then solve them. Experience has shown that this approach can prove its worth even in such matters as vital to the security of the State as that ultimate weapon, the nuclear missile. Is that not demonstrated by the Soviet-American agreements dealing with that matter?
126.	Neither can there be any doubt about another matter. Those agreements would not have been possible if they had put either side at a disadvantage, if the principle of equal security had not been scrupulously observed.
127.	But if, on such a basis, two countries have been able to achieve a limitation of arms, then why cannot, say, five Powers act similarly, provided, of course, that there will be no threat to the security of any of them? And if that can be done, what is there to prevent such a method from being applied to a wider range of countries? The greater the number of States that participate in a practical solution of the disarmament problem, the more tangible will be the benefit for the security of all peoples.
128.	Furthermore, we believe that the successes achieved on the path towards detente already make it possible for considerable additional resources to be made available to assist the developing countries.
129.	In view of all these considerations, the Soviet Union wishes to propose that the question of the reduction of the military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council of the United Nations by 10 per cent and utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries should be included in the agenda of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations as an important and urgent item.
130.	If our proposal meets with general agreement, and if the General Assembly adopts an appropriate resolution, a beneficial and useful step can be taken.
131.	The States which are permanent members of the Security Council of the United Nations are known to have the largest military budgets. This is taken into account in our proposal.
132.	In our view it would be appropriate to take as the starting-point for the proposed reduction the level of military budgets for the current year, 1973. That proportion of the funds made available by such a reduction which would be used to benefit the developing countries could, for example, amount to 10 per cent.
133.	Needless to say, such a step would require "the participation of all the permanent members of the Security
Council without exception. It would also be desirable for other economically and militarily powerful States to reduce their military budgets.
134.	We suggest that the funds made available for economic assistance to the developing countries should, first of all, be granted to those countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America which have experienced great difficulties this year because of grave natural disasters such as drought and floods.
135.	The distribution of these funds should be carried out on an equitable basis. The amounts to be granted to individual countries, and the time-limits within which they are to be provided, could be determined by an international committee appointed on an ad hoc basis from among representatives of the developing countries, the States which are permanent members of the Security Council and other countries which reduce their military budgets.
136.	It is obvious that the reductions in military expenditure would also benefit the States carrying out such reductions. They would be able to channel considerable funds towards the non-military needs of their own people and an improved standard of living.
137.	The United Nations has laid the groundwork for fruitful activities on behalf of peace in a number of important fields.
138.	Specifically, at last year's session, the General Assembly voted by a large majority in favour of the settlement of two major problems: the non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVIII], and the question of a World Disarmament Conference [resolution 2930 (XXVII].
139.	But has this clearly expressed will of the peoples of the world, this opinion of the overwhelming majority of the States Members of the United Nations been taken into account by all States? Unfortunately, that cannot be said to be true. It is a known fact that the Governments of some States have taken a position which prevents those decisions from being put into effect.
140.	The Soviet Union believes that the earliest possible implementation of the solemn declaration of the General Assembly, speaking on behalf of the members of the United Nations, concerning their renunciation of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, would be an effective means of ensuring that one of the principles of the United Nations Charter was laid down as a law of international life. To that end, a forceful decision in the matter must be taken by the Security Council.
43. For its part, the Soviet Union is ready to negotiate and to formalize reciprocal undertakings with all -and I stress, all — the nuclear powers on the non-use of force, including, at the same time, prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons.
44. The time has come to undertake practical preparations for the convening of a World Disarmament Conference. Arrangements must finally be made so that the Special Committee provided for in the General Assembly resolution relating to preparations for that Conference can carry out the functions entrusted to it. There is no need to prove how desirable it is for all the nuclear Powers to take part in the Committee's work.
145.	There are some who contend that the World Disarmament Conference could not be productive because of the large number of participants. But who ever said that complex problems must necessarily be settled by two or three States, or that a large-scale international conference will not reach agreement?
146.	We harbour no illusions that the World Disarmament Conference will do away with all problems at one stroke. Let it go on for several months, or even several years. How can there be any objection to that if the Conference makes a contribution to the practical solution of urgent disarmament problems?
147.	It is also argued that the Conference might hamper the efforts at solutions involving a smaller number of States. We feel that such fears are unfounded. Multilateral efforts can only help bilateral ones, and vice versa.
148.	Although detente and the development of peaceful co-operation are measured, not in decades, but merely in years, into this short period of time there have been compressed events which are significantly changing the face of the world.
149.	Memories are still fresh of a time when relations between the Soviet Union and the major capitalist countries were marked by tension and, in the case of some of them, by outright hostility. The fact that those times are now behind us is not welcomed by all. But all who are concerned for peace welcome the fact that those relations are now on a new track.
150.	The Soviet Union and France have been dealing with each other in a consistent and serious manner for a number of years. Both countries have acquired useful experience and are using the favourable trends of detente to develop both their bilateral ties and political co-operation in international matters, and especially European matters. The Soviet Union values that important achievement.
151.	The radical changes achieved by the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany in their relations demonstrate that the two States are guided not by considerations of expediency, but by the long-term interests of their peoples and the interests of peace in Europe. A spirit of realism has also prevailed in the approach of the Federal Republic of Germany to questions which had long divided it and the Polish People's Republic and the German Democratic Republic. Many obstacles to the establishment of normal relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the other socialist countries of Europe have been removed, although in the Federal Republic of Germany itself, from all indications, such a policy is not to everyone's liking. The influence of forces clinging to old, outworn policies can still be felt there even today.
152. A few days ago the General Assembly congratulated the representatives of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, two independent sovereign States, on their countries' admission to membership in the United Nations. This is one of the most important indications of the changes which are taking place in the world. We warmly welcome the presence in this hall of the delegation of the fraternal German Democratic Republic, and we are also gratified to see here the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany.
153.	It is not difficult to gauge the significance of the historic fact that the General Assembly of the United Nations, pursuant to Security Council recommendations, enthusiastically adopted the decision to admit these two States to membership in the United Nations. That fact shows merely that such a decision was long overdue. It is in keeping not only with the interests of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, but also the interests of all States throughout the world.
154.	In a mere 18 months or two years an enormous distance has been covered in relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. As a result of Soviet-American talks at the highest level — during the visit of President R. Nixon to Moscow in May of last year and the visit of the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, to the United States this year — a firm basis has been laid for the development of relations between the two countries in a way which is fully in keeping with the principle of peaceful coexistence and which opens up vast possibilities. A number of agreements in various fields have been concluded. All these agreements have been made public; they speak for themselves. And they have not remained mere pieces of paper; much work has been done to give them concrete expression.
155.	It is of fundamental importance that the improvement in Soviet-American relations is being achieved on the basis of mutual recognition of the opposition between the two States' social systems and ideologies, and on the understanding that the rapprochement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America is directed against no one and threatens no one's interests.
156.	The Soviet Union is convinced that if both sides unswervingly carry out all the obligations they have assumed, including the strict observance of a cardinal principle in international relations, that of non-interference in each other's internal affairs — a principle on which our whole approach is based-then Soviet-American relations will be a permanent favourable factor promoting international peace-a point which is of historic significance.
157.	Relations between the Soviet Union and Japan are not at a standstill. The Soviet Union intends to continue to work to ensure that these relations become relations of genuine good-neighbourliness and co-operation. That is quite feasible if both countries constantly bear in mind the fundamental long-term interests of peace and security in the Far East.
158.	The Soviet Union is ready to expand its relations of mutually advantageous co-operation with all countries of
Europe and the other continents which so desire, whether in the search for solutions to current international political problems, wide-ranging economic agreements, joint efforts to use the benefits of scientific and technological progress or the exchange of spiritual values.
159.	On the first day of the present session of the General Assembly the second phase of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe began. This is a great and unprecedented endeavour. For the first time all European States, together with the United States and Canada have sat down at the same table in order jointly to determine measures that would help to assure the peoples of Europe a peaceful future for as long as can be foreseen.
160.	The Soviet Union views the prospects for the work of the Conference with considerable optimism. Its participants have already to a certain extent found a common language; there are, at least, no differences between them in agreeing that the Conference faces tasks of great importance which will require business-like and constructive consideration. If such an approach prevails to the end, the participants in the Conference will be able to place their contribution to the strengthening of general peace in the scales of history with a sense of satisfaction. That will benefit not only States directly concerned with European affairs, but all peoples of the world.
161.	There is a possibility of achieving a good and, in terms of its potential consequences, even a historic success as a result of the Conference. All that is necessary for this is for all participants to display a responsible and serious approach to the problems before them. Nobody should yield to the temptation to teach others how to manage their internal affairs. It must be admitted that some would like to try to impose their own internal practices on others. No, internal practices, internal laws, represent the line before the threshold of every State at which all others must stop.
162.	Were we to embark on a course of imposing our own practices on other countries, whether in the field of economic life or ideology, it is probable that those who are trying to persuade us to adopt the laws .morals and customs of others would disagree. And that is understandable and justified. If States and their representatives to the United Nations tried to act in that way, none of us here would advance one step in important matters and people would, not without justification, draw an analogy between the activity of the United Nations and the Biblical legend of the Tower of Babel, where those involved ceased to understand one another and failed to complete what they had intended to build.
163.	Meanwhile, some in the West are not averse to launching noisy propaganda campaigns and even to resorting to the methods of blackmail in order to cover up their own attempts to interfere in the affairs of other countries. Matters have gone so far that they are attempting to arrogate to themselves the right to dictate right and left by whom and how the question of emigration from this or that country should be handled, how many emigrants there should be and when and just where they should go. In doing so, they do not hesitate to praise to the skies those who represent no one but who, whether deliberately or inadvertently, are merely an unwitting weapon in the hands of the forces opposed to the relaxation of tension in the world.
164.	The Soviet Union decisively rejects such an approach and condemns it. We will not allow anyone to interfere in our internal affairs.
165.	The question that inevitably comes to mind is this: do the organizers of these campaigns seriously think that only the Soviet Union, only the socialist countries are interested in international detente and in the development of trade, scientific and technical and other forms of co-operation and that others are merely doing them a great favour by agreeing to hold talks on these matters?
166.	Anyone who is interested in the slightest degree in seeing an improvement in the international situation is well aware that this is not the case, that this is a reciprocal process governed by the mutual interests of the parties concerned and, above all, by the interests of the people.
167.	The main thing now is not to let the basic, truly important problems facing States be overshadowed by a poisonous atmosphere deliberately cheated over trumped-up questions.
168.	The Soviet Union considers it desirable to supplement political detente in Europe by military detente. This cause may be served by yet another major undertaking by a number of States: the talks opening on 20 October 1973 on the mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe.
169.	As a result of the positive changes in the international situation, it is also becoming possible to view the situation in Asia in a new light.
170.	In Asian affairs, as in international affairs in general, the policy of the Soviet Union is a policy directed towards peace, security and co-operation. The Soviet Union extends its hand to any State which shares these goals. A shining example of this is the uninterrupted development of relations between the USSR and India, a great, peace-loving Asian Power. It is further demonstrated by the history of friendly relations between the Soviet Union and many other Asian countries. Our fundamental belief is that there are no problems in relations between the Soviet Union and the States of Asia which could not be solved at the negotiating table.
171.	The Soviet Union is the initiator of the concept of collective security in Asia. This idea is constantly gaining strength; scepticism is being dispelled and the unfounded suspicions are disappearing.
172.	In a recent speech in Alma Ata, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, L. I. Brezhnev, said that we support collective security in Asia because "we are seeking to eliminate war, armed conflicts and imperialist aggression on the continent of Asia; we want the conditions for unhampered development and national revival to be guaranteed every country and people; we want a spirit of trust and
mutual understanding to prevail in relations between the countries of Asia".
173.	The Soviet Union is in favour of equitable participation in the system of collective security by all Asian countries, without any exception. Any intention of directing collective security in Asia against any State is totally alien to us, despite allegations to the contrary.
174.	The positive changes which have recently become apparent on the Asian continent also include the emergence of new, constructive factors in the situation on the Korean peninsula and this is, first and foremost, to the credit of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. That being so, it would be all the more inadmissible for new, artificial obstacles to the peaceful and democratic unification of Korea to be added to the old forms of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people.
175.	There is, of course, no need to recall in detail in this Assembly the consistent support which the Soviet Union has given and continues to give to the developing States of Asia, Africa and Latin America. On more than one occasion the United Nations has been the arena for fierce political battles with colonialism of every kind, and the Soviet Union has always resolutely defended oppressed peoples and given all possible support to their struggle for national liberation.
176.	We are well aware that this is a difficult and grim struggle, and some very recent events remind us yet again that it may take tragic turns.
177.	In Chile, as we know, the lawful Government has been overthrown. The elected President, Salvador Allende, his country's most outstanding patriot, has been killed. The forces of reaction have struck a blow at the Chilean people's desire for true independence and freedom.
178.	There was serious provocation of another Latin American State, Cuba, whose embassy and one of whose ships were fired upon. Surely the heads of the military junta realize that such acts can only be described as international brigandage and acts of aggression?
179.	An anti-Soviet campaign has been stirred up in the country; there are instances of arbitrary and violent action against Soviet institutions and citizens who were sent to give friendly assistance to the Chilean people at the request of the lawful Government of the country.
180.	What can one say about this? There can be no doubt that history will bring to account those who attempt to prevent the peoples from breathing the air of genuine independence or to drown in blood their right to national freedom.
181.	For its part, the Soviet Government could not remain indifferent to the intolerable situation that was developing and took the decision to break off diplomatic relations with Chile, or, more precisely, with the regime of the military junta.
182.	There is no doubt that the just cause of the Chilean people will triumph in the end, despite the current tragedy.
183.	States which have embarked on the course of political independence have always found and will continue to find in the Soviet Union a friend ready to aid them in consolidating their economic self-sufficiency, to share its knowledge and experience and to assist them in their moments of difficulty. Expansion of co-operation with developing countries is an integral part of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union.
184.	It is our conviction that the relaxation of international tension is conducive to a situation where young States can, in peace, devote all their efforts and resources to economic and social progress, to raising the living standards of their people, and to shaping their own future without fear of outside interference.
185.	The healthier the over-all world atmosphere becomes, the more anachronistic are the remaining vestiges of colonialism and the reserves of apartheid and racial discrimination, the stronger is the condemnation they merit and the more vigorous must be the struggle to bring about their complete elimination. It is the clear duty of the United Nations to contribute to the speediest possible elimination of these shameful survivals of colonialism wherever they still exist, be it in Angola or Mozambique, Bissau or Southern Rhodesia, South or South-West Africa.
186.	It is our aim that the voice of the fighters should be clearly heard here, within the walls of the United Nations, that the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted by the fifteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly [resolution 1514 (XV)] should be fully implemented and that the racists and colonialists should be finally deprived of the opportunity to receive support from outside, in particular from certain Member countries of the United Nations, something which is still a feature of current international life.
187.	Those who struggle against colonialism and racism for their national liberation and for their inalienable human rights and dignity enjoy the unwavering support of the Soviet Union. Let there be no doubt that the Soviet Union will continue to do its utmost to ensure that this struggle ends in a decisive victory.
188.	In the struggle for peace, the Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community are one with the developing States and we value this highly. With some of these countries we have well established relations; with others, relations are only now beginning to develop. But apart from this, the platform of the struggle for further detente offers ever-greater opportunities for co-operation. We believe that the fullest possible advantage should be taken of them.
189.	Throughout its history, the United Nations has operated in varying political weather, and so far the fine days have been far fewer than the bad ones. What has enabled it not merely to survive but also to do many useful things? The fact that it was founded for the purpose of maintaining international peace. And this task remains permanently relevant. From another point of view, the United Nations Charter contains adequate provisions for the fulfilment of the Organization's lofty mission. The
United Nations has demonstrated its strength in those cases where the purposes and principles of its Charter have been strictly observed, and its weakness when departures from the Charter have been permitted. What matters is that this world Organization should remain in the mainstream of international politics, contributing to the solution of crucial problems.
190.	This does not in any way imply that the Soviet Union is inclined to neglect even one aspect of the diversified activities of the United Nations, whether of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian nature. It actively assists in putting into practice everything of value-1 repeat, everything of value — that the collective wisdom and experience of States can produce.
191.	Indeed, a few days ago, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR ratified two important international legal instruments pertaining to respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms and the protection of human dignity and the interests of society as a whole. These documents were carefully and thoroughly elaborated in United Nations bodies and were subsequently approved by the General Assembly. I am referring to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex] and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [ibid.]. These two Covenants do not merely contain wishes or recommendations of a declaratory nature, but provide for quite specific obligations on the part of States parties to them. We appeal to countries which have not yet signed or ratified these Covenants to follow our example and to take steps to ensure that they come into force as soon as possible.
192.	The peoples of the world expect from the United Nations measures which will contribute to a further improvement in the international situation. With favourable changes taking place in the world, opportunities are increasing for the United Nations to make its own, major contribution to the consolidation of detente and to making it stable and irreversible.
193.	For its part, the Soviet Union is sparing no effort for the triumph of the cause of peace on earth. This is the essence of its peace-loving policy and its peace programme, launched by the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Every State, every statesman can be confident that he will continue to find in the Soviet Union a faithful partner at all times and in all cases where action is taken to prevent the danger of war and contribute to peace.﻿35.	I should like to add my congratulations to those so well expressed by the Minister for External Relations of Brazil to our new President, Ambassador Benites of Ecuador, whose long experience at the United Nations and his many contributions to international law and to the inter-American system all ensure that this twenty-eighth session of the Assembly will have outstanding leadership.
36.	I come before you today  —  confirmed in office but two days ago  —  as probably the world's most junior Foreign Minister. That President Nixon should ask me as my first official act to speak here for the United States reaffirms the importance that my country attaches to the values and the ideals of the United Nations.
37.	It would be idle to deny that the American people, like many others, have sometimes been disappointed because this Organization has not been more successful in translating its architects' hopes for universal peace into concrete accomplishments.
38.	But, despite our disappointments, my country remains committed to the goal of a world community. We will continue to work in this Parliament of Man to make it a reality.
39.	Two centuries ago, the philosopher Kant predicted that perpetual peace would come eventually — either as the creation of man's moral aspirations or as the consequence of physical necessity. What seemed Utopian then looms as tomorrow's reality; soon there will be no alternative. Our only choice is whether the world envisaged in the Charter will come about as the result of our vision or of a catastrophe invited by our short-sightedness.
40.	The United States has made its choice. My country seeks true peace, not simply an armistice. We strive for a world in which the rule of law governs and fundamental human rights are the birthright of all. Beyond the bilateral diplomacy, the pragmatic agreements and dramatic steps of recent years, we envisage a comprehensive, institutionalized peace encompassing all nations, large and small, a peace which this Organization is uniquely situated to foster and to anchor in the hearts of men. This will be the spirit of American foreign policy. This attitude will guide our work in this Organization.
41.	We start from a bedrock of solid progress. Many of the crises that haunted past sessions of the General Assembly have been put behind us. Agreement has been reached on Berlin; there is a cease-fire in the Middle East; the VietNam war has been ended. The rigid confrontation that has dominated international life and weakened this Organization for a quarter of a century has been softened.
42.	The United States and the Soviet Union have perceived a commonality of interests in avoiding nuclear holocaust and in establishing a broad web of constructive relationships. Talks on stretegic arms limitation have already produced historic accords aimed at slowing the arms race and ensuring strategic stability; we have today resumed negotiations on this subject. The positive results we hope for will enhance the security of all mankind.
43.	Two decades of estrangement between the United States and the People's Republic of China have given way to constructive dialogue and productive exchanges. President Nixon has met with the leaders of that great nation; we have agreed to a historic communique  that honestly sets forth both our differences and our common principles; and we have each opened a liaison office in the capital of the other.
44.	Many other countries have seized the initiative and contributed, in substance and spirit, to the relaxation of tensions. The nations of Europe and North America are engaged in a conference to further security and cooperation. The two German States have taken their place in this Assembly. India, Pakistan and Bangladesh have begun to move towards a welcome reconciliation. North and South Korea are at last engaged in a dialogue which, we hope, will lead to a new era of peace and security between them.
45.	Yet these achievements, solid as they are, have only made less precarious the dangers and divisions inherited from the post-war era. We have ended many of the confrontations of the cold war; yet, even in this room, the vocabulary of suspicion persists. Relaxation of tensions is justified by some as merely a practical interlude before renewed struggle. Others suspect the emergence of a two- Power condominium. And as tension between the two original blocs has eased, a third grouping increasingly assumes the characteristics of a bloc of its own — the alignment of the non-aligned.
46.	So the world is uneasily suspended between old slogans and new realities, between a view of peace as but a pause in an unending struggle and a vision of peace as a promise of global co-operation.
47.	In 1946 James Byrnes, the first Secretary of State to address this Assembly, spoke of how the United Nations could "help to break down habits of thinking in national isolation and go far to bring about understanding and tolerance." 
48.	The United States will never be satisfied with a world of uneasy truces, of offsetting blocs, of accommodations of convenience. We know that power can enforce a resigned passivity, but only a sense of justice can enlist consensus. We strive for a peace whose stability rests not merely on a balance of forces, but on shared aspirations. We are convinced that a structure which ignores humane values will prove cold and empty and unfulfilling to most of mankind.
49.	The United States deeply believes that justice cannot be confined by national frontiers; that truth is universal, and not the peculiar possession of a single people or group or ideology; that compassion and humanity must ennoble all our endeavours.
50.	In this spirit we ask this Assembly to move with us from detente among the big Powers to co-operation among all nations, from coexistence to community.
51.	Our journey must begin with the world as it is and with the issues now before us. The United States will spare no effort to ease tensions further and to move towards greater stability. We shall continue, in the spirit of the Shanghai communique, our search for a new relationship with the People's Republic of China. We shall work to promote positive trends elsewhere in Asia. The uncertain peace in Indo-China must be strenghened; the world community cannot afford, or permit, a relapse into war in that region. We shall continue to pursue vigorously the building of constructive relationships with the Soviet Union. We shall strive to promote conciliation in Europe. In the negotiations beginning next month we shall seek a reduction of the military forces that have faced each other for so long across that divided continent. We shall give new vigour to our policy of partnership in the Western hemisphere. We shall honour our pledge to promote self- determination, economic development and human dignity across the continent of Africa. We shall press on with strategic arms limitations talks. We consider them crucial for security and stability in this period. We shall search for solutions to the world-wide problem of conventional weapons, which drain our resources and fuel the fires of local conflict.
52.	In all these efforts the United States will be guided by certain fundamental principles.
53.	We have no desire for domination. We will oppose — as we have consistently opposed throughout this century — any nation that chooses this path. We have not been asked to participate in a condominium; we would reject such an appeal if it were made.
54.	We will never abandon our allies or our friends. The strengthening of our traditional ties is the essential foundation for the development of new relationships with old adversaries.
55.	We will work for peace through the United Nations as well as through bilateral relationships.
56.	We recognize our special obligation, as a permanent member of the Security Council, to assist in the search for just solutions in those parts of the world now torn by strife, such as the Middle East. While we cannot substitute for the efforts of those most directly involved, we are prepared to use our influence to generate a spirit of accommodation and to urge the parties towards practical progress.
57.	But progress on the traditional agenda is not enough. The more we succeed in solving political problems, the more other and perhaps deeper challenges emerge. As the world grows more stable we must confront the question of the ends of detente. As the threat of war recedes, the problem of the quality of life takes on more urgent significance.
58.	We are, in fact, members of a community drawn by modern science, technology and new forms of communication into a proximity for which we are still politically unprepared. Technology daily outstrips the ability of our institutions to cope with its fruits. Our political imagination must catch up with our scientific vision. This is at the same time the greatest challenge and the greatest opportunity of this Organization.
59.	The pollution of the skies, the seas and the land is a global problem.
60.	The increased consumption of cereals has reduced world food reserves to dangerously low levels.
61.	The demand for energy is outrunning supply, and the need for technological innovation is urgent.
62.	The growth of the world's economy is inhibited by restrictive trading blocs and an insufficiently flexible international monetary system.
63.	The exploitation of the resources of the ocean beds, which is essential for the needs of burgeoning populations, requires global co-operation lest it degenerate into global contention.
64.	Challenges of this magnitude cannot be solved by a world fragmented into self-contained nation States or rigid blocs.
65.	I do not intend, today, to cover the whole agenda of international co-operation. Rather, I shall speak briefly of some illustrative areas for common action. I pledge the readiness of the United States to solve these problems co-operatively and to submit proposals Jmed at their resolution.
66.	First, a world community requires the curbing of conflicts. The United Nations, in its 28-year history, has not always been idle in this sphere. In Indonesia, the Indian subcontinent, the Middle East, the Congo, and Cyprus, it has shown its ability for effective fact-finding, mediation and peace-keeping missions. This central aspect of the United Nations work must be strengthened. On a small planet, so bound together by technology and so interdependent economically, we can no longer afford the constant eruption of conflict and the danger of its spread.
67.	Yet, in recent years, we have found ourselves locked in fruitless debates about the inauguration of peace-keeping operations and over the degree of control the Security Council would exercise over peace-keeping machinery — an impasse which has ensured that permanent peace-keeping machinery would not come into being. Each peace-keeping unit we have formed has been an improvisation growing out of argument and controversy.
68.	We should delay no longer. The time has come to agree on peace-keeping guidelines so that this Organization can act swiftly, confidently and effectively in future crises. To break the deadlock, the United States is prepared to consider how the Security Council can play a more central role in the conduct of peace-keeping operations. If- all countries concerned approach this problem with a desire to achieve a co-operative solution, the United Nations can achieve a major step forward during this session.
69.	Secondly, a world community must have the widest possible membership. The exclusion of any qualified State denies representation not only to Governments, but to peoples. Membership in this body should be a step towards reconciliation, not a source of conflict. The time has come for North and South Korea to be offered their rightful place here without prejudice to a future evolution towards unification. In this spirit also, we support the permanent membership of Japan in the Security Council.
70.	Thirdly, a world community must assure that all its people are fed. The growing threat to the world's food supply deserves the urgent attention of this Assembly. Since 1969, global consumption of cereals has risen more rapidly than production; stocks are at the lowest levels in years. We now face the prospect that, even with bumper crops, the world may not rebuild its seriously depleted reserves in this decade.
71.	No one country can cope with this problem. The United States therefore proposes that a world food conference should be organized under United Nations auspices in 1974 to discuss ways to maintain adequate food supplies and to harness the efforts of all nations to meet the hunger and malnutrition resulting from natural disasters and that nations in a position to do so offer technical assistance in the conservation of food. The United States is ready to join with others in providing such assistance.
72.	Fourthly, a world community cannot remain divided between the permanently rich and the permanently poor. Let us therefore resolve that this Assembly, this year, initiate a search, drawing on the world's best minds, for new and imaginative solutions to the problems of development. Our search must be candid and realistic, but it must also be free of peremptory demands, antagonistic propositions, ideological confrontation, or propagandistic rhetoric, or we will surely fail.
73.	The United States is prepared to join this new search, providing freely of the experience gained over two decades. We have learned not to exaggerate our capacity to transform nations, but we have also learned much about what progress is possible. We will participate without pre-conditions, with a conciliatory attitude and a co-operative commitment. We ask only that others adopt the same approach.
74.	In this spirit, the United States is willing to examine seriously the proposal by the distinguished President of Mexico for a charter of the economic rights and duties of States." Such a document will make a significant and historic contribution if it reflects the true aspirations of all nations; it will accomplish nothing if it is turned into an indictment of one group of countries by another. To command general support, and to be implemented, the proposed rights and duties must be defined equitably and take into account the concerns of industrialized as well as of developing countries. The United States stands ready to define its responsibilities in a humane and co-operative spirit.
75.	Fifthly, a world community must harness science and technology for the benefit of all. We must begin to match our remarkable technological skills with our equally remarkable technological needs. We must find the means for the co-operative and judicious development of energy resources. We must responsibly confront the problems of population growth, which are fast pushing humanity towards the limits of what our earth can sustain. We must embark on a new scientific revolution to increase agricultural productivity in all lands. No field of human endeavour is so dependent upon an open world for its advancement, no field is so in need of international co-operation to cope with its potential dangers.
76.	Are we prepared to accept the imperatives of a global society and infuse our labours with new vision? Or shall we content ourselves with a temporary pause in the turmoil that has racked our century? Shall we proceed with one-sided demands and sterile confrontation? Or shall we proceed in a spirit of compromise produced by a sense of common destiny? We are convinced that we must move from hesitant co-operation born of necessity to genuine collective effort based on common purpose.
77.	It is a choice no country can make alone. We can repeat old slogans or strive for new hope. We can fill the record of our proceedings with acrimony, or we can dedicate ourselves to dealing with man's deepest needs. The ideal of a world community may be decried as unrealistic, but great constructions have always been ideals before they can become realities. Let us therefore dedicate ourselves to this noblest of all possible goals and achieve at last what has so long eluded us: true understanding and tolerance among mankind.﻿56.	 This year the General Assembly once again looks to Latin America to provide a distinguished figure to preside over its proceedings. The honour, Sir, has fallen to you, and to your country. May I take this opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption of this high and responsible office, and also to express my confidence that our deliberations will be guided into constructive and productive channels with your experienced hand at the helm?
57.	The membership of the United Nations at this moment stands at 135. This is a large membership when compared with the 51 States which signed the Charter as founder Members In 1945, of which my country was one. One of the objectives then, and in the intervening years, was to strive for universality in the Organization so that "We, the peoples," of the Organization could justifiably speak as "We, the peoples" of the world. That desirable objective has been brought a step nearer realization by the admission during the current Assembly session of three new Members — the Bahamas, the Federal Republic of Germany, and the German Democratic Republic — representing between them a considerable population and a diversity of cultural, social, historical and political backgrounds and philosophies.
58.	The admission of the two Germanys is the fruit of a policy of detente actively pursued in Europe, and is a striking example of the fact that accommodation can be reached between parties with widely differing political persuasions and conflicting interests, provided that the will is there and the effort is conscientiously and patiently made. It is a lesson from which we can all profit for the lessening of hostility is conducive to the buttressing of peace, which is the raison d'etre of this Organization.
59.	The spirit of detente abroad was one of the main themes of the statements made in the general debate at last year's session of the General Assembly. The passage of time enables us to consider its consequences in better perspective and to take stock. Those countries which have adopted the course of detente appear to be consolidating their contacts and relationships to their mutual benefit and, in many ways, to the benefit of others. At the same time, some other Governments with seemingly irreconcilable differences have begun to follow their lead and to open up a cautious dialogue with one another. This attitude is highly commendable and ought to be endorsed and conscientiously emulated by all of us, for the single, overriding imperative of international relations is international peace. This is a fact which should be borne in mind, particularly by smaller countries, for they, too, have a duty to work towards a relaxation of tension after the example set by the major Powers. It would be a tragedy if the world should move out from under the shadow of major-Power confrontation only to be faced with the threat of increasing conflicts of smaller scale. Such a tragedy must be averted by responsible leadership in this Organization, as well as by the individual efforts of each one of us.
60.	In its external relations, South Africa, for its part, remains willing to pursue all avenues of contact and communication, with the object of relaxing tensions and creating conditions favourable for the solution of problems of concern to us. Where our efforts in this direction have been reciprocated the results have been encouraging. South Africa remains ready to enter into discussions with any country, on the African continent or elsewhere, which shares our approach, an approach rooted firmly in the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes. South Africa harbours no aggressive intentions against any country; hence our willingness to conclude non-aggression pacts with other States in Africa. Accusations that we have committed acts of aggression are totally unfounded. We are irrevocably opposed to the use of force and violence in international relations.
61.	It is deplorable that force and violence in the form of indiscriminate attacks against innocent, uninvolved and unsuspecting individuals and groups should have become a characteristic of our times. Terrorism takes many forms, but a common component is the utter disregard by the perpetrators for established authority and their determination to subvert, and if possible destroy, constitutionally established law and order, both national and international. It is doubtful that the international law of sovereign States can survive in a meaningful way if the international community should fail to discharge its responsibilities to curb this evil. It is a source of concern to my Government that so little progress has been made on this urgent world problem in the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism, which held its first session in July and August this year. My Government considers that the Assembly should urgently commence drafting a general convention on terrorism. We cannot afford to evade or to confuse the issue while terrorism is rampant.
62.	If we, the international community, resolve that we shall settle our political differences without having recourse to force, if we renounce irresponsible methods of terror and violence, and if we continue to make progress in disarming a world bristling with lethal weapons, we can direct our energies and our resources to the solution of the world's other pressing problems, which are many. A number of these are problems of a non-political nature, and confront mankind as a whole. I suggest that the most basic problem of all, and one which encompasses a host of supplementary problems, is how in the future we shall balance the world's rapidly increasing population against our planet's dwindling resources, taking into account the rising economic and social expectations of the very same people whose numbers are increasing at a phenomenal and unprecedented rate. We have, for example, already been given a disturbing reminder this year of the difficulties of providing everywhere the most elementary of man's needs: food. The spectre of famine was raised by the devastating drought in West Africa, end drought conditions, floods and other natural disasters elsewhere. Let me at once express South Africa's sympathy to those who have suffered as a result. These disasters and the consequential threat of famine should not be seen as isolated occurrences. They are a foretaste and a warning of the problems that will have to be dealt with in the future.
63.	Another serious problem with which mankind will have to deal is the potential energy crisis. It is necessary that there be the closest co-operation between the developed and the developing nations in the consideration of this matter, for, after making due allowance for the need to protect the quality of our environment, energy is the key to the material improvement of man's estate. We are faced with the possible gross depletion of the total known reserves of all sources of energy if energy is in future consumed at the rate forecast today. It is, therefore, essential for all of us that the different energy-producing resources of the earth be rationally exploited in the interest of mankind as a whole.
64.	Nuclear energy undoubtedly occupies a key position in supplying mankind's energy needs of the future. Nuclear power reactors which will supply only about 51,000 megawatts of electricity in 1976, are expected to contribute as much as 564,000 megawatts in 1985 and then to double their supply in the space of the next five years. In terms of total world requirements of electricity, nuclear energy is expected to supply 23 per cent by the year 2000 as compared with half of 1 per cent in 1970.
65.	South Africa is one of the world's major producers of uranium. We possess large exploitable deposits of low- grade uranium and we provide a stable supply of a portion of the world's uranium on a competitive basis. At the present moment we are engaged in assessing our capability of supplying this nuclear fuel in an enriched form since enriched uranium is the fuel for most nuclear powered reactors.
66.	Having said this, let me add that South Africa's atomic energy programme is devoted to peaceful purposes exclusively. It has always been our policy, and it remains our policy, to sell uranium only on condition that the uranium be made subject to International Atomic Energy Agency or equivalent safeguards to ensure that it is not diverted to military purposes. In the same spirit, the uranium enrichment project to which I have just referred will also be applied for peaceful purposes only. To that end, the South African Government proposes to negotiate, at the appropriate time, an agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency for the application of safeguards to the enriched uranium produced by the project, so as to ensure that the product is used solely for peaceful purposes.
67.	We believe that this development will not only herald a new era of industrial and economic growth in South Africa but will also enable us to make a contribution to the efforts of the international community to solve the potential world energy problem.
68.	May I at this point digress to refer in a few words to the unfortunate events at Carletonville of which mention has been made in the course of the general debate. The tragic loss of life is deeply regretted. Sympathy with the next of kin was expressed by my Prime Minister and others immediately after the incident. A memorandum compiled by my Mission, in the course of reproduction as an official document,  will place the matter in perspective. Meanwhile I would simply ask that judgement on the incident not be formed purely on the basis of emotion. What transpired at Carletonville will be determined by the judicial inquiry which has been instituted.
69.	Turning now to the question of South West Africa, may I say at the outset that my Government has noted with regret the repeated calls of the Security Council to terminate the contacts between South Africa and the Secretary- General. Those contacts represent a voluntary attempt to use the facilities of the United Nations for the pursuit of a peaceful settlement of the problem. That is one of the primary purposes of this Organization. Yet the call is now apparently to bypass and to set aside the machinery which the United Nations offers for the peaceful settlement of problems. This must inevitably serve as an encouragement to those who advocate confrontation, force and violence as a means to an end in South West Africa. And that course is being advocated despite the fact that in the 14 months between March 1972 and April 1973 during which contacts were made, more real progress was achieved in the search for a solution to the problem in the United Nations context than in all the preceding years.
70.	For the first time in the history of the Territory, directly as a result of the contacts, representatives of black, white and other groups from throughout the territory have been brought together around the table under the chairmanship of a Prime Minister of South Africa for the purpose of discussing and trying to resolve issues with Territory- wide implications. We consider that this is a significant and important development for, as my Prime Minister has declared, it is the inhabitants of South West Africa themselves who must decide their own future and not South Africa or the United Nations.
71.	We for our part do not consider that we have the right to impose a settlement on the Territory and we do not believe that the United Nations has the right or indeed wishes to impose a settlement on its inhabitants. We shall respect their wishes.
72.	We have indicated that any exercise to ascertain the wishes of the population will not be compromised by any existing political and administrative arrangements. And we have stated, with regard to the question whether individual population groups may suddenly become independent as separate entities, that we do not envisage such an eventuality. We expressed the latter position in dealing with a point raised by the Secretary-General whether the possibility could arise, in the light of South African legislation, that one or other of the population groups might acquire separate independence before the South West African people as a whole had exercised their right to self-determination.
73.	We believe that all this, taken together with the other points set out in the South African statements reproduced in the Secretary-General's reports, constitutes progress in the real sense of the word. South Africa, for its part, is ready to engage in further contacts, for we believe that we ourselves as well as the United Nations should persevere in searching for a solution.
74.	We realize that there are those who believe that progress has been too slow. On the other hand, they too should realize that this is a most complicated and intractable problem and that it cannot therefore be solved overnight. This is fully recognized by the Secretary-General, who stated in his report of 30 April of this year that:
"Should the Security Council decide to continue these efforts", — that is, the contacts — "it should bear in mind my earlier statement to the effect that time and protracted discussion will be required if any progress is to be achieved." 
75.	South Africa's presence in the Territory is accounted for by the undertaking we have given to ensure that its inhabitants are able and ready to exercise their right to self-determination and independence. We have no designs whatsoever with respect to any part of South West Africa's territory. In the meanwhile, we believe we have a duty to continue to assist in the development of South West Africa in all spheres: economic, social and political. We derive no financial or economic advantage whatsoever from our presence in the Territory. Every cent which accrues from taxation levied on income derived within the Territory, including profits on foreign investments and operations in the Territory, is reinvested in South West Africa for the benefit of all its inhabitants. In addition, South African taxpayers contribute to the Territory's advancement on current account alone — that is, excluding payments to finance capital projects — funds which in the last few years have varied between $60 million and $80 million per annum. It will be appreciated that our resources are not unlimited. Moreover, we have responsibilities also to our own peoples in South Africa, where there is an increasing need for funds for development purposes. Nevertheless, we make this Contribution to South West Africa in the genuine belief that it is our duty to do so.
76.	One cannot of course forecast the outcome of the Security Council's consideration of the Secretary-General's latest report. We recognize that the gap separating us, although narrower than it has ever been as a result of our contacts with the Secretary-General, still exists. But we would hope that the Council and this Organization as a whole will be guided by the imperative need for peaceful evolution by consent of those directly concerned, namely, the inhabitants of South West Africa, both black and white. We believe it is crucial that all the segments of the population of South West Africa should be enabled to get together to sort out their problems and to resolve them to their own satisfaction, in a manner consistent with the peaceful objectives of the Charter
77.	As I have indicated, a start has already been made in this direction. We have also been encouraged in this regard, by a series of discussions which have recently taken place and which are continuing between representatives of the white group in South West Africa and representatives of such groups as the Hereros, the Namas and the Damaras as well as of the organization known as the Voice of the People. The latter representatives are among those who are known to be opposed to the South African Government. Nevertheless, they have all in the course of these discussions expressed themselves as favouring dialogue in South West Africa and as being opposed to violence as a means to an end. As an example of these discussions, I may mention that Mr. Clemens Kapuuo of the Hereros and Mr. D. F. Mudge, a member of the Executive Council for South West Africa, met in Windhoek on 24 September. In a joint statement issued shortly thereafter, they declared that they were both in favour of contact and dialogue as a method of solving the problems of South West Africa and that they rejected violence. In the course of their discussions, according to the statement, they exchanged views on matters relating to South West Africa in general. It was clear, the statement added, that both of them wished to promote the interests of their respective peoples and of the peoples of South West Africa as a whole. Further meetings of this nature are envisaged.
78.	These meetings of individuals of differing views and attitudes are an indication of the desire of the inhabitants of the Territory to involve themselves jointly and directly in the future evolution of South West Africa, and we hope that they will receive encouragement to seek progress in this way. We for our part will afford them every encouragement.
79.	In this world of continual change, we recognize and accept the need for change also in areas of our own responsibility. Our policies are anything but rigid or static. My Prime Minister has stated in Parliament that the South African Government is a Government of change, and that it will continue to bring about change in a systematic and orderly way as warranted by changing circumstances and changing requirements. But we believe in change by evolution, not by violence. This is why we attach special importance to the consultations which are continually in progress between the Government and the leaders of the black and other peoples in South Africa.
80.	We have stated on many occasions that our policies provide-for the different black nations in South Africa to achieve self-government in the geographic areas of their jurisdiction and to advance to complete sovereignty and independence in the sense in which this concept is generally understood. In other words, each of them would qualify for membership in this Organization. They are aware that they can negotiate their independence, in the full sense of the word, with the South African Government at any moment of their choice, as the South African Prime Minister has repeatedly stated.
81.	Eight black nations, totalling more than 14 million people, have already achieved self-government in varying degrees. Six of them have their own Parliament, their own Cabinet and Prime Minister, the latter answerable to their Parliament. The two other black nations, including the 4 million Zulus, have Legislative Assemblies, with executive power vested in an Executive Council. During the course of the last two years, five elections have been successfully held to elect members of these Parliaments. A sixth election is still to be held.
82.	Arising from this political progress, the South African Government and the Prime Ministers and other leaders of all the various nations are continually in dialogue with each other. Frequent contacts take place at all levels from the Prime Minister downwards and in the private as well as the public sector. In fact, my Prime Minister has, during the seven years of his premiership, held more official discussions with the leaders of these nations than have all his predecessors together. Many of these leaders, moreover, travel abroad and state their positions publicly. Their opinions on matters of detail falling within the over-all objectives of South African policy do not always coincide with the opinions of the South African Government — but it is their prerogative and duty to put the position of their peoples as they see it. The South African Government regards these contacts and discussions as essential for the promotion of peaceful evolution.
83.	One of our concerns, in this evolutionary process, is the question of human dignity. The South African Government is fully conscious of the importance of recognition and acceptance of the human dignity of the individual, and my Prime Minister has publicly stressed the central position it must take in future political developments in South Africa. Earlier this year in Parliament he said he was at all times prepared to do away with unnecessary measures if these measures stood in the way of healthy relations in South Africa.
84.	There is nothing which exercises the minds of South Africans more than the solution of our own special political problems. It is after all our future we are building and it is our security that is at stake.
85.	We ask the international community to respect our desire to resolve our problems without interference. Let me repeat, however, that we are at all times ready to enter into discussions concerning our internal policies with anyone who is genuinely interested therein. But in the final analysis, it is we ourselves who must solve our problems and solve them we must and shall, whatever the sacrifice, if we are to continue to live in peace and prosperity in South Africa.
86.	This brings me to the end of my prepared statement. Before resuming my seat, may I refer briefly to the efforts made to prevent me from addressing the Assembly. I do not intend to deal with the accusations levelled against my Government in the course of these efforts, for they are irrelevant to the issues before the Assembly. I must, however, totally reject them.
87.	We have witnessed here an attempt to violate the principle of freedom of speech and expression in this august Assembly. It was an attempt to deprive the representative of a Member State of his inherent right to participate in the proceedings of the General Assembly and to state the case of his country. If it had succeeded it would have put the clock back 2,000 years. For it was the Romans who introduced the concept audi alteram partem: listen to the other party, a principle which has survived for over 20 centuries and is still observed and cherished in all civilized societies. The actions of some representatives were unworthy of the dignity and the status of this Assembly.
88.	Moreover, far from humiliating me and my country, they have succeeded only in furnishing proof of the length to which they will go to undermine a principle which forms one of the main corner-stones of the United Nations and without which it cannot survive.
89.	Finally, in view of what has happened here I must place on record my strongest possible objection to the unprecedented, illegal and unconstitutional action by the General Assembly concerning South Africa's credentials. My Government views it in the most serious light indeed.﻿Since the twenty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly, some notable events have successively taken place on the international arena. First, there was the cessation of the war in Viet-Nam and Laos. Secondly, there were the talks held and the agreements concluded between the two super-Powers-the United States and the Soviet Union. Thirdly, there was the convening of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. In. the meantime, the third world has further awakened and grown in strength, and the African, Latin American and non-aligned countries held a series of important international conferences. What is the characteristic of the present world situation? Is the international situation really moving towards a general detente? This is a question in which people are interested. The delegation of the People's Republic of China would like to state its views on this question and a number of other questions with which the current session of the General Assembly is confronted.
3.	First, what is the characteristic of the present world situation?
The Chinese Government has long held that our world is now going through a process of great turbulence, great division and great realignment. The basic contradictions in the world are all sharpening, in particular the contradictions between imperialism and colonialism on the one hand and
the oppressed nations and peoples on the other and the contradictions among the imperialist countries, especially those between the two super-Powers. Although no new world war has broken out since the Second World War, local wars resulting from imperialist aggressions have never ceased. The great victory of the heroic Viet-Namese people's war of resistance against United States aggression and for national salvation has once again proved that imperialism and all reactionaries are paper tigers. A small nation can defeat a big one and a weak nation can defeat a strong one, so long as they dare to struggle, are good at struggle and persevere in struggle. It is not the people who fear imperialism; it is imperialism which fears the people. Revolution is the main trend in the world today. Now that the war in Viet-Nam has ended, can it be assumed that the world will henceforth be tranquil? Obviously not. When the Korean war was ended in 1953, some people thought that no more gunshots would be heard in the world. Not long afterwards, however, the Suez war broke out and then the Viet-Nam war started. And even today, the war in Indo-China has not stopped completely, for there is still fighting in Cambodia. Tension in the Middle East has not relaxed in the least. The colonialists and racists are carrying out armed suppression against the African people and the African people are developing armed resistance against them. The aggression against, subversion and control of and interference in countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America by the super-Powers are continuing without end. A recent case in point is the military coup d'etat in Chile. President Salvador Allende died a martyr at his post. We express profound condolences on his heroic death. At the same time, we hold one should not forget how harmful the absurd theory of so-called "peaceful transition" is to the anti-imperialism revolutionary struggles of the Asian, African and Latin American people, a theory which has been advocated by another super-Power. The dismemberment of a sovereign country by armed force and the legalization and perpetuation of that division have also become a tendency on the part of the big Powers in their attempt to dominate the world. In the economic field, the gap is widening between the rich and developed countries and the poor and developing countries, and even among the developed countries there exist many contradictions, and hence detente among them is far from being the case. The recent Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-aligned Countries, held at Algiers, strongly condemned racism, Zionism, colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism and strongly demanded a change in the present state of affairs in the world, demonstrating a further awakening of the Asian, African and Latin American peoples. In a word, we consider that the characteristic of the present situation is one of great disorder throughout the world and not tranquillity. And the main trend amidst this great disorder is that countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution. 

5.	Second, why is there no tranquillity in the world today?
6.	We have always held that all countries in the world, big or small, should be equal; that all countries, irrespective of their social systems, should establish normal State relations on the five principles of mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, mutual non-aggression, noninterference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence; and that international disputes should be settled peacefully on the basis of these principles without resorting to the use or threat of force. This should apply to relations between big Powers, to relations between a big Power and a small country, and all the more so to relations between a strong and a weak, or between a rich and a poor country. It was on these principles that China started to improve its relations with the United States and established diplomatic relations with Japan. In their joint communique issued in Shanghai on 27 February 1972, China and the United States further declared that they should not seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region and were opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony. The same principle was reaffirmed in the Sino-Japanese statement of 30 September 1972 on the establishment of mutual diplomatic relations. In our view, the above-mentioned principles are the minimum criteria for the equality of all countries in international relations and indicate the correct way to achieve a relaxation of international tension.
7.	As sovereign States, the United States and the Soviet Union are fully entitled to take the measures they deem appropriate to improve and develop their bilateral relations. However, we cannot but point out that the Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War signed by them on 22 June 1973 goes far beyond the scope of bilateral relations. One may ask, Who has given them the right to enter into what they call "urgent consultations" in case of a dispute between either of the parties and other countries and even between any other two countries? The phrase about disputes which "appear to involve the risk of nuclear conflict" is open to any interpretation, and their so-called "urgent consultations" are bound to be followed by actions dictated by their own interests. Does not this mean that they may interfere at will in the relations among all countries on the strength of the huge numbers of nuclear weapons in their possession? China absolutely will not go begging for nuclear protection from any country, nor is she afraid of nuclear threat from any country. But we feel in duty bound to state our views on this matter since it concerns all the people of the world.
8.	The signing of such an agreement by the Soviet Union and the United States is by no means accidental, but is derived from the so-called principle which they agreed upon in 1972 that the Soviet Union and the United States have "security interests. . . based on the principle of equality". What is meant by "security interests.. . based on the principle of equality"? To put it bluntly, it means rivalry for world hegemony — wherever one goes, the other will do the same. What they are doing now is simply to wrap up this content in the form of an agreement.
9.	In fact, this Agreement is a mere scrap of paper. It contains no explicit undertaking on the non-use of nuclear weapons; still less does it envisage the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. The United States Government was more frank when it stated that the Agreement is only a general statement of policy which does not involve any particular positive actions that either side has to take, and pointed out that agreements are not always maintained and there is nothing self-enforcing about this document.
10.	However, the Soviet leaders have made a great fanfare, lauding that Agreement to the skies, alleging that it ushered in "a new era" in international relations and opened up "historical vistas for strengthening universal security as a whole," and that it was "indeed of historic importance for all mankind". They have their motives for so eulogizing the Agreement. One may recall Khrushchev's famous remarks: "Even a tiny spark can cause a world conflagration" and "We" — that is, the Soviet Union and the United States-"are the strongest countries in the world, and if we unite for peace there can be no war. Then if any madman wanted war, we would but have to shake our fingers to warn him off." In this way, if the Soviet Union could be bound together with the United States, would not the whole world have to cringe to them? However, in our view, things may not necessarily turn out that way.
11.	It is not so easy for the Soviet Union to bind itself to the United States. Shortly after the signing of the Agreement, the Soviet Union pressed forward with its underground nuclear tests and hastened the development of missiles with multiple warheads. The United States will not take this lying down. Why? Because the desperate struggle for nuclear superiority and world hegemony still goes on. The contention between the Soviet Union and the United States now extends all over the world. A vivid proof can be found in the recent subversion of a government in Asia and another in South America. Their scramble is becoming increasingly fierce. That is the reason why there is no tranquillity in the world today. So, what peaceful coexistence is there to speak of? There is. only a travesty of peaceful coexistence; the substance is coexistence in rivalry. But whether such coexistence can last is, of course, another question.
12.	The Soviet leaders noisily proclaim that as a "socialist" State the Soviet Union is the "natural and surest ally" of the developing countries. In the past, some people in China also believed this, because they saw the Soviet Union as the homeland of the great Lenin and the Chinese revolution, a continuation of the October Revolution. Therefore, how could the Soviet Union, as a socialist State, fail to give the developing countries whole-hearted internationalist assistance? But since Khrushchev rose to power, we came to realize, thanks to the long and direct experience we had gained as a result of the Soviet Union's demand for the establishment of a joint fleet in the China Sea, its withdrawal of experts, its tearing up of contracts, border intrusions, subversions, and so on, that this was not the case, and that what the Soviet Union practised was not internationalism but great-Power chauvinism, national egoism and territorial expansionism. Therefore we will not blame those friends who have so far failed to see this for lack of experience. How can a socialist turn into an imperialist? There is in fact nothing strange about it if one goes a little into the history of the international Communist movement. Was not Karl Kautsky once a somewhat well-known Marxist? But he later betrayed Marxism and capitulated to imperialism. It was Lenin who passed the final historical verdict on Kautsky in his well-known pamphlet Trie Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky.  People can change; so can a State. It has changed, and what can one do about it?
13.	Lenin pointed out on one occasion: "We judge a person not by what he says or thinks of himself but by his actions." That applies to a State as well. What has the Soviet Government done to other countries in these years? This is clear to the broad masses of the people of Czechoslovakia, Egypt and Pakistan, to the peoples of Cambodia who are fighting dauntlessly, and to other peoples who have been subjected to its aggression, subversion, control, interference or bullying. The actions of the Soviet Government have amply shown that it is "socialist in words, imperialist in deeds", as Lenin said.
14.	The Soviet-United States Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War cannot hoodwink many people or intimidate the peoples of the world, but can only arouse indignation, misgivings and disillusionment. The tide is mounting against the hegemonism and power politics practised by the super-Powers.
15.	Third, who is really against detente?
16.	Shortly after the war in Viet-Nam came to an end, the United States Government pronounced 1973 to be "the year of Europe". That was followed by the first stage of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe — a conference advocated by the Soviet Government for many years. All this indicates that Europe is the focus of contention between the two super-Powers — the United States and the Soviet Union — and that the so-called European Security Conference is nothing but one of the forms of contention. Its proceedings showed, however, that it went far beyond the scope to which the two superpowers wished to confine it. At that Conference many countries stated pointedly that deeds and not empty promises are called for in the matter of security; that European security must be based on the safeguarding of national independence and sovereignty; that one must not become mentally disarmed and off guard simply because the European Security Conference has taken place; and that in order to guarantee European security, military blocs must be disbanded, foreign military bases dismantled, and foreign troops withdrawn, so that the relations between European countries may be established on the principles of mutual respect for independence and sovereignty, complete equality and non-interference in each other's internal affairs.
17.	Moreover, some countries pointed out that the security of the Mediterranean and the security of Europe

were inseparable and that there could be no security for Europe when the Mediterranean is under the armed threat of, and contention by, the two super-Powers. All this is tantamount to a direct blow at those who seek by means of this Conference to consolidate the occupation of many European countries which resulted from the Second World War or the events thereafter, and to proceed further to disintegrate Western Europe and dominate the whole of Europe. The European Security Conference is still going on; but, judging from the proceedings of its first stage, it will further expose the ambitions of that super-Power which seeks to divide and disintegrate Western Europe.
18.	While stepping up its arms expansion and war preparations and its world-wide contention with the United States for spheres of influence, the Soviet Union is clamouring for "spreading the zone of relaxation to the whole world". Accordingly, it has lately picked up once again the long-ignored trash known as the Asian Collective Security System. This is most amusing. It reminds us of the American by the name of John Foster Dulles, who, after the war in Indo-China was brought to an end by the first Geneva Conference in 1954,  hastily rigged up the so-called South-East Asia Treaty Organization, which was directed against China and whose members were mostly non-Southeast Asian countries. The Soviet Union is a European country and the chief of the alliance deriving from the Warsaw Treaty. Why should it be so eagerly concerned about the "collective security" of Asian countries? Has the ghost of John Foster Dulles gone to the Kremlin? Actually, would it not be less devious and more direct simply to extend the Warsaw Treaty to Asia?
19.	Lately, the Soviet leaders have tried to pin an additional label on China, namely "opponent of detente". As the Chinese saying goes, this is putting Mr. Chang's hat on Mr. Li's head. Since you say you are so anxious to relax world tension, why do you not show your good faith by doing a thing or two — for instance, by withdrawing your armed forces from Czechoslovakia or the Mongolian People's Republic and by returning the four northern islands to Japan?
20.	We hold that imperialism means war. There is a danger of war so long as imperialism exists. Today, when the various types of basic contradictions in the world are sharpening, the danger of a new world war still exists, and the people of all countries must be prepared, and must not let themselves be misled by a temporary and superficial facade of detente. Only thus can we better strive for a bright future for the world. In the final analysis, the destiny of mankind is decided by the people in their hundreds of millions who persevere in struggle and unity, and not by the one or two super-Powers.
21.	Fourth, there is the Cambodian question.
22.	The Chinese Government resolutely denounces the United States Government for continuing to support in various ways the puppet regime in Phnom Penh and wantonly to interfere in the affairs of Cambodia. The regime of the traitorous Lon Nol clique, which is now installed in Phnom Penh, was imposed on the Khmer people by the United States imperialists and their allies and has been illegal from its very inception. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of the head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, is the sole legal government of Cambodia. The People's Armed Forces of National Liberation of Cambodia under its leadership have liberated over 90 per cent of Cambodia's territory, with over 80 per cent of the population. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia has been recognized by nearly 50 countries. The participants at the recent Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries, which met in September at Algiers, have declared that the Royal Government of National Union under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk is the only legal government of Cambodia and earnestly requested all countries which love peace and justice to give it formal recognition [see A/9330, p. 12]. This is a voice of justice. The Chinese Government holds that the continued usurpation by the traitorous Lon Nol clique of the seat in the United Nations is a contempt for all countries that uphold justice, for the Fourth Conference and for the United Nations itself. The Chinese Government firmly maintains that the present session of the General Assembly should take a decision immediately to expel the representatives of the traitorous Lon Nol clique from the United Nations and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of the head of State, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, its rightful seat in the United Nations.
23.	Fifth, I turn now to the Korean question.
24.	There are now before the General Assembly two draft resolutions on the Korean question — one sponsored by the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan and other countries [A/C.1/L.645], the other sponsored by Algeria, China and other countries [A/C.1IL.644 and Corr.l]. Regarding the former draft resolution, the Chinese Government considers that the position for retaining the United Nations Command and the United States forces in South Korea and for the entry of both North and South Korea into the United Nations is unreasonable and contrary to the joint communiqué of North and South Korea issued on 4 July 1972,  although it contains the positive element of dissolving the so-called "United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea".
25.	The withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the Korean question are long overdue. According to the provisions of the Korean Armistice Agreement of 27 July 1953,  a high-level political conference for the settlement of the Korean question ought to have met within three months after the Armistice Agreement became effective. The conference was not held only because of the obstructions put up by the United States side at the time. Subsequently, the question was again discussed at the 1954 Korean Political Conference in Geneva. The then United States Secretary of State, Mr. John Foster Dulles, peremptorily rejected all reasonable proposals, thereby blocking once again a solution to the question of the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the Korean question. The United States was then absolutely unwilling to withdraw its forces from South Korea.
26.	What could be done about it? Well, if you would not withdraw, we would.
27.	In 1958 the Chinese People's Volunteers unilaterally and unconditionally withdrew from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Consequently, there are no foreign forces on one side in Korea, while large numbers of foreign forces, mainly United States forces, are stationed on the other side. This most unreasonable state of affairs cannot but constitute an obstacle to the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea.
28.	Is South Korea so lacking in national self-respect that it must rely on the support of foreign forces? Obviously, such a state of affairs cannot be tolerated by the people in South Korea. Subsequently, thanks to the initiative of President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, a joint communiqué of North and South Korea on the independent and peaceful reunification of the country was issued on 4 July 1972, leading to the start of a dialogue between the North and the South. This was a big step towards the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Korea and the peaceful settlement of the problem of the reunification of Korea by the Koreans themselves. With the issuance of this communiqué, the Korean Armistice Agreement, signed 19 years ago, to a great extent ceased to play the role it once had. The Koreans in the North and the South have themselves agreed upon refraining from committing armed provocations, big or small, and upon taking active measures for preventing incidents of unexpected military conflicts. Is this not the best guarantee for the maintenance of the armistice?
29.	It is captious to say that the dissolution of the United Nations Command and the withdrawal of foreign forces would nullify the 1953 Armistice Agreement. It should be recalled that the Korean Armistice Agreement was signed between the Korean People's Army and the Chinese People's Volunteers on the one hand and the United Nations Command on the other. According to that kind of reasoning, would not the withdrawal of the Chinese People's Volunteers mean that the Korean Armistice Agreement had long been nullified? Since the Chinese People's Volunteers could withdraw from Korea, why cannot the foreign forces in South Korea under the signboard of the United Nations Command do the same?
30.	The continued presence of the so-called United Nations Command and of foreign forces in South Korea is at variance with the principles agreed on by the two sides in Korea on 4 July 1972 that "unification shall be achieved through independent Korean efforts without being subject to external imposition or interference". In point of fact, it is the very presence of this outside force that has emboldened the South Korean authorities to reject a number of reasonable proposals put forward by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, thus causing the dialogue between the North and the South to bog down. The Kim Dae Jung incident which occurred not long ago
has shown how abjectly the South Korean authorities depend upon foreign forces. In order that conditions may be created to accelerate the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, the United Nations Command should agree to disband, and all foreign forces stationed in South Korea should agree to withdraw.
31.	As for the entry of both North and South Korea into the United Nations, this is plainly an attempt to legalize and perpetuate the division of Korea, which runs counter to the principle agreed upon between the North and the South that has a homogenous people, a great national unity shall be sought, above all as one nation, transcending differences in ideas, ideologies and systems". In his five propositions put forward on 23 June of this year [see A/9027, para. 19], President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has pointed out that the North and the South should not enter the United Nations separately and that if they want to enter the United Nations before the reunification of the country is achieved, they should enter it as one State, at least, under the name of the Confederal Republic of Koryo after the Confederation is enforced. This proposition is entirely reasonable and merits the sympathy and support of all countries that uphold justice.
32.	Sixth, there is the question of Bangladesh.
33.	At the time of the twenty-sixth session of the General Assembly in 1971, the Soviet Union supported India in
 dismembering Pakistan by armed force. The General Assembly and then the Security Council adopted resolutions by overwhelming majorities calling for cease-fire, troop withdrawal and the repatriation of the prisoners of war by India and Pakistan f General Assembly resolution 2793 (XXVI) and Security Council resolution 307 (1971)]. At its twenty-seventh session, in 1972, the General Assembly further adopted two interdependent resolutions calling for the repatriation of Pakistan prisoners of war and expressing the desire for the admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations [resolutions 2938 and 2937 (XXVII)].
34.	It was not until 28 August of this year that an agreement on the repatriation of prisoners of war and civilians was reached between India and Pakistan at New Delhi. This agreement has come much too late, but its ultimate conclusion is to be welcomed. The agreement reached is on paper, and there will have to be a process before it can be turned into reality. Complications may yet arise. The Chinese Government holds that the question of admitting Bangladesh to the United Nations can be considered once the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council are implemented without qualification. But this can be done only after the thorough implementation of the United Nations resolutions, and definitely not before.
35.	Seventh, there is the Middle East question.
36.	Although the two super-Powers are both trumpeting about a general world trend towards detente, a tense stalemate of "no war, no peace" still prevails in the Middle East. When the Soviet Union dismembered Pakistan in 1971, no one said there was the risk of a nuclear war. Neither has anyone made a similar warning in connexion
with the current United States intervention in Cambodia. It is only in the Middle East that, at the mention of an attempt by Arab countries to repulse Israeli aggression and recover their lost territories, the air is filled with cries about a risk of nuclear war between the two super-Powers. Why is this so? Because the situation of "no war, no peace" created and maintained by the two super-Powers serves them best in their scramble for spheres of influence, oil resources and strategic positions in the Middle East. In. appearance the two super-Powers are each supporting one of the antagonistic sides, but in essence they are like two clay figurines which have been kneaded together and then remoulded, so that there is something of each in the other. Take the case of the aggressor Israel. Could Israel be so unbridled in its truculence if it received only supplies of American weapons but none of Soviet manpower? In our opinion, the so-called risk of a nuclear war has been deliberately fabricated to scare people. It is futile to count on the super-Powers to bring about a settlement of the Middle East question. Nor will the situation be changed by any resolution adopted by the United Nations. The only way out is to act independently and rely on one's own efforts. China has never had anything to do with the Israeli Zionists. China firmly supports the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle against Israeli zionism. We believe that so long as they uphold unity and persevere in struggle, the Palestinian and other Arab peoples, with the support of the people of the whole world, will certainly surmount all the difficulties on their road of advance, recover their sacred territories and regain their national rights.
37.	Eighth, there is the question of opposing colonialism.
38.	An excellent situation prevails in Africa. In the past year, the African people have achieved a series of new victories in their struggle to win and safeguard their national independence and to oppose racism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism. Through their struggle they have come to realize more and more the necessity of armed struggle and mutual support. The Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [OAU], at its tenth ordinary session held last May in Addis Ababa, issued the resounding call to "eliminate all forms of colonialism on the African continent". The conference documents fully manifested the unity and co-operation of the African countries and their militancy against the common enemies, as well as the determination of the African people in the territories which have not yet become independent to expand their armed struggle for national liberation. With imperialist and superpower support and connivance, the racist regimes and colonialist authorities in Africa are resorting to more insidious and brutal means in their desperate struggle to buttress their tottering rule. They have long refused to implement the United Nations resolutions which reflect the just demands of the African people. What deserves special attention is that while the old-line colonialists are on the decline, neo-colonialists of different shades are trying to take their place by means of cunning and deceptive manoeuvres. The super-Powers are sowing dissension among the African countries so as to fish in troubled waters. The African people are still faced with the task of a protracted, complicated and tortuous struggle. Africa belongs to the great African people. The Chinese people stand firmly by the African people. We resolutely support the peoples of Mozambique, Angola, Azania, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Guinea-Bissau, Spanish Sahara and other regions in their just struggle for national liberation. We warmly hail and give recognition to the new-born Republic of Guinea- Bissau. We resolutely support the just struggles of all African countries against aggression, subversion and the sowing of discord by colonialism and neo-colonialism and in defence of State sovereignty and African unity. We are confident that the awakening African people will continue to win new victories in the course of their coming struggle.
39.	Ninth, there is the question of opposing maritime hegemony.
40.	The determined struggle for the recognition of maritime rights in a zone of 200 nautical miles initiated by Latin American countries has won increasing support among the numerous small and medium-sized countries. Both the Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the OAU and the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held earlier this year, expressly declared that a coastal State is entitled to establish an exclusive economic zone or a zone of national jurisdiction with the maximum limit of 200 nautical miles. And land-locked States are also entitled to share sea-bed and fishery resources. On this problem of maritime rights, the numerous small and medium-sized countries are waging a gigantic and vigorous struggle against the maritime hegemony of the super-Powers. With a view to seeking hegemony on the seas and oceans, the super-Powers are trying in vain to preserve the outdated law of the sea and are doing their utmost to restrict the territorial sea and scope of jurisdiction of all countries. They insist that the three-nautical-mile or 12-nautical-mile rule for the territorial sea is sacred and inviolable, arguing that the expansion of the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction will narrow down the open sea. This is a bluff. What sacredness and inviolability! The three-nautical-mile rule was a man- made stipulation, and so was the 12-nautical mile rule. Both rules reflect the reality of the time when the seas and oceans were controlled by colonialism and imperialism. What is there that is so sacred and inviolable? As to the assertion that the larger the territorial seas and the zones of jurisdiction, the smaller the open sea, the question must be asked, What is the open sea? The so-called "open sea" has, in fact, always been the "private sea" of a few strong naval Powers. The numerous small and medium-sized countries have now stood up; they constitute the majority and demand a change in the so-called law of the sea, which is advantageous only to the imperialists. What fault can-one find with this? In a proposal submitted by the Soviet Union and its allies to the United Nations Industrial Development Board on 2 June 1972, they said that "the sovereignty over the natural resources is depending to a great extent upon the capability of utilizing these resources by the industry of the developing countries .. '.". 
41.	At the 101st meeting of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction held in Geneva on 22 August 1973, a Soviet representative said that the developing countries could not increase their catch even if they had a 200-nautical-mile zone, because they lacked the technical know-how, fishing capacity, and so forth. These statements simply mean that the greater the might, the greater the right. This is the logic of imperialism, pure and simple. Why are the super-Powers so violently opposed to the position of the small and medium-sized countries for enlarging the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction? It is not difficult to see the underlying motive if only one takes a look at the contention between the United States and the Soviet Union for maritime hegemony in the Mediterranean, the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean, the Caribbean, the Pacific and the Atlantic Ocean and their rivalry in setting up bases and plundering the fishing and sea-bed resources there. When the territorial sea and the zone of jurisdiction are enlarged, their "private sea" over which they act the overlords will contract. How can the super-Powers not desperately oppose this? However, their opposition will eventually prove futile. So long as the numerous small and medium-sized countries are united by seeking common ground on major points, while reserving differences on minor ones, and persevere in tenacious and protracted efforts, their struggle against maritime hegemony is bound to triumph.
42.	The struggle against maritime hegemony is an important aspect of the struggle waged by the numerous developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America to protect national resources and develop the national economy. It is also a new focus in the current struggle against hegemonism. In other economic spheres, the developing countries are also more closely co-ordinating their actions and strengthening their unity in the struggle against exploitation, plunder, dumping and monopoly by imperialism and big-Power hegemonism. The bilateral and regional economic co-operation of the developing countries is growing, and the various organizations of raw-material- exporting countries are expanding. More and more developing countries have come to realize that, in order to consolidate political independence, it is imperative to attain economic independence, and that in order to develop the national economy, it is imperative to rely on their own efforts and strengthen their mutual support and cooperation. It was by plundering and exploiting the people of Asia, Africa and Latin America that colonialism and imperialism accumulated their fortunes. Therefore, the people of these continents are fully entitled to demand repayment of this debt. However, in the light of China's own experience, colonialism and imperialism will never repay the debt and, what is more, they will create more difficulties for those countries which are defending their national independence and developing their national economy. It is futile to harbour any unrealistic notions about .them. We must persist in opposing imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. We must rely on ourselves, rely on the people, wage an arduous struggle and exert sustained efforts. We believe that, by so doing, the developing countries will certainly become prosperous.
43.	Tenth, there is the question of disarmament.
44.	The Chinese Government has always stood for disarmament. But what we stand for is genuine disarmament, not phoney disarmament; still less empty talk about disarmament coupled with actual arms expansion every day. At present, we face the harsh fact that the super-Powers are hawking disarmament, and the Soviet Union in particular is most energetic about it. Nearly every year it comes up with some sort of proposal on disarmament at the General Assembly. Last year, it boasted of the great significance of its agreement with the United States on the so-called limitation of strategic nuclear weapons. And this year, it is even more vehement in lauding the so-called epoch-making significance of the Soviet-United States Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. Meanwhile, it has sanctimoniously proposed a 10 per cent reduction of the military budgets of the five permanent members of the Security Council and the utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries [2124th meeting]. This is Krushchev's old war which has been peddled for more than a dozen years. It has not deceived many people. How are military budgets to be assessed? To study this problem alone, a committee will have to be set up and work for many years. Can military budgets really be reduced? Anyway, nobody has ever seen this happen. We think it is better to stop this kind of empty talk, and stop it quickly. If you are really the "natural and surest ally" of the developing countries you should come up to this rostrum and declare openly that your military aid to all developing countries which is used to resist foreign aggression is gratis and free of charge, that you will not be a merchant of death, and that, although you have charged previously, you will not press for the payment of debt and interest, especially in the case of the struggling Arab countries. Be forthright and simple. Declare publicly that you will cancel all the military loans, that there is no need for repayment and that you will let them be gone with the wind. Would not that be more practical?
45.	What general disarmament? Actually, in the world today, it is the two super-Powers that are engaged in an uncontrollable arms race. Their aim is nuclear superiority and the nuclear hegemony with which to dominate the world. To put it bluntly, any disarmament must first of all be the disarming of these two super-Powers. But can this be realized? On this point, the United States Government is somewhat more candid than is the Soviet Government. It admits that military expenditures cannot be reduced in the context of rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers. As to the numerous small and medium-sized countries, the real problem they face is definitely not disarmament, but the strengthening of their necessary and independent defence capabilities. Even Western Europe is inadequate in defence capabilities. How much more so are the large number of small and medium-sized countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America? What have these countries got to disarm? To talk about general disarmament in these circumstances is gibberish. If such proposals were really accepted, it would mean to ask the whole world completely to disarm itself in front of the two super-Powers and allow itself to be ordered about.
46.	The Chinese Government is in favour of convening a world conference on genuine disarmament. But there must be the necessary pre-conditions and clear aims for the conference. That is, all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against non-nuclear countries and in nuclear-weapon-free zones. For example, the Soviet Union should undertake obligations in respect of the nuclear-weapon-free zones in Latin America, and they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible for all countries big and small to discuss on an equal footing and with equanimity and to solve the questions of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and other questions free from any threat of force.
47.	Some people charge that China's position on the disarmament question is "either all or nothing". This is a distortion. One may ask, What difficulties are there for nuclear countries first of all to undertake the obligation, as the first step towards nuclear disarmament, that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against non-nuclear countries or in nuclear-weapon-free zones? Is this not a truly effective first step towards the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons? But these disarmament- advocating "saints" would not even agree to undertake this minimum obligation. Does this not suffice to show that they are actually imperialists who persist in arms expansion and aggression, menacing the people of the world and aspiring to world hegemony?
48.	The People's Republic of China is taking part in the activities of the United Nations for the third year. We wish to say frankly that what we have experienced in the United Nations has caused us to become worried. Speeches are multiplying and resolutions are piling up in the United Nations, yet the Organization has not been able to look into matters which it ought to — for instance, the question of the prevention of nuclear war — and it is impotent in the solution of many major world issues — for instance, the Middle East question. If things continue this way, what future is there for the United Nations? However, we are not disheartened. We believe that the present conditions in the United Nations should be changed and that the Charter should be revised. How can the United Nations go on working in the same old way it did more than 20 years ago, when the world has already changed? The third world has risen up. The United Nations must be able to give expression to the desires of the numerous small and medium-sized countries, truly to give effect to the principle of the equality of all countries big or small and to cease to be controlled by the super-Powers and their small number of followers if it is to be worthy of its name. China is ready to work together with all countries which love peace and uphold justice for the achievement of this noble aim.﻿Mr. President, let me begin by congratulating you most warmly on your election to this internationally very important post.

3.	I speak to you as a German and a European. To be more exact, my people live in two States, but they have not ceased to regard themselves as one nation. At the same time our part of Europe is as yet not much more than an economic community, but before the end of this decade it will grow into a European union.
4.	We-the representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany-are no strangers here. We have long participated in the work of the specialized agencies. We maintain good relations with nearly all Member States. Here, at United Nations Headquarters in New York, we have been shown much understanding in past years.
5.	I wish to take this opportunity to thank our friends who have spoken up for us in this forum when we were not in a position to speak for ourselves. We shall not forget on whom we were able to rely.
6.	But I would add immediately that we have not come here to use the United Nations as a wailing-wall for the German problems or to make claims we know cannot be met here in any case. Rather have we come to assume our
share in the responsibility for world affairs on the basis of our convictions and within the framework of our possibilities.
7.	The foundation of the United Nations and the most incisive break in German history were events which coincided in a dismal, though at the same time encouraging, manner. The recent history of my people is truly closely linked with the genesis of this world Organization.
8.	Since 1945, my people and the two German States have put a considerable distance behind them. And yet our gratification over the fact that we have been given a friendly welcome here is mitigated by the division of Europe, which is glaringly manifest in Germany and which, almost three decades after the end of the war, still claims its victims.
9.	Certainly, starting from that part of Europe which has been the source of so many tensions, we have initiated and developed a policy of understanding which was, and still is, to fill in the rifts left behind by the cold war.
10.	We have, I feel, seen in the meantime that not only tensions but also detente can be contagious.
11.	As the Federal Republic of Germany we shall-as our Foreign Minister emphasized here last week in internationally binding terms [2119th meeting] -seek to create a state of peace in Europe in which the German people also can regain their unity in free self-determination. I say this knowing very well-with all respect — that the United Nations cannot really help us in this matter.
12.	The two German States, belonging as they do to different political groupings and facing the problems resulting there from, have learned that their interrelationship is today of greater importance than what is known as the "national question". This applies to Europe in general.
13.	In spite of their different social and political systems, bound by treaty and conviction to different alliances, the two German States have resolved to embark on a policy of peaceful neighbourliness, coexistence and, we hope, cooperation. We shall therefore try to spell out peaceful coexistence German-style. But in view of the thoroughness which is said to be a German characteristic, I cannot promise that this will always be easy.
14.	More importantly, the consistent renunciation of force as a means of achieving aims, of furthering one's interests, and of settling differences, was the decisive factor needed to sow the seed of detente in the heart of Europe. The
Treaties of Moscow  and Warsaw,  the Treaty on the basis of our relations with the German Democratic Republic, the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin' of 3 September 1971, and soon, I hope, the treaty with Czechoslovakia, which has already been negotiated, are based on the renunciation of force.
15.	Berlin, in particular, displays constructive opportunities. It no longer needs to be a source of tension in the heart of Europe. West Berlin can bank on its interests being looked after by the Federal Republic of Germany and on its protection being ensured by the three Powers that, being the supreme authority, remain directly responsible for the city's security and status. If there is anyone to appreciate what this change means, it is most certainly the one who carried responsibility as Governing Mayor of Berlin during a critical phase of its history.
16.	Renunciation of force was one element of our peace policy; acceptance of the realities the other. Accepting things as they are has been a bitter pill f6r some, but it was necessary for the sake of peace. For the renunciation of force and the right attitude to reality are the two basic elements of concrete efforts to safeguard peace.
17.	This prepared the way for the next step. A new foundation is to be laid for security and co-operation in Europe.
18.	The bilateral renunciation of force encourages us to enter a second, multilateral phase of European diplomacy, the purpose of which will be to produce a real change in the relationship between the European States on the basis of what has come about. It will do so through growing security from military threat, through intensive economic and technological exchanges, through human contacts, through better knowledge of each other-in other words, through a state of everyday peace.
19.	It would indeed be a good thing if the work done in Helsinki and now being continued in Geneva could soon end with a conference convened at a level that is commensurate with the results achieved.
20.	What I am talking about here will one day be understood as a significant experiment: how States can learn to master conflicts and eliminate the use of force.
21.	And if we even succeed, by means of confidence- building measures, in reducing the tremendous wastage that has been the outcome of mistrust between antagonistic systems, we should then have set a historic example.
22.	Security cannot ensue from trust alone. This, too, is a reality. The reverse is also true. Confidence ensues from security.
23.	A distinguished American spoke in this city of the-as he called it-impending "nuclear death-dance". Well, the two super-Powers, which have in their hands by far the most powerful means of destruction, recently signed an agreement which some are still trying to fathom but which is quite certainly intended to obviate the death-dance. That agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union is oriented to the principle of renunciation of force and the recognition of realities. It is, as I understand it<a piece of active coexistence and surely also a response to the demands made by the non-nuclear-weapon States at the Conference of Non-Nuclear-Weapon States, held at Geneva in 1968. On that occasion, five years ago, the nuclear- weapon States were called upon to assume concrete obligations of their own. I still hold the view today that those who have power, particularly nuclear power, do not on that account have morality, or wisdom, on their side. Big dangers to mankind emanate from the big Powers, not from the small.
24.	A code of responsibilities should be defined to which the nuclear Powers should subject themselves.
25.	But if the two super-Powers do not guarantee peace, who could do so in their place? The responsibility of neither of the two I have mentioned can today be assumed by anyone else, and neither of them can relinquish that responsibility.
26.	Thus our world today finds its balance. But it cannot achieve that delicate balance without the specific weight of the People's Republic of China, of Japan and of the European Community. In such a system the specific role of Latin America, of the African countries, of the Asian subcontinent and the other partners in Asia becomes effective.
27.	Power, I feel, cannot be quantified at will. There is a limit to its expansion-a limit where power becomes transformed into impotence. But detente is not synonymous with disengagement, and it must by no means turn into disinterest if fresh tensions are not to be created.
28.	At the end of the cold war there can, in my view, be neither conquerors nor conquered. Truly, peace, if it is to be secured, must not call for victory of the one and defeat of the other, but only for the one victory of reason and moderation.
29.	Incidentally, the use or threat of force should be renounced by all States-regardless of whether they possess nuclear weapons or not. If we have the determination, and the luck, this can be achieved by means of an appropriate system of international agreements.
30.	The only legitimate exception would remain the right to individual and collective self-defence as embodied in Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
31.	My Government is willing -- and I wish to state this clearly — to help bring about an agreement which is being prepared in the Atlantic Alliance in order to make possible a balanced reduction of forces and weapons systems. This will not be possible overnight, but we must get down to the job seriously and consistently.
32.	It is not only a question of giving Europe an opportunity. It is a question of giving the world an opportunity to create conditions which will permit us to turn our attention, and to devote our national energies, to the massive problems of tomorrow. If I may pose the question, If the world does not succeed in quelling force and violence and effectively proscribing it, how will it then be capable of resolving the problems of peace which — free and remote from force — will demand the employment of all our energies?
33.	In a world in which we are all increasingly dependent on each other, a policy for peace must not stop on our own doorstep. Small steps can, as experience has shown, take us quite a long way.
34.	To mediation and conciliation in disputes we attach special importance. The strengthening of international jurisdiction, the consolidation and further development of international law, require, in our opinion, the active attention of this Assembly.
35.	Our world is going through a process of rapid change. Many of its explosive problems and conflicts spread like epidemics, owing to the increasing proximity of States and continents. Conflicts can, as shown by the terrorism of the present time which either does not want to use or is incapable of using political means, have unforeseeable consequences owing to the vulnerability of highly developed societies.
36.	The catch phrase "preventive conflict research", the prerequisite to "preventive diplomacy" as it is called, is born of the realization that it is no longer sufficient to investigate the so-called classical motives of disputes — and here I mean motives such as territorial claims, ideological domination, nationalistic ambitions, the temptations of imperialist dominance, the flaws in security systems, disturbances of the balance of power.
37.	I am not preaching an existence free from conflict and free from tension. That would be an anaemic illusion. What I have in mind is the fruitless and negative conflicts which confirm to us every day that man, afraid of man, is capable of destroying himself. This opens up new and deeper areas of responsibility for conflict research.
38.	I wish to state with all due clarity that human distress is conflict. Where hunger prevails, there can be no peace in the long run. Where bitter poverty prevails, there can be no justice. Where a man's very existence is threatened for want of basic daily needs, it is not permissible to speak of security. There must not be resignation in the face of destitution.
39.	"Non-violence" is a concept we owe to the man who awakened a great Member country in this Assembly; the force of that doctrine has not diminished. But the realities of today require it to be complemented by an opposite statement of fact, namely, that there is violence through tolerance, intimidation through indolence, threat through passiveness, manslaughter through immobility. We must not stop on this threshold, for it may be the threshold between survival and decline.
40.	I did not make the personal acquaintance of that President of a Latin American country who lost his life through the recent coup. But I wish to emphasize most strongly that this type of solution is not the answer. Or, if you like, unfortunately it can be. But then one day it will be said that reform could only come from revolution because changes were not otherwise accepted.
41.	We are becoming more and more conscious of the limits of the globe. We must not ruthlessly exhaust its resources lest we condemn ourselves to slow suicide. We must not allow the globe's biological cycles to be poisoned any further.
42.	It is surely no coincidence that man today, having seen his planet from out of the depths of space, is becoming conscious of the material and biological dependence of the inhabitants of this so very small spaceship, Earth. Not only within individual countries but also on a world basis we shall — if we want to live in freedom and security-in future have to go without some things which, though economically profitable, are of questionable social value. And some of the things which appear to be economically unprofitable have become indispensable to the existence of a modern society.
43.	I know that there is a tendency in some developing countries to regard the dearth of raw materials as a special kind of political opportunity, for it may here and there swing the pendulum in highly industrialized countries from surplus to shortage. But I say this: this is no ground for satisfaction. These are problems which concern us all, and not just those who come after us.
44.	We must soberly appreciate that the resources of this world will suffice to give posterity an existence worthy of the modern concept of the quality of life only if we keep population growth within responsible limits and only if we achieve a larger measure of social justice in the world.
45.	The depressing food situation in many parts of the world requires us to draft a world food plan so that, if in any way possible, catastrophes can be prevented by means of an integrating strategy for the production of food and its distribution.
46.	Let me emphasize that we must not only establish, and very quickly, what food is needed to keep large sections of mankind from hunger, but also whether States are prepared to accept the rules required to that end.
47.	On the other hand, and at the same time, we must establish what raw materials we need in order to guarantee the quality of our civilization and to improve it where possible.
48.	Let me say quite frankly that, morally, it makes no difference whether a man is killed in war or is condemned to starve to death by the indifference of others. I repeat: it makes no difference morally. We shall have to decide to break with the ritualistic traditions; who proscribes war also has to proscribe hunger.
49.	The United Nations, built in response to the challenge of an almost total world war, is the mirror of an age-old dream of mankind. That dream closely matches the hopes of eternal peace cherished by the nations.
50.	But the Members having some 30 years of United Nations training here know at least as well as we newcomers that 1945 did not see the start of the millennium. Unfortunately, the United Nations has not-at least not yet-crystallized into the nucleus of a world government.
51.	And yet mankind has brought into this Assembly of nations not only its goodwill but also many of its problems. There is not a single Member nation that left its history at home when it came here, indeed did not find its identity confirmed to some extent in this unwieldy design for a republic of nations.
52.	I perceive here a convergence of the perspectives of all continents. To comprehend and to respect the diversity of life and its systems, to enable it to present itself freely, to set up standards to that end which are binding for all — this seems to me to be the mandate of the United Nations for civilization, also in future. That is our hope, at any rate.
53.	It is this very diversity which gives us the right to speak of a world society. This diversity is bound up in the tension between equal sovereignty and mutual dependence in this one, troubled world.
54.	Some of the criticism directed at the United Nations sounds bitter and cynical, is filled with an almost jubilant pessimism, as if it stemmed from a secret hope that the weaknesses of the Organization would refute the idea of it and its purpose. But setbacks in pursuit of an ideal do not necessarily prove that that ideal is wrong, but often merely that the road to it could be better.
55.	In this respect many of the goals which the Organization has set itself have not been achieved — the goals set in the Second World War and in 1945.1 want to say that in all frankness. But we also know that this Organization has been able to prevent a great deal of misery, misfortune and death.
56.	Here in this institution arguments of reason and morality have time and again and untiringly been proclaimed, arguments which have prohibited this step into the abyss. The United Nations is not a clinic where our peoples can be cured of their neuroses by patient world doctors. Yet it can help to create more solidarity among nations.
57.	That solidarity is the fundamental requirement of a world society, and it is the prerequisite to its survival. That is my deep conviction. I am not speaking of the Utopian realm of the equality of all nations and of all men. But anyone who has never dreamt this dream of equality knows little of the will for justice which, beyond all barriers of continents, race and religion, is perhaps the true binding power among us human beings.
58.	There is solidarity, but not enough of it. I ask for more sympathy for the victims of armed conflicts that threaten to break out anew in this or that corner of the world. But neither should we forget the victims of non-war which sometimes can be just as brutal. On the road to world citizenship we must practice solidarity. We shall not be able to speak of a humane world order until the principle of justice is universally understood.
59.	Permit me to say on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany that we shall support United Nations resolutions aimed at liquidating the anachronistic remnants of colonialism. This applies not least to our neighbouring continent of Africa. Without any addition and without any reservation I declare that we condemn racism as inhuman and as the cause of the most terrible crimes. Our own history has been a bitter experience on that score.
60.	Moreover, those who take their place in this Assembly must also adopt a position on the moral aspects of international coexistence even when their own national interests are not directly affected. In this process they come face to face with two recognized principles both of which serve the cause of peace: the first is the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of others; the other is the principle of the universality of human rights. Not only States but also individual citizens can invoke the fundamental rights embodied in the United Nations Charter. It is peace that benefits if people and information can move as freely as possible across boundaries.
61.	I would add that if we speak our mind on violations of individual human rights, on the suppression of the freedom to express critical opinions, on artificial barriers at national frontiers to the exchange of people and information, the decisive criterion for that attitude will not be whether the offender is an ally or one with whom we have friendly contractual ties, or whether it is a less friendly Power. What matters is that we do not remain indifferent on these questions — even if some details should at first sight or in general be hard to assess,
62.	A policy of peace, solidarity and renunciation of force is indivisible. The conflict in South-East Asia has not yet burnt itself out and the smouldering conflict in the Middle East has not yet been defused. In both cases the main thing is that those concerned should talk, not shoot.
63.	I wish to stress our interest in a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the Middle East. That is the interest of the Federal Republic of Germany. My Government shares the hope that the international community will not relinquish the possibilities of mediation. My Government also feels that it is primarily direct peace talks between the Arab countries concerned and Israel that v will  best secure a balance of the elementary interests of both sides.
64.	The struggle for peace and the fight against misery require us to recognize that in the one world we live in our fate is, after all, indivisible. Here, too, mankind is therefore under the compulsion to establish solidarity. Where else than in this United Nations should we be able to discuss freely new forms of vital co-operation?
65.	No nation should live at the expense of another. Anyone who refuses to accept this principle may be the instrument of our having to pay dearly for. it. National egoism is no shield. On the contrary, it is an obstacle to that very solidarity which, in the last report, is the best guardian of natural and legitimate national interests as well.
66.	We should not speak of "young" and "old" nations. It is more realistic to distinguish between young and old nationalisms. Ours, in Europe, are old, although a century or two are only a couple of short breaths in history. But believe me, the wild dream that the destiny of a nation can be fulfilled only in unbridled nationalism has in our case completely faded away. We learned from painful experience that there have to be more rational, more reliable forms for the lives* of nations-and that such forms actually exist, namely, good neighbourliness.
67.	The countries of Western Europe have resolved to establish the first regional community that is more than a classical alliance and at the same time does not imply that its members subject themselves to a ideological rules. Our aim is to achieve if possible in this decade the union of our economies, our currencies, our social systems and our foreign policies, and - as dictated to us by the signs of our time -- our security.
68.	The membership of the Federal Republic which I represent, also strengthens the presence of Europe in the United Nations. We are sure it will also be of benefit to others.
69.	The European Community, we hope, can become an example of economic achievement and social balance. It establishes itself as a power without imperial pretensions. The European union will be a power of peace and will be outward-looking.
70.	The Federal Republic of Germany has declared in its Constitution its willingness to transfer sovereign rights to supranational organizations and it has placed international law above national law and made it directly applicable. This expresses the realization that the sovereignty of the individual and of nations can be secured only in larger communities, that the meaning and fulfilment of history can no longer be attributed to the nation-State.
71.	Thus I end my speech with a plea: let us all together be on our guard against making sacred a concept which I regard as perhaps the most dubious legacy of European history: nationalism, which has claimed millions and millions of human lives and under whose banner fertile country has been devastated, thriving cities destroyed, peoples exterminated, and a whole civilization — our own- nearly swept away.
72.	Europe has ceased to pretend that it is the measure of things for the rest of the world. But it has occasion to warn the nations of the world about the great error which almost brought about its destruction: negative nationalism. And I believe we have to a large extent shaken off that hypnosis.
73.	The nation no longer finds its security in isolated sovereignty. In actual fact, isolation creates dependencies which have ceased to have anything to do with enlightened sovereignty. We need the larger community which gives us peace, security and, hence, freedom.
74.	There is, perhaps, not yet "the world free from war" nor "the world-wide rule of reason" enunciated by the President of the United States on 26 June 1945 after the proclamation of the United Nations Charter in San Francisco's opera house. But mankind must not allow itself to become paralysed in the face of gigantic, seemingly insoluble problems. What we need now is a programme of new confidence in man's abilities.
75.	Therefore, I make this plea.
76.	Let us courageously and jointly venture forth on a new road to the great goals of eliminating conflicts, bringing armaments under control, making peace safer.
77.	Let us courageously and jointly fight for universal recognition of the renunciation of force as a principle for the solution of political problems.
78.	Let us courageously and jointly-and I hope we will be many-work untiringly to ensure that human rights and fundamental freedoms are respected and may be exercised all over the world.
79.	Let us courageously and jointly-and I hope we will be many-fight to defend the right of nations freely to decide their own destiny and to ensure that the remnants of colonialism are removed and that all forms of racism are banned.
80.	Let us courageously and jointly promote the further development of international law, in particular by an effective convention against terrorism.
81.	Let us courageously and jointly do what is necessary to sustain the viability of the world we live in by protecting the natural environment and-partly by intensifying and widening scientific exchanges — securing for mankind conditions of a quality that will make life worth living.
82.	And let us courageously and jointly, in addition to our endeavours to foster the further development of world trade, make fresh efforts to intensify economic cooperation and development; and, above all, let us in this way combine all our energies and declare war irrevocably on hunger around the world.
83.	Man's ability to apply his faculty of reason has made the United Nations possible. Man's propensity for being irrational makes it necessary. Reason will have won the field if one day all States and regions come to live and work together as world neighbours in accordance with the principles of the United Nations.
84.	That will not happen in my lifetime, but I want to do what I can to make it possible. And I exhort us all to give every assistance we can, progressing step by step, to ease the task of future generations.﻿1. Mr. President, in these last days of the general debate I should like to pay a tribute to the authority and distinction with which you are presiding over our work.
2.	I shall be relatively brief, for I wish to avoid repetition and, besides, I have no taste or desire for making propaganda. But I would prefer that the truth should prevail even if it should emerge as the truth which is obvious on the banks of the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne and the Rhone, the four principal rivers of my country.
3.	This debate is drawing to a close without surprises, except those that we have ceaselessly warned against, and without excesses. Everyone is gratified by this, even if, in order to achieve it, one had to keep silent on many questions and take for granted what is merely adumbrated in the same way that a fad secures a grip upon minds before it prevails in the streets.
4.	You will no doubt understand what I am referring to. To speak of peace does not call for any great precision. On the other hand, to invoke detente, to believe in it as one would believe in spring when one suddenly comes upon it around the bend after winter, would seem to warrant more assiduity and curiosity. Who does not wish for detente, or could reject it?
5.	At the risk of causing irritation, I would remind you that we have had a long experience of detente and the concept thereof. For the last 15 years it has been the concern of our foreign policy. Judge for yourselves: decolonization; the establishment of East-West relations; friendly and active co-operation with the Soviet Union; the fundamental treaty between France and Germany in 1963; the building of a European entity; as early as 1964, understanding of, and respect for, China, to which the President, of the French Republic has, as you know, just completed a trip; unfailing support for the third world, for the independence of nations and for a more equitable distribution of resources, and, to take a current example, for the harmony of the Comoro islands with their destiny. All these things protect us from naivete, but they have shown us that lucidity and generosity should always go hand in hand.
6.	Meanwhile, we learn that 1973 is to be primarily the year of detente. And reference is made to this at every turn, as if a single year were sufficient to meet its needs and as if this year promised exceptional developments. To be quite truthful, I see but two such events — much discussed, but the full expression of which is not yet completely manifest and of which the consequences, you will agree, are not yet entirely known.
7.	In the first place, I see the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. It is, of course, as we all know, not yet concluded. Its principal merit consists in its having gathered together 33 European countries and the United States and Canada. Apart from this essential fact, the results, if they are good, will be, as it were, thrown into the bargain. They will, furthermore, serve the concept of detente mainly by representing compromises between opposing stands that could not have been developed at leisure. In the long run, the contents will matter less than the way in which they were obtained. For our part, we are doing all we can to ensure the success of the Conference, and I am sure that this is well known.
8.	This Conference is therefore an important fact, an unaccustomed event, unusual in recent international practice; it is a development that is comforting to note. For all that, it is not the Eden of detente, it does not represent the alpha and omega of conciliation. It is a joint effort, an arduous effort that is the business of all. It is a state of mind that is being born — a miracle indeed! — among the poisonous flowers of the arms race, which remains, however, fraught with the mistrust and the ambitions to which it gives rise.
9.	Let us therefore be reasonable in our appreciation, cautious in our enthusiasm, and realistic in our behaviour. Let us not allow ourselves to be trapped in the all-too-easy syllogism: the Conference serves the idea of detente; detente can serve to nourish all speeches; therefore, he who refers to the Conference is, assuredly, one who practises detente.
10.	Furthermore on 22 June last, the United States and the Soviet Union published the news of an agreement they had reached on nuclear strategy. That agreement is but a 
beginning and is to be followed up, so it is stated, in 1974. Its authors were gratified and they invited the whole world to share in their gratification. Why? Because this undoubtedly is an agreement between two very great Powers and it consequently concerns us all — or rather it affects us all, because it can be clothed in the chaste cloak of detente. Those two reasons are not sufficient to mask the reality that has gradually become apparent to all. In order to avoid bankruptcy, and with political considerations in mind, the two Powers have preferred to limit the development of some of their nuclear armaments while at the same time maintaining a sufficiently strong mutual vulnerability to deter each other from upsetting the balance.
11.	Thus, this type of detente would be limited to such an exercise in balancing between the two treaty partners. When children fight, one often notices that the strongest avoid a head-on clash with each other and instead attack the lightest-weight members of the other gang, who can be easily knocked down by a few simple blows. It is the same with nations. And if the light-weight nations are at present worried, how can anyone be surprised? The only surprising thing is that it has taken them so long to become nervous, finding themselves with a mere rifle in their hands while the pressures and presences remain the same at their frontiers. All that one very famous actress wore was perfume. I fear that, so scantily clothed by detente alone, we still run the risk of shivering.
12.	My analysis of the recent months would perhaps have been rather less cruel in so far as detente is concerned —  detente is, after all, a French word which we have endowed with its full significance by our actions — had it not been for the fact that certain slanderous campaigns have sought to cast slurs upon our very idea of national independence, shared by so many others.
13.	The past and geography have taught us lessons that we are not likely to forget. We are like prey that has been so often hunted that the hunter can no longer approach. Illusions, wars, more illusions and war again: this has been our fate. Henceforth, we rely primarily on ourselves, on our own efforts. I cannot imagine anyone, unless he is under an illusion, who could think of making us renounce this.
14.	We have been distressed, I would say hurt, to hear from our friends or from peoples for whom we have affection statements made here or there whose lack of reality in comparison with the facts or the actual situation in the world seems surprising to me. Even more surprising are the steps which have been taken to convince us that the questions at issue are mere figures of speech that we are wrong to feel uneasy about, but merely justified by the domestic considerations of a sovereign State.
15.	Can one really deal so lightly with a serious matter of concern to us all? Because it is a matter of national independence for a nation which does not want to be the pawn of world strategy. In its turn, after many others, and left to its own resources France provided itself with nuclear armaments, not in order to indulge in dreams of grandeur, but because its every existence was at stake. Alone, we covered the ground of difficult research, with a considerable time lag. And today some people are indignant that we have dared to tread this path, which is presumably the royal way reserved to those who today hold power; that we have placed our footsteps in their tracks, such deep tracks. And yet what protests did their actions give rise to? I look for them in vain.
16.	Nowadays one is less modest, doubtless because one knows that with France, a peaceful Power whose only ambition is to live in harmony with all and not to be taken by surprise, one does not run a great risk. Well, one does in fact.
17.	I shall not refer to the risk of ridicule. But a risk one is essentially exposed to is the risk of not understanding that one is being manipulated, used, propelled against one's own interests. And more serious still is the risk of being wholly mistaken in one's analysis of the world situation, to have understood nothing, with gaping mouth and, unfortunately, closed eyes. Finally, there is the risk of opposing the will for independence, which should be that of all peace- loving peoples and which France is convinced it is serving while ensuring its own destiny as a free nation.
18.	We shall at least preserve a vivid memory of the moment of collective blindness in which some have foundered, dragging down with them, by means of false evidence, some quarters of public opinion whose irrational fears were nursed at leisure. And we shall therefore abide by our conduct so that our fate cannot be settled except by ourselves, since from now on everyone can realize that we cannot disappear without damage to others.
19.	And again, we are convinced, we are sure, that by so doing we are strengthening the ground on which Europe must be built by affirming our steadfastness, our independence, our determination not to slacken our defence efforts.
20.	How could I avoid, after all, referring to Europe? Everyone quite rightly wonders, does Europe already exist, and particularly in the consciousness of others rather than in the consciousness of Europe itself? Is it something that is really going to exist? I refer to it only as a citizen of one of the States that go to make it up, attached like so many others to those landscapes and those shores which have borne witness to such diverse activity and been the scene of so much meditation. I speak about Europe only from a certain memory of the past and with the reasonable hope of a more just, more secure and fuller life.
21.	I am sure that this is the deep aspiration of all those European peoples who live on an exiguous territory, densely populated, closely partitioned, the internal boundaries of which are crumbling a little more each day, yielding to the thrust of time — a universal phenomenon.
22.	There is no collective will or power here; only the certainty that in joining forces everything will eventually become simpler, even if the path towards it is not entirely mapped out. This effort might perhaps also warrant the fair name of detente, the effort that nine States, often so different, pursue tirelessly in order to bury antagonisms, adjust their policies, and ensure their well-being. It would warrant being hailed often from this rostrum, and even better to be encouraged from the bottom of people's hearts. It would warrant an organization such as the United Nations showing it henceforth less indifference. Finally, it would warrant an appreciation of the extent to which Europe undoubtedly would be useful to the international order because, besides the virtues of its own joining of forces, Europe would become a pole of peace in a world drifting from one spell of vertigo to another.
23.	Recently in Copenhagen, "the Nine" — as they have become known these days — agreed to define their common identity among themselves and to express with one voice their opinion on an important matter — their relationship with the United States — as they have already done in other cases, for example the Conference on European security. There is nothing unwonted in such behaviour nor is there in the approaches which are to follow, because some State or other will also have wished to establish such a dialogue. There is nothing unwonted either if, in the weeks to come, a common view is expressed within the framework of the Atlantic alliance, where thinking is going on in the light of world developments.
24.	Perhaps even, but I do not want to dream too much, the latter will have to take into account this common will which may animate European countries so that a more equitable and better shared universal order may prevail.
25.	A more equitable and better shared universal order: it is there that genuine detente will truly be able to flourish.
26.	As long as the independence of everyone is not fully recognized and respected, as long as the living conditions of every country are not made more secure, where indeed is detente?
27.	Does it not lie in the restoration of international monetary regulations, which would give equal opportunities to all, and in a stability without which the weaker will be trampled underfoot?
28.	Does it not lie in the establishment of normal trade practices that would limit emergency measures which have an unexpected effect on markets?
29.	Does it not lie in a rational, generous and far-reaching concept of production and trade, which would share major commodities equally between producers and consumers?
30.	Does it not lie in the establishment of an international code defining the rights and obligations of each State in the world commercial order?
31.	There is nothing new left to be said about these topics. Should one be irritated at the fact that nothing can yet be put down to the credit of international co-operation? Should one be irritated that the monetary organization has been smashed to smithereens under the pressure of its own deficiencies? Should we be irritated that the selfishness of nations hinders any progress towards agreements on primary commodities? Should we be irritated at the fact that shortage is replacing affluence, that the forecasts of technicians are not borne out by the facts and that humble and innumerable lives, often wrecked by hurricanes and droughts, are also suffering from unforeseen vicissitudes, the origin of which they do not know, and that even squander the slender resources of days of starvation?
32.	Should one allow onself to become disheartened enough to accept the false pretences, the abortive texts, the proposals which aim at politics and not at the well-being of our fellow men?
33.	For our part, we shall continue crying out certain truths, perhaps in the wilderness of some meetings which are too densely packed with words. We shall continue, by our national action, and also in Europe with our partners,, and everywhere in the world where we are bound by ties of history and friendship, we shall continue to affirm that stability, generosity, responsibility, respect for others are concepts without which there can be no monetary or commercial future for the world, without which there would be just one single prospect: that of bitterness and violence.
34.	In this year of 1973, it would have been easy, had one wished, to restore equanimity to the whole world. Away from dialectics which cause one to lose sight of realities and which deflect the deep inclination for peace of peoples, could not those who claim to bear the highest responsibilities have found the path to true glory?
35.	However, only interested motives, too well-understood and thoroughly weighed, seem to have guided their thoughts and actions. Take South-East Asia — where the fighting is taking so long to be extinguished after having been endless — and on other frontiers where it is still the eve of battle, with sudden outbursts.
36.	There is the Middle East where the situation, one had been told, was under control. And so why should it change? And being so sure of tomorrow one had left until tomorrow what should have been done today. And the results are there for all to see. Did not so much certainty, such assurance, warrant the present being dealt with before the irreparable occurred?
37.	Let us hope that those conflicts of another era —  anachronistic to the point that they last without causing inconvenience except, unfortunately, for the suffering populations — will cease. Let us hope that the collective conscience will be heeded before they go astray who, in keeping with their tremendous present responsibilities, must quickly understand the friendly and urgent message that we put to friends that they be inspired by tolerance and prompted by the will to concerted action not only in their own meetings, but also in their relations with all peoples who, in their powerlessness, follow the progress of such merciless games.
38.	On the subject of those absurd, ruthless, unfair wars, my country has long since, over and over again, voiced its views and stated its policies. Therefore I shall not dwell on that.
39.	In this assembly of nations we have many friends. We feel a community of thought with many peoples, many States, young or old, which, like us, are seeking their way in order to assert their dignity by themselves assuming the responsibility for their destinies.
40.	We believe with them that this rostrum, this international gathering, this periodic and organized pooling of world preoccupations are indispensable so that peoples souls may sometimes throb and that some cries may be uttered here and there; and these, heard by the multitude, may so animate them that nothing will ever be as before; so that falsehood may lose its assurance, that indifference may finally come to be tinged with concern; and that those who make demands and claims may also heed the voice of responsibility; that friendship may cease to be a matter of subservience and influence cease to be burdensome; that the veiled but ever-present threat may no longer weigh on people's minds and hearts, and that from now on, nobody may dare to give expression to it.
41.	I myself, prepared this speech several days ago. Before coming here today I changed nothing except the tenses of two verbs, from the present to the past, and inserted two phrases quite spontaneously.
42.	This address is a statement of our policy, a statement of its concepts, duration and determination. I delete nothing. I add nothing to it.
43.	But since last Saturday, fighting has been resumed and all the evidence indicates that it is particularly bloody. I offer the assistance of my country so that the war may quickly subside and not flare up again. We could make suggestions to contribute to a peaceful settlement on condition that everyone wants this and really wants a just and lasting peace. I am convinced that our European friends share this wish. I hope that these sincere wishes are not offered in vain﻿118.	Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to join with my colleagues in congratulating you on your high office. Ecuador will rightly feel a reflected glory.
119.	Sir, I have spoken on many occasions in this Assembly and have usually felt it right to deal with the main topical and urgent issues in the field of international affairs. I do not intend to do this today. Many of them, it is true, remain as difficult and contentious as ever, but they will feature on the agenda of the various Committees of this Assembly and the views of the British Government will be explained when they come up for discussion. All of them should be soluble by patient bilateral diplomacy, assisted as the need arises — and it arises more often day by day-by the conciliation machinery of this United Nations organization for conciliation. This must be the order of the day in the middle of this twentieth century. Now, however, I wish to concentrate only on two major long-term problems in the world, both profound and in the long run decisive in terms of what I shall call in shorthand the problems between East and West and North and South.
120.	The first duty laid upon the United Nations is to maintain international peace and security. We have had a deeply troubled century. Twenty-one years after the First World War the world was just beginning to recover from the appalling carnage when it all started all over again. It is now 28 years since the ending of the Second World War. So far we have avoided a global holocaust, although at all times the situation has been saved only by knife-edge diplomacy. But there are signs at long last that we are just starting to learn. Whether peace has been forced upon us by the realization of the ultimate horror of the nuclear weapon, or whether the miseries of two world wars have taught us the bitter lesson that war solves nothing, unless it is that in the main the innocent pay the penalty, or whether the United Nations, if it has not preserved peace, has helped men to talk themselves into a more sober mood in which they realize that there are no slick answers to the modern problems of this world. Perhaps it is in fact a mixture of all three. But the hope must be that one way or another at this moment of time-late, it is true, but better late than never-the lesson of the futility of violence is being learned.
121.	Herr Brandt just now said that we should talk, not shoot, and as a European I stand here to say that it was that failure in Europe which very nearly led to the destruction of our continent; and that, surely, should be a lesson for all.
122.	In his thoughtful introduction to his report on the work of the Organization the Secretary-General rightly reminds us that while it is easy to criticize the limitations of the United Nations in matters affecting peace and security, the Organization, and particularly the Security Council, does have to its credit real achievements in defusing disputes. Of that at least we should remind ourselves lest we lose heart. But he would be a bold man who would say that an era of universal peace is within our grasp. War, although contained, is still with us. Man has not solved his basic needs for security, for food and for shelter. At this time of the twentieth century I think we ought to remind ourselves that there is no excuse for these shortcomings apart from prejudice, fear and suspicion, for we have all the technical means that we need to provide for man's very modest needs.
123.	Since 1945 the international scene has been dominated by the problems arising from the totally different social, economic and political systems of the East and West and from the aftermath of rapid decolonization. In East- West relations there have been periods of comparative calm and moments of acute peril. Coexistence has been preached. But it has meant different things to different people and the shock waves of tension between the Communists and the rest have spread, and the impact has been felt world-wide. Those who have wished to avoid the contagion of the rivalry of the great Powers have not always been able to do so. The rigid confrontation of the major Powers and the continuing escalation of force and counter- force was not only a source of grave danger in itself to the countries in the Northern Hemisphere but, worse perhaps, also paralysed the use of common resources and stultified the economic development of nations much further afield - nations that otherwise would have been able to do something to bridge the gap between the developed and the developing countries.
124. Now, at long last, these preoccupations seem to be yielding to a wider perspective. It is not, of course, easy for Communists and the rest to live together and work together when philosophy and practice are so different, but, at long last, at least there are signs of flexibility. The United States has established a relationship with China. The Soviet Union and the United States have softened the edges of their bilateral relations. It became possible for serious negotiations to begin between the Western Allies and the East over the future of Berlin. The two German States have made real progress in their joint discussions and are now both Members of this Organization-a historic step, which my Government welcomes-and if it is followed up with tolerance and with generosity this will undoubtedly have beneficial effects in Europe. The European Community, now enlarged, is finding its own identity and looks outward to fruitful contacts with the rest of the world; and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has met and defined an agenda for work leading towards detente. Up till now it is no more than that, but lest we are to despair, we must recognize it as a start in reconciliation and try to build further upon it. That being said, I must make it clear that detente must be real and not an illusion. Lip service to detente which evaporates at the first test is a trap. Like so much in life it is the will to work together for the highest common factor that counts and certainly as far as my Government is concerned the will is there. Our strong desire is that, however difficult it may be, the two political systems should live together not only without enmity but in broad accord. We will therefore take risks for peace, but at the same time we will not be duped by empty declarations into jeopardizing our security and our chosen way of life which goes with it. I would echo the words of Mr. Kissinger a few days ago [2124th meeting]: my country, like his, seeks true peace, not an armistice. Let us, therefore, share our ideas, share our resources and share our cultures. Let us resolve not to undermine but to understand, not to confront but to reconcile. We-that is, the East and the West-will have the chance to put these sentiments to the test in phase two of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. I trust that the Communist countries will be able to prove that they care for the basic freedoms of people everywhere; for, I say with great respect, it is people, not bits of paper, that politics, national and international, are about. We will try to respond in a constructive spirit in phase two of that
Conference, remembering always that, as Mr. Andersen has just reminded us-and I think it is too often forgotten-that politics are also about the quality of life.
125.	The other division in the world-the division between the rich and the poor countries-is just as profound and just as likely to breed tension. This is essentially an economic rather than an ideological division. Even if there was no conflict between East and West, and even if this conflict had not sometimes spread to the third world, we would still face the great human problems caused by the vast difference between the living standards of the developing and the developed countries because of the accidents of time. I understand the emotions which break out from time to time in the wake of the colonial era. But we have a situation now in this modern world which requires not slogans, however tempting, but cool, rational analysis and a realistic assessment of what can be done under a number of headings: investment, credit, commodity arrangements, debt, aid and trade. They are all relevant to the relationship between the rich and the poor countries and during this session of the General Assembly we shall be discussing the first review and appraisal of the progress of the Second United Nations Development Decade, and I hope it is these things-and I will repeat them: investment, credit, commodity arrangements, debt, aid and trade-which will be the subjects of analysis and, if possible, of agreement. We shall not agree on every aspect of these and of other subjects. Important interests of both developing and developed countries are involved and prima facie at times they seem to diverge but, again, if one looks at each one separately under those headings that I have listed, it will almost always be proved by careful analysis that the interests of the developed and the developing are complementary and not antagonistic. Our common deliberations, therefore, will be fruitful only in so far as we make a deliberate attempt to find the common interest and act on it to a point where we all can see that we can gain as well as give. We must simply not allow politics to intervene to hamper or cripple the fine economic prospects for ordinary people in developing and developed countries. I conclude from this that the key word for the future of economic development is "partnership". Let us recognize the situation for what it is and work together to put it right. In short, the less emotion there is, the quicker we shall get on. For partnership to work it is necessary that each understand the realities which limit the possibilities for action of the other.
126.	We are-and again I make no apology for reminding the Assembly of this-we are dealing with human beings, not with units on the economist's slide rule. So the developed countries must understand the right of the newly emerging countries to be master of their own fate, to control their economic, political and social destinies. What else is nationhood about? And in turn it should be clear that politicians in countries like my own which are governed by a parliamentary democracy have to satisfy their electors that the money which is deliberately being diverted from them is not only being well spent for the benefit of the recipients but to the long-term advantage for all. We in the Western countries-and here I can speak especially for the enlarged European Community-are tackling these questions with energy. The European summit conference last autumn gave to the outside world a high place in its programme. But we can be really successful only if we can move forward with the developing countries in a spirit and practice of partnership and create an atmosphere of mutual purpose and of mutual trust. So I repeat, partnership in this age and day is the key word to success.
127.	We also have undertaken to transfer economic resources and expertise to developing countries and are doing so on an expanding scale. But the word "transfer" means just what it says, at least in the short term. Money and resources, in other words, which would otherwise be available to the donor country are transferred for the benefit of another and I would invite the developing countries to recognize the problems of presentation which, for example, we in the United Kingdom have when we are speaking to our own electors. We could do a lot ourselves with the £300 million or so which we agree to transfer to others. We are willing to forgo these advantages for ourselves, but the transfer of resources must be seen to be directly related to the achievement of general prosperity all round. That is the only condition we make, but I think it is reasonable.
128.	My country continues to attach high importance to aid. Our official aid flow has steadily increased. In the two years between 1970 and 1972 it rose by nearly half &s much again and it is our intention that it should continue to grow. I was interested, in this context of aid and investment, in what Mr. Gromyko had to say yesterday [2126th meeting], and in particular in his proposal for a 10 per cent reduction in the military expenditure of the leading Powers [A/9191]. My recollections in this Assembly go back some way, and I thought I had recollected having heard this before. I was right. In 1958 the Soviet spokesman stated:
"The Soviet Government's proposal is to reduce the military budgets of the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France by 10 to 15 per cent and use part of the savings so effected for assistance to the under-developed countries."
That was debated. It did not at that time find favour, for reasons which I think were then valid — how do you measure, for example, military budgets?  — and which may still be valid now but I am not concerned in prejudging what the decision on this proposal may be not in 1958, but in 1973. But I would not like it to be thought that in other countries things have stood still on this front of aid and investment. For example, in terms of international aid our contribution in the United Kingdom is many times greater than that of the Soviet Union and, incidentally, it so happens that our total aid is already about 10 per cent of our expenditure of defence. In other words, as far as the United Kingdom is concerned, this is a field in which we should welcome more competition from the Soviet Union and from other countries.
129.	There is, of course, the question of how much of the total flow of resources could be met by official aid and how much by private investment. Whatever the proportions achieved, it will remain true that the private investment will play a significant role in development and I would remind this Assembly of the Pearson report, which says as follows and I quote:
"There can be no doubt about the contribution which private capital can render to economic development. Indeed, dollar for dollar, it may be more effective than official aid . .. ."
It is of course important that private investment should be properly integrated into the development plans and priorities of the host country. Investors should involve the nationals of the recipient State to the maximum, strive for maximum participation of local capital and reinvest a fair proportion of the profits in the enterprises of the country's enterprise which is concerned. But there is a reverse side to any coin and, as the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade put it, developing countries should bear in mind the importance of the attraction of foreign capital of conditions conducive to sustained investment. The plain fact is that private investment will not flow to the countries which do not provide the conditions in which it can bear fruit. It is therefore necessary once again to underline and emphasize that it is necessary to create an atmosphere of partnership if enough resources are to be transferred from those who have them to those who have not to make any real impact at all on the gap between the developed and the developing countries; and this applies both to official aid and to private investment.
130.	A pre-condition, therefore, of success is that we must get away from the concept of conflict, whether ideological or racial. We have a common and a material interest in this and it is our joint responsibility as leaders of opinion to see to it that our peoples understand the destructive implications of actions and words which are designed to fuel the fires of intolerance and, by contrast, realize the benefits which flow from partnership which is open and trustful.
131.	I cannot accept that the greater East-West detente must somehow be at the expense of the developing world. The reverse should be the case. If detente means anything, it must entail a liberation of resources from both East and West  —  a liberation of resources for more constructive ends. In a sense, the problems of the relationship between East and West and between the developing and the developed countries are linked, and success in dealing with the one will ease the anxieties of the other. When problems exist they can either be approached in an atmosphere of tension and conflict, as if a solution can be reached only by the victory of one side and the defeat of the other, or they can be faced in the belief that reconciliation and partnership is possible and should be pursued with relentless purpose and vigour. This Organization-I believe we ought to remind ourselves - was founded on the latter premise. That was the basis and the inspiration of the Charter. Until now it has

been confounded by political distrust and, for the reasons of which I have spoken, we have left undone much that ought to have been done together. It is in the basic belief that man has the capacity to reject his baser instincts and accept the disciplines inherent in reconciliation that we in this Assembly should formulate our policies and lead our peoples.﻿122.	Mr. President, I bring to you and to all our colleagues assembled here the greetings and good wishes of the Government and the people of India. I extend to you our warmest congratulations on your accession to the high office of President of the General Assembly. In selecting you as its candidate for President, the continent of Latin America has shown its appreciation of your ability and experience and has helped the Assembly in choosing a man whose faith, competence and devoted services to the United Nations can assure us of a successful session. You can always depend on the full co-operation of my delegation in carrying out your tasks as President.
123.	I should like to record our appreciation of the outgoing President, Mr. Trepczynski of Poland, for the skill and patience with which he discharged his responsibilities. With his leadership we accomplished much that was valuable in the work of the United Nations.
124.	Our distinguished Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, has now been in office for nearly two years. We have admired his dynamism, and the sense of purpose he has brought to his work. We look forward to his wise counsel and assessment on many of the issues we shall deal with during the current session.
125.	We deeply mourn the death of the President of Chile, Dr. Allende, in such violent and tragic circumstances. I do not intend to comment on internal developments of a sovereign State. In the wider context, however, I must express profound regret and concern over the setback that the democratic tradition of the people of Chile has suffered as a result of his overthrow, and over the violence, bloodshed and deprivation of human rights and infringement of diplomatic obligations which have recently been reported from that country. We earnestly hope that peace and harmony will be restored soon so that the people of Chile can resume their work of national reconstruction and reconciliation without any outside intervention and without further violence.
126.	The Secretary-General, in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization [A/9001 /Add. IJ, has indicated the value of the United Nations in the present-day world, and has emphasized once again that the United Nations can only be what its Member States wish it to be. Few delegations will disagree with that assessment; the universal desire to render the United Nations a more effective instrument for promoting international peace and co-operation will depend on the willingness and ability of the States represented here to appreciate and reconcile different points of view and to arrive at decisions which serve those interests which are shared by most of us. Surely, our effort should be to extend the area of co-operation through identification of those interests. At the same time, in discussing any problems we must look at them in their totality and apply the Charter provisions in all their aspects and not selectively or in a piecemeal fashion.
127.	The year that has just passed since we last met has seen important, though uneven, developments, but, on the whole, the world has moved forward, however haltingly and however slightly, towards our goal of peace, justice and progress. The gradual reduction of tension between rival blocs, which many of us had long been urging, is now clearly noticeable. The recent improvement of relations between the great Powers and the increase in contacts between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America, and the United States of America and China, are important in themselves, and also as an indication that the trend that developed last year has maintained its momentum. The Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War, concluded between the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in June of this year, and the understandings between them in several other fields are welcome. We are also gratified that this steady search for international peace and security has led to important developments in Europe: in the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, in the treaties between the two German States and between the Federal Republic of Germany and other countries in Eastern Europe, and in the convening of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe.
128.	We join others in welcoming the process of mutual accommodation and co-operation and the consequent reduction of tension. However, this spirit of detente has yet to extend to all parts of the world and should not be limited to mere coexistence among the major Powers. Regrettably, such concepts as the balance of power, spheres of influence and power vacuum are yet to be discarded. Unfortunately also, the great Power rivalry continues to show itself in many ways and in many areas; this brings severe stress and strain in international relations. The power of the strong is still to be placed at the common service of mankind. Only through genuine co-operation can the peoples of the world move forward towards a better future, in accordance with their own wishes and without any feeling of subordination and dependence, or of imposition or pressure from outside.
129.	I was privileged to take part in the Fourth Conference of Heads of State and Government of Non-Aligned Countries in Algiers, where those problems received the most careful and comprehensive examination from the largest gathering of Heads of State or Government ever held. The most significant feature of that great Conference was the confidence it created and the will it generated to work together for realizing our common objectives. Those States are determined to achieve, together with all nations of the world and with a spirit of constructive co-operation, equality among all nations and an equitable exploitation of resources of the world. We shall thus encourage the march forward of man for peace and for a better life. Political understanding and economic co-operation among major
Powers are therefore to be so arranged and channelled that they do not become, even unintentionally, instruments of new forms of domination and dependence.
130.	The maintenance of world peace and security will depend to a large extent on the speedy removal of economic and social disparities, both nationally and internationally. The non-aligned countries wish to build, together with other developing States, a collective self- reliance within the framework of international understanding. They are determined to remove all forms and manifestations of injustice and inequality, discrimination and oppression wherever they may exist. Their dedication to this cause should not be mistaken as a confrontation with any particular country or a group of countries. They have reaffirmed their firm resolve to strengthen the United Nations, which remains the best available machinery for world-wide co-operation.
131.	The world has changed a great deal since our Charter was signed in San Francisco nearly 30 years ago. The Charter must evolve with the times in order to remain an effective and dynamic force for peace and progress. Thus, there is an understandable desire for a comprehensive review of it. We believe, however, that in the prevailing climate of international politics, it would be premature to do more than examine the Charter in certain fields.
132.	We welcome this year three new Members: the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany and the Commonwealth of the Bahamas. We have excellent relations with those States and look forward to working with them in the United Nations. The Bahamas joins us as the newest Member State from the Caribbean within a few weeks of attaining freedom. We cannot forget in this connexion that there are still a number of countries which are to be freed from colonial rule.
133.	The simultaneous admission of the two German States to the United Nations may well signal the disappearance of tensions and hostilities of the past and the beginning of a new era of understanding and co-operation in Central Europe. We welcome the new pattern of relationship. The two German States, as Members of this Organization, could indeed make a significant contribution to world peace and development.
134.	The admission of these States marks an important step in achieving the goal of universality of membership of the United Nations. This makes it all the more regrettable that Bangladesh, a sovereign State recognized by over 100 Members of the United Nations and with a population of over 75 million people, has not yet been able to take its rightful place among us. I should like to emphasize the call made by the Algiers Conference for the admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations. Member States will no doubt recognize that the continuing denial of Bangladesh's right to be in the United Nations injures, if not defeats, the purposes and principles of the Charter of this Organization.
135.	India seeks friendship and co-operation with all nations on the basis of equality, reciprocity and mutual respect. With over 75 States of the different continents of the world we share the common ideals of non-alignment. Together with these and many other developing countries we face the common problem of economic development and are working for a better world order.
136.	With western Europe our links go back for centuries and the future holds bright prospects for greater exchanges in various fields. Our political and economic relations with the countries of eastern Europe have shown steady and fruitful development. With the Soviet Union we have achieved a close and co-operative friendship, based on mutual trust and understanding, which we greatly cherish. Both the United States and India have a strong faith in democratic systems and we share many common values. Our contacts and associations with Britain have lasted for hundreds of years and now continue to develop on a basis of mutual respect and equality. Our common cultural values and liberal traditions provide a strong base for our growing friendship with France. As close neighbours, India and China have to live in peace and amity, and we hope that our relations will soon move in that direction.
137.	Japan's rapid industrial advance is a lesson for us, and we welcome that country's co-operation in various fields. We are glad that Australia, Canada and New Zealand an: sharing, more and more, our values and attitudes and are showing greater awareness of Asian and African aspirations. In Ottawa, we had a successful meeting of the Commonwealth countries about six weeks ago.
138.	With our most immediate neighbours-Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma, Nepal and Sri Lanka — we maintain and seek the closest friendship and wide-ranging co-operation. We are making all possible efforts to end the era of confrontation with Pakistan.'
139.	The most significant development in our subcontinent has been the search through direct negotiations for normalization of relations. The New Delhi Agreement of 28 August 1973 provides for the settlement of the humanitarian problems left over from the conflict of 1971. It represents yet another step in the fulfilment of the Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972, which had set out the framework for the establishment of durable peace in the subcontinent.
140.	Ever since independence, India has tried its utmost to live in peace and friendship with Pakistan. In spite of many setbacks and frustrations, this has remained, and will remain, a fundamental objective of our foreign policy.
141.	The tragic events in the subcontinent in 1971 were a direct consequence of the short-sighted policies and adventurist actions of the Pakistani military rulers to which the President, now Prime Minister, Mr. Bhutto himself has made repeated references. The military oligarchy, having failed to crush the determination of 75 million Bangalis, involved India in a war by suddenly bombing from the air several places in western India on 3 December 1971.1 state these simple facts only to give a proper perspective, and not with any desire to dwell on the past. Our purpose is to look forward.
142.	The war lasted about two weeks and the fighting stopped in Bangladesh on 16 December 1971. From that moment onwards, we took a series of steps to restore normalcy and achieve durable peace in the Indian subcontinent.
143.	In the eastern sector, all Indian troops were withdrawn from Bangladesh within a period of 90 days by agreement between the two Governments; all the prisoners taken in Bangladesh were transferred to India as a result of a decision by the joint Indo-Bangladesh command; and all the refugees-nearly 10 million of them — returned from India to Bangladesh in three months' time, by the end of March 1972. In the western sector, the unilateral cease-fire declared by India came into effect on 17 December 1971.
144.	Soon after the cease-fire, we sought negotiations with Pakistan. As a result of the initiative taken by Prime Minister Mrs. Indira Gandhi a summit meeting was held in Simla. An agreement was arrived at on 2 July 1972, which, among other things, provided for, first, a line of control in Jammu and Kashmir, secondly, evacuation of territories occupied during the conflict; and thirdly, troop withdrawals. All these decisions were implemented in less than six months. An area of over 5,000 square miles occupied during the conflict was vacated and restored to Pakistan. In addition, all the prisoners of war taken by either side in the western sector returned home.
145.	Our next initiative was to make a joint declaration with Bangladesh on 17 April 1973 for solving the major humanitarian problems which arose as a result of the 1971 conflict. Three groups of people were affected: (a) hundreds of thousands of Bangalis stranded in Pakistan and prevented from returning to Bangladesh; (b)  hundreds of thousands of Pakistanis in Bangladesh whom Pakistan was refusing to receive; and (c) about 90,000 prisoners of war and civilian internees held in India. Bangladesh showed a spirit of accommodation and statesmanship in delinking the humanitarian problems from the unresolved political issues between Bangladesh and Pakistan.
146.	Following negotiations with Pakistan on the basis of this joint declaration, an agreement between India and Bangladesh, with the full concurrence of Bangladesh, was arrived at and signed in Delhi on 28 August 1973. This agreement provides for simultaneous repatriation of all the three groups I have just mentioned.
147.	As regards the 195 prisoners of war, all three Governments agreed that they should be kept in India pending a final settlement. The Delhi Agreement further provides, and I quote:
"On completion of repatriation of Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian internees in India, Bengalis in Pakistan and Pakistanis in Bangladesh referred to in Clause (v) above, or earlier if they so agree, Bangladesh, India and Pakistan will discuss and settle the question of 195 prisoners of war. Bangladesh has made it clear that it can participate in such a meeting only on the basis of sovereign equality."
148.	We hope that the Delhi Agreement will be fully, speedily and smoothly implemented with goodwill on all sides. The first steps in this direction have already been taken. Simultaneous repatriation of Bengalis from Pakistan, Pakistanis from Bangladesh, and prisoners of war and civilian internees from India has already started.
149.	I doubt if there is any comparable instance in modern history where a cease-fire, demarcation, troop
withdrawal, evacuation of occupied territories and repatriation of persons detained or stranded, following an international armed conflict of significant character, has been brought about within such a short period. All this has been achieved through direct negotiations, and as a result of the understanding shown on all sides, after taking into account all aspects of the problems. Therefore, to discuss now piecemeal and in isolation any of these problems from the point of view of any single party would be, to say the least, of little profit.
150.	These concrete facts clearly show that our search for normalization of relations and the establishment of a durable peace in the subcontinent has continued and has produced significant results. Our commitment to this goal is unequivocal. If we succeed in making the subcontinent an area of peace and co-operation, it not only will lead to a better life for over 700 millions of its people, but also will have a salutary impact on other areas as well.
151.	The Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Viet-Nam was signed in Paris this year. For many years we had repeatedly expressed our conviction that a military solution in this area was not feasible. Therefore, the massive and what seemed to be avoidable destruction of life and property in Indo-China shocked and pained us. The final terms of settlement, including provisions for the withdrawal of foreign forces from Indo-China and for bringing about a workable cease-fire in that area, are not much different from what we have been advocating all these years. The tragic sufferings of the people of Viet-Nam must come to an end and the full implementation of the Paris Agreement offers a challenge as well as an opportunity; every effort should be made to ensure lasting peace and to promote full and speedy reconstruction.
152.	As with the people of Viet-Nam, so with the people of Laos and Cambodia, India has always had close historical, cultural and emotional links. They can always depend on our sympathy, understanding and support. In this context, we welcome the recently concluded agreement
 among the parties in Laos. We hope that the people pf Laos will soon be able to set up a national coalition government in accordance with their legitimate aspirations without any outside interference.
153.	The peace in Indo-China will not be complete until the war in Cambodia has also been brought to an end. We are deeply distressed at the suffering which the people of Cambodia are still undergoing and the heavy toll of lives that is still taking place. We would urge that the people of Cambodia should be enabled to determine freely, and without any outside interference, their own future so that peace can return to that unhappy and tortured land. The international community can best assist this process by respecting fully the legitimate right to freedom, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the States of Indo-China.
154.	The comprehensive debate on the situation in the Middle East in the Security Council this summer showed once more, and most convincingly, that there can be no solution to this problem until Israel withdraws from the territories it has occupied by force as a consequence of the 1967 war. Israel's persistent refusal to vacate the occupied Arab lands and its violation of the rights of the inhabitants of the territories occupied by force are the direct causes of tension and conflict in this area. A just solution based on the implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and the recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians can lead to an enduring peace in this region. The Secretary-General's visit to the Middle East must have brought into clearer focus the views of the contestants. His analysis may well help the parties and the Security Council to continue the search for a just and speedy solution to this explosive situation. We, on our part, will be guided by the principles we have always followed in regard to the problem of the Middle East; they are: the non-acquisition of territories by force of arms, the right of all States in the area to exist, and the inalienable rights of the Palestinians.
155.	We have noted with satisfaction the direct dialogue established between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea for the intensification of contacts to solve humanitarian problems and the eventual reunification of the Korean people. In these talks, as indeed in the whole of Korea, the less outside interference there is the better will be the chances of the parties leaching agreement. Any proposal before the United Nations on this subject will be examined by us with these considerations in mind.
156.	The twin phenomena of colonial domination and racial bigotry in Africa are the greatest burden on the conscience of the contemporary world.
157.	The situation of the people under Portuguese domination was tragically highlighted by the disclosures in the international press of the gruesome massacres in Mozambique. We must continue to expose the criminal character of Portuguese colonialism.
158.	We welcome the declaration of independence by the people of Guinea-Bissau and extend our support to Partido Africano da Independencia da Guine e Cabo Verde in its work of national integration and consolidation. We have no doubt that the peoples of Angola and Mozambique will soon succeed in their struggle for independence.
159.	The will to be independent must be sustained by the United Nations not only in the areas I have specifically mentioned, but in many others which we shall consider during these three months. We were disappointed, therefore, that when the question of terrorism was discussed in the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism, the
 refusal by some to admit the possibility of freedom fighters using all means to achieve their objectives, prevented the Committee from coming to any conclusion.
160.	In Zimbabwe, the racist regime continues to maintain its illegal administration in defiance of world opinion. We regret that the Security Council has been prevented from taking any .decisive action for applying the existing sanctions. In addition to improving the effectiveness of sanctions, their extension and strengthening is necessary. The breach of sanctions by some countries and trading interests is most regrettable, particularly when we recall that the sanctions were imposed by a unanimous decision of the Security Council.
161.	Nowhere are the obligations of trust vested in the United Nations more binding than in Namibia. The people
of Namibia have demonstrated the greatest courage in asserting their own rights by boycotting the recent so-called elections in Ovamboland. Clearly, the South African Government is not willing to work with the United Nations in bringing about Namibian independence and unity. The efforts made through the United Nations Council for Namibia, its High Commissioner, and the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa could, if their activities are planned and co-ordinated in a well-thought-out manner, contribute effectively to the political independence of the Namibian people as a whole.
162.	In this session, the General Assembly will consider the adoption of the Draft Convention for the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid [item 53 (b)/. We shall support all measures to intensify and widen action for outlawing this intolerable and inhuman doctrine which has brought so much suffering to millions of human beings in South Africa. Only recently, the world was shocked with the brutal killing in Carletonville.

163.	Today is the birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, and I recall that he was the first man to rise and revolt against the cruel practices of the Government of South Africa. He led a movement for improving the lot of the coloured people in that country, even before he launched the civil disobedience movement in India for obtaining our freedom and independence. Since India raised this question in the United Nations in 1946, practically every Member of this Organization, including South Africa's allies, has denounced apartheid. We shall continue to co-operate with all other Member States until South Africa gives up its intolerable policies of racial discrimination.
164.	While recent developments on the limitation of nuclear armaments and the prohibition of certain categories of weapons of mass destruction are important, enduring world peace and security can be based only on total disarmament. However, the goal of general and complete disarmament, including, in particular, nuclear disarmament, remains as distant as ever. We have long urged the convening of a world conference on disarmament with the participation of all countries so as to focus attention on this urgent problem. Unfortunately, the Special Committee on the World Disarmament Conference, set up after the last General Assembly session, could not proceed with any substantive work. Given goodwill on all sides, the difficulties which arose can be removed by the present session of the Assembly so that a world conference on disarmament can be prepared for and convened as early as possible.
165.	My delegation has noted with interest the new item proposed by the delegation of the USSR for a reduction in the military budgets [item 102]. The intention seems to be that the permanent members of the Security Council and other militarily significant States should use a part of the savings for providing assistance to developing countries. We have been stressing that savings from disarmament should be diverted to development assistance. We shall therefore co-operate with other delegations in a constructive effort to consider how this proposal, which will no doubt be elaborated in course of discussion, could serve the interest of disarmament and also enhance development assistance.
166.	The declaration of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)J was a significant step in our efforts to reduce great Power rivalries and tensions in the different regions of the world and forms a part of our desire to eliminate military alliances and bases. I should take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the statesmanship of Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka in mobilizing international opinion for this purpose. Useful work has been initiated by the 15-member Ad Hoc, Committee on the Indian Ocean established by the last session of the Assembly [resolution 2992 (XXVII)] for considering measures for implementing the Declaration. This Declaration cannot be effective unless the great Powers and other major maritime Powers co-operate fully with the littoral and hinterland States.
167.	We look forward with utmost interest to the forthcoming plenipotentiary Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The meetings of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction this year have brought out certain difficulties, none of which need prove insurmountable. By working together with all other countries we could achieve a just and equitable law of the sea and sea-bed which would provide for and ensure an orderly exploration and exploitation of the sea-bed beyond the limits of national jurisdiction and a rational management of its resources, bearing in mind the special needs and interests of the developing countries, whether coastal or land-locked. A fair and viable law of the sea should also provide a framework of regulations for other uses of the sea, including those relating to the exploitation of its living and other resources by establishing an exclusive fishery and economic zone for the coastal States.
168.	The concept of world-wide partnership in economic and social development has been accepted. However, the progress towards full implementation of the International Development Strategy for the 1970s [resolution 2626 (XXV)] has been extremely disappointing. Some developed countries, particularly the smaller among them, have responded well, but little success has been achieved in even its most publicized goals. The dismal fact is that the Second Development Decade is going the way of the first, and with far less excuse. The growth of most developing countries is well below the targets set. The growth in the least developed countries has been slower still. The benefits of world economic growth are not being shared equitably and the rich societies are becoming richer and the poor poorer. Full recognition of the interdependence of the world community and adoption of measures conducive to the attainment of a more balanced growth in the world economy is still lacking.
169.	Many developing countries have already spoken of a real and imminent danger that, owing to the preoccupation of developed countries with readjustment of their mutual relations, the urgent need to implement policy measures in favour of developing countries may not receive the attention it deserves. The first biennial review and appraisal of the Strategy has so far been inconclusive. If agreed conclusions could be reached during this session, remedial measures to improve performance in the remaining years of the Decade would be easier to take. In the developing countries the struggle for greater equality and justice must
continue. Equally, we have to seek wider economic co-operation among the developing countries themselves. The important measures outlined recently at Algiers for this purpose should prove most useful.
170.	Contrary to earlier expectations, agreement on international monetary reform has not been reached. Stability in international monetary arrangements is not yet within our grasp. The issues are undoubtedly complex. Non-aligned countries have reiterated that the new international monetary system, in the establishment and working of which the developing countries should participate as equals, should be universal. The system should guarantee the stability of international trade flows and conditions of financing; it has to recognize the specific situation and needs of the developing countries for preferential treatment.
171.	The growth of world trade and the rightful share of the developing countries in it will be facilitated by the establishment of special drawing rights as the principal reserve asset, for the phasing out of the monetary role of gold, for an adjustment mechanism which is both efficient and equitable and, above all, for the establishment of a link between the special drawing rights and development finance, in order to provide for the adequate transfer of additional real resources to the developing countries. All these measures will create an orderly arrangement for adequate liquidity.
172.	The Declaration adopted a few days ago at Tokyo will soon be followed by a round of multilateral trade negotiations. The trend towards liberalization of world trade is to be welcomed, but the developing countries should not emerge from these negotiations as net losers. Specific measures must be taken to secure additional benefits for the international trade of developing countries. This has indeed been agreed to in Tokyo.
173.	To achieve this, the concept of preferential treatment for developing countries in all sectors of the negotiations has to be accepted. Moreover, we must ensure that the enlargement of the preferential arrangements among the
 developed countries, as well as the reduction of industrial tariffs following the multilateral trade negotiations, do not erode the meagre benefits which the developing countries have secured under the generalized scheme of preferences. To make this scheme fully operational will require its implementation by those who have not yet done so and substantial improvements in the arrangements already in operation.
174.	The delicate and precarious balance between-world food supply and demand during the last few years has emphasized the urgent need for a global strategy for food security. Widespread drought in several countries has brought to the forefront the problem of matching world resources and technology for production of food with global needs, in normal as also in abnormal years. We support the initiative of the Food and Agriculture Organization to work out an effective solution to this problem.
175.	In stressing the essential link between economic development and environmental improvement we have
consistently underlined that there is no contradiction between the solution of ecological problems and the interests of developing countries. We have, therefore, spoken against ecological considerations being used to curtail aid, erect trade barriers and prevent the transfer of technology. This could be the result of a short-sighted desire to protect economic advantages: restraints on economic growth must not be adopted to the detriment of the developing world.
176.	We are confident, therefore, that the United Nations Environment Programme under Mr. Maurice Strong will keep all these aspects in mind in working out a plan of action for the betterment of mankind as a whole. In this context, the development of human settlements is of particular importance to developing countries.
177.	I have followed with great interest the many important views expressed by distinguished ministers and leaders of delegations gathered here. Today, I have taken the time of the Assembly to set forth our ideas on some of the important issues before us. We must ponder over the many valuable ideas presented to us by men of thought, and we must bend our energies to collective effort as men of action. The Charter provides the mechanism for translating these ideas into action. Let us, if we can, gather enough courage and wisdom and seize this opportunity to serve our fellow men.﻿52.	 Mr. President, those of us who know you well take a special pride in your elevation to the presidency of the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session. The people of Ecuador share the honour which your personal qualities have justly earned.
53.	The international climate is charged with confidence and hope. Attitudes of hostility which once seemed to bean organic part of our generation's life are now giving way to patient dialogue. The Viet-Nam cease-fire, the American-Chinese encounter, the summit meetings at Moscow and Washington, the German agreements and the European treaties have been succeeded by a cease-fire in Laos, by talks between North and South Korea, and by contacts between the three States of the Indian subcontinent. The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe is at work, bringing a tragic era of confrontation to its end.
54.	Let us leave the historians to define the precise point at which the international journey took a new direction — and the causes which inspired the change. In the meantime the results are tangible and impressive, although not yet universal. In some discussions — but not in all — the old vocabularies of abuse are being softened by a welcome air of civility. It is generally understood that coexistence must be based on a separation between viewpoints and relationships. Even when Governments differ in their ideas, their viewpoints and their policies, in their social structures and in their international orientations, they can, nevertheless, foster good relations even across the gulf of their divergences. It was the cold-war philosophy that insisted on ideological agreement or political harmony as the condition of good relations between States. The detente accepts and admits no such condition. It respects and transcends diversities of interest and outlook. Indeed, the logical conclusion of the detente is the universality of international relations. Fidelity to detente requires all States to cultivate normal relations with each other, irrespective of differences and even of conflicts in their interests or policies. At a time when States which have real conflicts of ideology, policy and interest are establishing relations with each other, it would be a grotesque paradox if States which have never had any reason to quarrel about anything were induced to weaken or to sunder their mutual ties.
55.	But we shall not do service to the spirit of detente if we carry our satisfaction beyond the point of reason and truth. Free dialogue and compromise have prevailed in many disputes, but they are still rejected in others, and the victories of international conciliation in the past few years have all been won outside the United Nations structure. This indicates that the growth of world community is painfully slow, Indeed, our Secretary-General, with admirable realism, has found it necessary, in the introduction to his annual
report o n the work of the Organization [A/9001/Add. 1], to warn us of some of the shortcomings in the work of the United Nations so far. The truth is that, while quiet, bilateral diplomacy has recorded many triumphs, strident, polemical, public debate has not brought any good result on any issue at any time. The lesson is plain. The central role of this Organization should be to promote agreements between parties to a conflict irrespective of their voting strength, and not to try to adjudicate between conflicting views on the mere basis of numerical weight. The United Nations, in short, should have a diplomatic and not a parliamentary vocation. This point was stated with great precision by the Foreign Minister of Canada. I quote his words:
"... we must try to avoid barren and abrasive confrontations, which are frequently the result of formal voting processes. Consensus is another and often surer route —  Consensus does not mean the imposition of the will of the majority on a reluctant minority which feels its vital interests are at issue; it means the shared recognition of what should and can be done." [2126th meeting, para. 60.1
56.	Now here, in a few words, is a basic evaluation of what may be wrong with United Nations techniques. The result is not only that successes have come outside these walls; failures have abounded within them. The discussions on international terrorism by our Ad Hoc Committee ended in fiasco, as had the debate in the General Assembly after the Munich outrage last year. In Rome the International Civil Aviation Organization sat for many weeks without being allowed to agree on any amendments to the Hague or Montreal Conventions. All Members of the United Nations are united in their ability to discuss each other's imperfections. There are majorities to be had for selective political judgements against those who do not belong to a large voting bloc. But majorities cannot always be found for objective, temperate statements free of denunciation and invective.
57.	The Secretary-General's introduction to the annual report reminds us that the efforts of the United Nations in political conciliation are, in his words, "complementary" to "the normal bilateral dealings of Governments" [A/9001/ Add. 1, p. 5]. That is true. I also think that it is true that an attempt by all the Arab Governments to escape from the duty of engaging in "the normal bilateral dealings of Governments" to a constant reliance on public debate is one of the sources of the continuing deadlock in the Middle East. Indeed, every procedure and attitude that has proved its efficacy in other disputes has so far been ignored or rejected in our region.
58.	Would we not do well then to listen to the counsel of two statesmen whose names are pre-eminent in the history of the recent detente. Chancellor Willy Brandt of the Federal Republic of Germany has told this Assembly that
".. . it is primarily direct peace talks between the Arab countries concerned and Israel that will best secure a balance of the elementary interests of both sides." [2128th meeting, para. 63.]
And Mr, Kissinger, Secretary of State of the United States, has reminded us that not even the strongest of great Powers can "substitute for the efforts of those most directly involved" [2124th meeting, para. 56],
59.	The absence of negotiation in the Middle East is the gravest obstacle to the termination of regional tension. But it is not the parent cause of the tension. The root of the conflict lies deeper; the root of the conflict lies in the refusal of Arab Governments to come to terms with Israel as a sovereign nation rising from the depths of Middle Eastern history to resume its place in the universal community. Not one of the Arab Governments whose representatives have spoken from this rostrum about withdrawal from territories held since 1967 has said that in order to achieve their territorial claims the Arab States would recognize Israel's rightful place amongst the free nations of the area and establish permanent peace, friendship, commerce and normal relations with Israel similar, for example, to the relations which exist between the States of Western Europe, which only a short time ago were locked in hostility and war. Many Arab spokesmen say the opposite. The Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. El Zayyat, has stated in the Security Council and elsewhere that beyond the 1967 armistice lines lie the frontiers proposed in a United Nations recommendation of 1947 [resolution 181 (II)], which Egypt and other Arab Governments destroyed, as they had promised, "by blood and fire", and these in his learned view are the only legal frontiers. Nor would this be the end of Israel's dismantlement. An article in the official Cairo newspaper Al Gum-huriya only several days ago tells us that
"The withdrawal of Israel from all the conquered Arab territories is an initial demand of the Arab States presented as a part of the comprehensive programme aimed at putting an end to the Zionist settlement in Palestine."
60.	From such statements it is not hard to deduce the meaning of the phrase about the "legitimate aspirations of the Palestine Arab people" when employed by those in whose eyes the sole representatives of that people are the organizations which carry out murder and banditry all over the world but usually at a discreet distance from the Middle East,
61.	The plain fact is that the present Arab leadership is not satisfied with the verdict of history which has led to the constitution of 18 Arab States in an area of II million square kilometres with a population of 100 million. Arab leadership seems to be in an excited imperialist mood. It demands the elimination of Israel, a non-Arab nation, older in its roots within the Middle East than any other, more venerable than any other in the lineage of spirit and tongue that ties it to that soil, unexampled in the persistence of its national identity.
62.	Israel is the very heart and core of Middle Eastern history; but Israel is a Jewish and not an Arab entity. Therefore, there are Arab leaders who cannot sustain its sovereign presence: it must be either physically eliminated or swallowed up in something else so that its "Israel hood" would vanish under some Arab combination or domination. In its philosophy national freedom in the Middle East is an exclusive Arab right — to be monopolized, and not to be shared. There are other expressions of this hegemonistic and exclusive spirit —  in Arab policy in the Persian Gulf and in the posturing of Colonel Qaddafi as he flaunts his opulent purse across the world. But it is in the Israeli context that the tendency to see sovereignty in the Middle East as an Arab monopoly has had its most ominous effects.
63.	Now, what I have said is admittedly a stringent view of what Arab Governments seek to achieve. But unfortunately it is sustained by a great array of official statements. It is confirmed by the implacable warfare to which Israel, alone amongst all the States of the world, has been subjected since its birth. It is nourished by outrages such as the shooting in the head of the 11 Israeli athletes, tied hand and foot, on the floor of a helicopter in Munich one year ago. Such acts are possible only if the victims are regarded by the assassins as lying outside and beyond any human context. And, indeed, the Arab hostility towards Israel today joins hands with another and deadlier hatred to which it is akin. For where else, Members of the United Nations, other than in Cairo, can you imagine the publication by writers close to the seat of power of an article which I hold in my hand and from which I read the concluding extract:
"In the whole world people have ended by understanding that Hitler was right, for the Jews are vampires which suck the blood of humanity. They wish to destroy the world, but the world vomits them. They have been chased from land to land; they were burned in the ovens of Hitler — 1 million, 2 million, 6 million. Would that he had accomplished it fully!"
That is what Al Akhbar wrote on 19 August this year.
64.	"Would that [Hitler] had accomplished it fully!" This particular extract is only one example of hundreds of Nazi publications that have made Cairo a world centre of anti-Semitic ideology. As we listen to these obscenities on Cairo Radio, as we bury our dead after Munich or Lod, as we recall wars, assaults, boycotts and threats over these 25 years, as we read of the Covenant of the so-called "Palestine Liberation Organization", which asserts that only Arabs have sovereign rights in the Middle East, can we be reproached if we see ourselves as the target of a particularly virulent hatred, at variance with all humane values and vastly removed from anything that can be called detente?
65.	In short, one of the components of Israel's policy —  and I say this in great frankness —  is a profound scepticism about the basic intention of Arab States to respect Israel's sovereignty, its national identity, its cultural legacy, its place in the Middle East and the world. There is one thing, and one thing alone, that could undermine that scepticism: negotiation.
66.	For recent international experience teaches us that negotiation is not simply a procedural method: it is a principle of coexistence. Negotiation does not merely photograph established positions; it leads them towards mutual accommodation. It puts hopes and suspicions to their only viable test. At the negotiating table the discourse between the parties ceases to be rhetorical, abrasive and polemical. It becomes pragmatic, concrete, empirical. A unique kind of solidarity asserts itself between the negotiators, who become subject to the mystique of potential success and put forth their maximal effort to avoid a final break. Precisely because negotiation has such far-reaching effects, the Arab refusal to negotiate without prior conditions arouses far-reaching suspicions.
67.	We have long been convinced of the need to undertake a detailed negotiation ranging freely across all the problems at issue. If this aim has not been fulfilled, we share the
universal regret — but we disclaim culpability. We have accepted Security Council resolution 242 (1967), which calls for the establishment of permanent peace by agreement between Member States in the Middle East, including withdrawal of forces from territories occupied since 1967 to secure and recognized boundaries to be determined in the peace agreement. We proposed detailed agendas for discussion with Egypt and Jordan, We accepted Ambassador Jarring's proposal, rejected by Egypt in March 1968, for convening Israeli and Egyptian representatives in conferences under his auspices to discuss a peace settlement. When four eminent Heads of African States visited our region in 1971, they submitted six proposals in writing, to which my Prime Minister made written and appropriate response on 28 November 1971.5 The African Presidents reported that this reply, together with that of Egypt, constituted a sufficient basis to justify negotiation. We stand by those replies today. In particular, we responded to the suggestion of the African Presidents which reads as follows:
"Acceptance by the two parties that 'secure and recognized boundaries' be determined in the peace agreement".
68.	In 1971, when it was pointed out that direct contact might not yet be easily acceptable to Arab Governments, we agreed to the United States procedure for proximity talks. When it was then suggested that it might be difficult to conceive a sudden transition from total deadlock to total peace, we accepted the idea of a Suez agreement involving the opening of the Canal under Egyptian administration, with a limited, agreed withdrawal of Israeli forces, even ahead of a peace settlement. We stipulated that this would not be the final withdrawal, but a phase leading to further negotiations in which the permanent and final line would be agreed upon between the parties.
69.	Throughout all this period we abstained — as we still do — from changing the political and juridical status of the administered territories, and have not closed any options for a negotiated peace. We opened the river crossings and cease-fire lines to a free movement of hundreds of thousands of Arabs from areas outside Israeli jurisdiction — and indeed from all over the Arab world. We placed the Holy Places of Christendom and Islam under the administration of Christian and Moslem authorities and proposed that this principle be given appropriate statutory expression in a peace agreement. In October 1972 I suggested a meeting with Foreign Minister Riad in New York "in order to break out of old deadlocks into a new vision and a new hope". We utilized the good offices of foreign statesmen and other visitors to convey to Cairo and other Middle Eastern capitals our proposals for contact and dialogue in any form and at any level agreeable to the other side. We welcomed the Secretary-General of the United Nations on his visit to Member States in the Middle East, and appreciated his testimony to the will for peace that, in his words, he found in his contacts with the Government of Israel.
70.	That is not an exhaustive list of all the soundings and gestures that we have made in an effort to generate a process of negotiation. Nor have we decided to despair of the
prospect. But can anyone seriously believe that all these initiatives, all these responses — none of which was put in ultimative form — offered no opening whatever through which Arab Governments genuinely desiring peace could seek or accept a dialogue with us?
71. The Arab reactions to these and other initiatives have always included refusals to negotiate; or refusals to acknowledge Israel's statehood at all; or an insistence that Arab positions be accepted in advance by Israel as a condition of negotiation; or a demand that the situation which preceded and in large measure provoked the war of 1967 be meticulously restored.
72.	Now, there is one important thing to be noted about those positions. If all or any of them had been adopted by Governments in America, Europe and East Asia in the past few years, there would be no agreements for the General Assembly to welcome and no detente for anybody anywhere lo celebrate.
73.	I turn from the past to the future. It is natural for the Israeli Government to use this opportunity of making a precise definition of the principles which move its policy. That policy is frequently and grossly misrepresented, especially at conferences from which we are excluded while our adversaries command the scene. Our policy is to seek peace and security. If the Israeli mind is intensely preoccupied with the problem of security, it is because of the particular memories that converge upon us. On one level of recollection we come face to face with a recent experience that no other family of the human race has ever undergone. The fires are out in the gas chambers, and the ashes are silent in European fields. But the memory of our 6 million kinsmen, brutally wiped off the slate of life, and the terrible agony of the million Jewish children butchered in the year of martyrdom abide with us, vivid, stark, unforgotten. And on the other level of memory there is the experience of 25 years in which our nation's progress has been secured only at a heavy price of suffering and death,
74.	A people that has undergone such affliction and borne such loss is bound by historic duty lo insist on a very precise craftsmanship in the construction of peace. It will not do simply to reproduce the vulnerable and explosive situation which threatened world peace six years ago. Israel's statehood, its Jewish vocation, its name and flag and tongue are a part of the international reality now and for all time. They are axiomatic, and it is our business to maintain them in growing security.
75.	We are asked whether we seek peace. The answer is, Yes, that is our central aim, the destination of all our policies and hopes. Peace does not only involve a documentary acknowledgement of rights. It signifies the permanent end of conflict, and the proof of its authenticity must be sought in human terms. Peace means open frontiers across which peoples can seek commerce and contact with each other in mutual accessibility and thus give depth and meaning to formal governmental engagements.
76.	Should we not look hard and long at the European example? The aim should be a community of sovereign States in the Middle East, as in Benelux and the European communities. With our eastern neighbour, once the boundary is determined, we should seek a system of relations based on separate sovereignties but with a high measure of social and economic integration. The remarkable ease and cordiality of access between Israelis and the mass of Palestinian Arabs today should be preserved and consolidated in a peace settlement. The squalid conspiracies of Arafat and Habash, with their grenades, daggers, bombs and guns, do not represent the views or interests of the million non-Israeli Arabs west of the Jordan living in peaceful interaction with Israelis today. That is why terrorist violence has no expression there.
77.	We are asked if we accept negotiation. The answer is, Yes, by any procedure mutually agreed upon. The negotiation is between the sovereign States of the area. We must be concerned to insulate our region from the rivalries and competitions of the Powers. The Middle East, after generations of servitude, is now free. It should not seek new. hegemonies and new servitudes at the expense of its newly won independence.
78.	What about Security Council resolution 242 (1967)? The answer is, Yes, we accept it as the basis for negotiation with Egypt and Jordan, and our memorandum of 4 August 1970 remains in force. It is vital to understand what the resolution says and what it does not say. The resolution rules out withdrawal except in the context of a "just and lasting peace". It does not require any unconditional Israeli action without balancing actions on the Arab side. And it specifically makes provision for the establishment of secure and recognized boundaries by agreement between Member States. When Arab Governments persuade international conferences to say that resolution 242(1967) requires immediate and unconditional withdrawal from all the territories, they commit a triple forgery within a single sentence and put our documentary consensus in jeopardy. But as it stands and as it is written it is a documentary basis for negotiation,
79.	Do we accept the principle of withdrawal? Yes. In the context of a permanent peace Israeli forces would withdraw to the positions and boundaries determined mutually by the peace agreements. Our policy is not unilateral annexation but the negotiation of agreements on the final boundary. That position is in full accord with the intentions of those who drafted and sponsored Security Council resolution 242 (1967). One of them, Assistant Secretary Sisco, said publicly in 1970:
"That resolution did not say withdrawal to the pre-June 5 line, The resolution said the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final, secure and recognized borders. In other words the question of the final borders is a matter of negotiation between the parties."
80.	We are asked about the Palestinian Arabs. If the idea is Palestine instead of Israel, our answer, of course, is, No. There is nothing "instead" of Israel either in universal history or in modern political reality. The question whether the Arabs have 18 or 19 States does not stand on an equal plane with Israel's solitary domain of nationhood and existence. But if the issue is Palestine side by side with Israel, the answer is that in peace negotiations with Jordan Israel's permanent boundary would be determined. It is not our governmental consensus to seek such boundary changes as would bring all or most of the Arabs of the West Bank and
their populated territories under Israeli sovereignty or citizenship. The majority of Jordan's population are Palestinians, and most of the Palestinians are Jordanian citizens. Thus an Israel-Jordan peace settlement would enable most of the Palestine Arabs east and west of the Jordan to affirm their identity and citizenship within an Arab framework. It is for Arabs and not Israelis to determine the precise constitutional structure of our eastern neighbour. In a peace settlement the area of the former Palestine Mandate on both sides of the Jordan between the desert and the sea would have two States — Israel and an Arab State which would be a Palestinian Arab State in its composition whatever its name or constitutional structure. It would be normal for Palestinian Arabs to be included in the Jordanian delegation that would negotiate peace with Israel.
81.	The principles I have outlined today would, of course, have to be submitted to negotiation with the other side. Here I seek only to emphasize that our positions are legitimate, normal and conducive to a wide range of peaceful solutions. Indeed, they are identical with the principles adopted by many States which have been praised here for their contribution to the new detente. It is possible to agree with those positions or to differ from them. But we see a moral and intellectual affront in any tendency to portray them as eccentric, as immoderate and, more grotesquely, as intransigent, when they are quite clearly nothing of the kind.
82.	Least of all is there any justification for making them the basis for abusive or punitive formulations in obedience to the pressures of Arab States which decline negotiation, refuse peace, encourage international terrorism and seek to impose their own hostilities on other States in a manner prejudicial to the sovereignty and dignity of newly emerging nations.
83.	Whatever has divided them in the past, the Israeli and Arab nations cannot escape their common destiny. History and geography ensure their proximity. Experience teaches us that there are no irreconcilable conflicts. If the Arab Governments will take example and inspiration from the prevailing spirit of detente, they will find in Israel a willing partner for regional development and co-operation. There would be more benefit and, above all, more honour and dignity for them and for us in the exploration of a peaceful future than in the pursuit of an ineffective and sterile rancour, which has achieved and will achieve none of its objectives but which degrades our region's name and obstructs its better visions.
84.	We shall respond affirmatively to any efforts, such as those indicated by the United States, to assist in the search for just solutions and to generate a spirit of accommodation.
85.	Israel's relations with the European community will enter a new phase with the conclusion this year of an agreement constituting a free trade area within the Mediterranean context. If the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe succeeds in its task, the Mediterranean and Middle East will benefit from the resultant growth of continental harmony. We welcome the decision of the Conference to invite Israel to present its views on matters inscribed on the Conference agenda,
86.	A central theme of the dialogue on detente in Europe, in the European Security Conference and elsewhere is liberty of movement and freedom of intellectual expression. Unless some success is registered here, there will be scepticism about the authenticity and depth of the change in the international climate. Our concern for detente should not lead us to ignore the desperate bid for freedom by men such as Solzhenitsyn, Sakharov, Levich and other scientists and thinkers who fall under governmental harassment and oppression.
87.	The saga of Soviet Jewry belongs to this theme,
88.	During his visit to the United States this summer, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Union of Soviet Socialists Republics, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, made a number of declarations implying that there are almost no rejections of requests by Soviet Jews to be permitted to leave for Israel. To our regret, we cannot confirm such statements at a time when so many Jews in the Soviet Union are held against their will and call out to us daily in despair. They face powerful authorities in a struggle to exercise the right, granted fortunately to many thousands of others, to join their people and their families in Israel. Applicants for emigration have in some instances been dismissed from work and left without any means of livelihood. Media of information have incited against them. Administrative molestation has made their life unbearable. Dozens of Jews, amongst them a young woman, have been condemned to long years of suffering behind barbed wire. The penalties inflicted on these people are especially surprising in view of the fact that the right to leave for Israel has been recognized in principle and that other Jews have exercised it. It is difficult to understand or condone a policy granting exit permits to some Jews while at the same time creating cruel obstacles for many others.
89.	Nor can we pass in silence over the anti-Jewish incitement conducted openly or under the cover of propaganda directed against religion or against Zionism. This campaign is still carried on through governmental media of information and by means of propaganda publications and pseudo-scientific literature. In this manner anti-Semitic ideas are disseminated and injected into the masses of the Soviet Union's population.
90.	On 26 March this year a tribunal in the French capital determined that information material distributed by the Soviet Embassy contained slanders on the Jewish faith and incitement to racial discrimination, and found those responsible guilty. But the Soviet authorities have not applied the Soviet law against the disseminators of anti-Semitic propaganda,
91.	At the same time, the Jews of Syria and the remnant still left in Iraq are living in constant torment. Israel again appeals to world opinion which has already alleviated the plight of these helpless small minorities whose only salvation lies in emigration and the pursuit of a new life.
92.	This season of the year was darkened for us in 1972 by the fearful affliction and murder of our sportsmen who went to Munich in the shelter of the Olympic flag. This year the horizon is clouded again. The kidnapping of Jewish refugees by terrorists in Austria is a reproach to international institutions whose sterile discussion of International terrorism must have given more encouragement to terrorists than they would have derived even from the absence of discussion. The decision to close the camp at Schoenau defied our belief. I recall an unforgettable day there a few months ago. In a world convulsed by nihilism and violence, it was moving to see this oasis of humane values, dedicated to the impulses of compassion and solidarity which have so often become submerged in the torrent of twentieth-century life. The very name Schoenau was recited with pride by every Austrian whom I was privileged to encounter. Those who have passed through its gates have known great suffering and torment in the tempests which have shaken Europe in this generation. To abandon such an enterprise in deference to a pair of brutal gangsters has a terrifying meaning, It raises the question where the final human victory belongs. Can law and civility triumph if they are not strongly defended? Can a decent and rational public order take root in the world if indulgence beyond their own expectation is shown to those who put a pistol to the head of unarmed wayfarers? What will be the effect of the constant suspension of European legal systems in favour of early release and impunity for those who come to kill and maim and leave their trail of innocent blood behind?
93.	The issue is not only how the safe transit of Jews from the Soviet Union to Israel will be arranged, once the emigration has been authorized and the immigration approved. This is an acutely grave question, but it arises in an even graver context. What is the future of a world in which two pirates and criminals can bring a, proud nation, can bring sovereign governments to the acceptance of their terms? What are the implications of transactions and engagements between civilized governments and violent extortionists? Who is going to rule our world, governments or gunmen?
94.	The Council of Europe in its resolution entitled "Report on the responsibility of the Member States of the Council of Europe regarding the free movement of people in Europe", adopted on 1 October 1973, rightly expressed the hope that no government will regard itself as bound by a promise secured by extortion to terminate facilities for the transit of emigrants from the Soviet Union. All these human predicaments emerge from the developments in Vienna this week. When the civilized world stands with bowed head, along comes President El-Sadat to celebrate joyfully the triumph of the young gunmen over a few aging, weary Jews and over the sovereignty and law of an enlightened European State.
95.	Once it was an international offence to aid pirates. They were defined as humani generis hostis, enemies of the human race. Are we approaching a time when it will be an offence to resist them?
96.	Chancellor Brandt called from this platform for an effective convention against terrorism. But experience shows that if in this matter we aim at universality we shall not have the necessary parliamentary success. There is — let us face it — no effective anti-terrorist majority in the United Nations. That is an ominous truth, but nothing is gained by ignoring it.
97.	I ask myself therefore whether it would be more effective to follow the general traditions of international law by
convening like-minded interested States to discuss and formulate a convention against terrorism. The law of the seas and other instruments of international law and international co-operation evolved from the common action of a few States to which others came to adhere. Most of the historic international conventions were constructed in this way. Formulated by the few, they became the consensus of the many. The 43 States whose votes indicated their dissatisfaction with the results of last year's debate on terrorism might well consider meeting for common action, which would in the first place engage themselves and later attract a gradual but broad consensus.
98.	For it becomes more evident each day that the United Nations, frustrated in its activity in regional disputes, should concentrate more of its efforts on matters of planetary concern which require a unitary framework. Mankind has a long past and an uncertain future. Revolutions in science, in technology, in the use of energy, in industrial productivity, in demographic growth have moved forward at a rhythm too quick for the mind to absorb. Man is not at ease with his environment. The intellectual and spiritual consequences are deep. Our culture is dominated by a sense of fragmentation and instability. It expresses the special pathos of the twentieth century condition — the confidence of power and yet the sharp premonition of vulnerability both living within us, together, side by side.
99.	The United Nations may recapture some of its lost prestige and resonance if it gives first priority to those issues which have a planetary dimension. The law of the air and of the seas, the defence of air and water against pollution, the stimulation of economic growth in developing countries, the conservation of resources, the fight against famine, the establishment of a reserve of cereals in years of abundance for use in years of scarcity (following may I say, the thrifty example of our Israeli ancestor Joseph in ancient Egypt), the response to the call of hunger south of the Sahara, the response to the important initiative of President Echeverria of Mexico calling for a charter of economic rights and duties of States — those are some problems which can only be discussed and solved on a global scale. Too much of the time of the United Nations may have been spent on the regional disputes in which individual Governments have the last say — for the simple reason that they have the ultimate responsibility. In the meantime, problems have collected which because they belong equally to all nations, end up by belonging to none. Each of our national societies has its custodians and spokesmen. The question is who except the United Nations can speak for the City of Man? Who speaks in responsible tutelage of the atmosphere, the soil, the oceans, the unique life-supporting Earth?
100.	Perhaps mankind's dilemma is the United Nations opportunity. Let us, therefore, tread this ground firmly but with precision for this is the only planet that we have.﻿60.	Mr. President, it is no mere duty but a real pleasure for me, in coming to the rostrum, to pay a tribute to you, the distinguished representative of Ecuador, and through you to the great Latin American community. I greet your country also as a good Pacific neighbour in the southern hemisphere, and we express the hope that every success will attend your efforts.
61.	This is a session of the Assembly at which we will be assessing the growing relaxation of tensions and the breaking down of the old barriers between East and West.
62.	The debates and the welcome action taken here on new Members are, of course, both a symbol and a practical result of these developments. But other results of the new relationship among the great Powers have still to be translated into practical benefits for the smaller countries and for this Organization. That new great Power relationship, that relaxation, has been brought about by a concert of convenience among the few. But we, the smaller nations, who need stable peace, co-operation and international order cannot rest satisfied with such a temporary and fragile situation. We have to find a way to build upon the relaxation, to bring it within a larger, more constructive and more permanent framework of international order.
63.	A "balance of power" among the great Powers has doubtless contributed to the new spirit of relaxation in international affairs; and to that extent we of course welcome it. But we are not naive. "Balance of power" in the past has been merely another term for the continuation, in a different guise, of competition and rivalry. The great Powers have continued their efforts to shift the balance in their direction; and in due course they have miscalculated, the balance has collapsed and major wars have occurred. In so far as similar elements are inherent in the present situation the world will continue unstable and the detente will be fragile. For, let us not forget, the great Powers still remain free to undertake their unilateral actions. And some of those unilateral, often sadly misguided, actions have brought great suffering in recent years and set back the progress of wide sections of the whole human family. In this nuclear age unfettered freedom on the part of the more powerful members of the family of nations is too dangerous. The great Powers are beginning at last to show signs of recognizing this. We, and they, in their interests as well as ours, must move to repair the damaged structure of international order. They are establishing some sort of balance among themselves; our task is to build a framework for a healthier relationship between the so-called great and the small.
64.	As the head of a newly elected Labour Government, I come to the international scene new; but the needs of the day seem startlingly obvious. Leaving aside the question of international security and international order, the chief need among nations is the same as the chief need within individual nations  —  that is, to achieve economic and social justice. That is the principal concern of my own Government at home; and I am convinced that it must also be the focal concern of the United Nations.
65.	We view with profound concern and dismay a situation in which, more than a quarter of a century after the United Nations was founded, the most critical of issues show no sign of improvement. I refer to the immense and growing gap between standards of living in the industrialized countries and the developing countries. I refer to the world food situation, which is more difficult than at any time since the aftermath of the Second World War. I refer to the rapidly multiplying world population and the other pressures on available resources. These are the obvious ills of international society, complicated still further by an international monetary instability that jeopardizes the development plans of all countries, by the rapid price inflation in much of the world and, this year, by crop failures and famines.
66.	We are in no doubt about the need to tackle more seriously the deepening division between the rich and the poor. It is depressing and deplorable  —  indeed it is intolerable  —  that most of the international conferences of the last decade or more have ultimately evolved along lines dividing the developed from the developing and in ways and with results in some cases which have reflected no credit on countries which were better off than others. Somehow-and sooner, not later  —  resources must be more equitably shared.
67.	A few countries, a minority of the human family, are using the bulk of the world's resources-resources which we now increasingly realize are exhaustible. Yet, ironically, the ever-increasing consumption of these resources is steadily bringing less and less real enjoyment to the favoured few. An increasing number among them are realizing the dead end  —  the literal dead end  —  of a philosophy and a way of life favouring the accumulation of material things to the point of greed and senselessness. It is a philosophy that in its time brought immense material benefits; but the cost to society of its pursuit to excess is now being plainly revealed. Rich countries, at some time, must appreciate that enough is enough. The richer countries must turn consciously towards improving the more intangible qualities of life for themselves while making their energies and skills available to improve, to a far greater extent than ever before, the material level of life for the majority of poorer countries.
68.	I mean, in other words, that a change in attitudes is required. If not, we run the risk that solutions will impose themselves by means of famine, pestilence, the exhaustion of resources and every form of social unrest and war. There is no need to manage so foolishly the resources of this beautiful planet. If this smacks of Idealism I make no apology for it. If there are no ideals there is no hope. We could do with more of the idealism with which we entered the post-war era  —  an idealism which has been pressed out by the weight of paper and speeches and resolutions and, yes, by the many sobering practical experiences of the last 28 years. One could, I can see it. be disillusioned and cynical. But it is imperative that we should act as if we believe the human race has a future. This may be idealistic, but I am not talking idealism, I am talking practicalities. The world has to move on to new courses if we are to survive. It is a matter of practical common sense.
69.	My Government, since taking office, has been trying to put its convictions into effect  —  though I speak in no boastful way, for I am conscious of how small our efforts are when measured against the needs of others. But we are trying to translate into international terms the vision of a decent and humane society which motivates our domestic policies. We have reviewed our mutual assistance programmes against the internationally accepted targets which now form part of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)]. We did so because it seemed to us that there was no greater or more urgent priority confronting us in international affairs  —  at least among those priorities which we, as a non-great Power, were in a position to do anything about. We were especially concerned about the possibility of failure of the Strategy for the Second Development Decade implicit in the decision of many countries to maintain reservations about the targets of the Strategy. In a world where millions continue to go hungry New Zealand has not felt able to rest on its achievements despite a steady growth in the size of our aid programme in absolute terms.
70.	My Government has therefore withdrawn previous reservations  on the Strategy targets. We shall seek to meet them. Notably, we have drawn up a programme of government aid which aims to increase more than threefold the existing flow of aid over the next three-year period. We hope to play our part through membership in the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme next year in ensuring expanded and equitable policies of United Nations aid for countries in need of it.
71.	The process of working to improve conditions of life can never be one-sided; it is a mutual one. In the South Pacific in particular and in South-East Asia, which are areas of close interest to us, we look forward to continued co-operation with the countries of the region. Their resources and skills and the efforts of their peoples are an all-important factor and will deserve the major credit for success if the Second Decade's targets are gained. We have seen the way self-government and independence have drawn forth those skills in small South Pacific territories for which New Zealand was once responsible  —  Western Samoa and the Cook Islands. We look forward to the same constructive development and co-operation in the case of the island of Niue, whose representatives will be discussing their plans with you at this session.
72.	What I have been saying grows out of my Government's strong feeling of the necessity-and, one can say increasingly, the inevitability-of social cohesion in the world today. This is not a unique notion of Labour Governments everywhere, but is rather the root idea of the United Nations Charter itself. We are all part of the one human family. Some of us welcome this, but the plain fact is that all of us have no choice but to adjust ourselves to this central fact of human existence.
73.	Obviously a great deal more than aid is needed. Action has to be undertaken on many fronts. For instance, we heard with interest the proposal of the Secretary of State of the United States of America for a world conference on food [2124th meeting]. Such a proposal naturally interests a country like New Zealand, which is deeply involved in the production of food, and we welcome it. But immediately we consider such a proposal we realize afresh how interconnected all the problems of the world are. People are hungry, but in some countries farmers are paid not to produce, and land is taken out of production. Other food-producing countries, like ours, have difficulty in getting access to northern hemisphere markets, because agricultural arrangements have been established which have nothing to do with efficiency but a lot to do with politics and protectionism. Unless fanners can sell their products at fair prices more food is not likely to be produced. Without freer trade in agricultural products it will be difficult lo get Imore food to the people who need it. Thus we hardly start to talk of food before we are face to face with the fundamental issues raised by the new round of negotiations among the States parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). And the GATT round takes us to a series of other interconnected issues. Yet the basic problems are not really mysterious at all or incapable of resolution if the will is there. Somehow the resources of this planet and the needs of the human family have to be matched. It can be done and it can be done in a way that would benefit all and harm very few.
74.	Both the proliferation of nuclear weapons generally, and the testing of nuclear weapons and devices in the atmosphere, notably in the. South Pacific, have caused New Zealand deepest concern. We view with disquiet the whole attitude of mind by which nuclear weaponry is preserved and indeed fortified as the years go by. In every way possible  —  by protests to the Governments concerned, by action in the General Assembly, by application to the International Court of Justice  —  we have made every effort to bring about the cessation of nuclear testing. But ,the testing in the Pacific zone has still persisted.
75.	In the more general context we have heard with dismay recently of the reported acquisition by the Soviet Union of a more advanced weapons delivery system which will increase the danger of a new round of nuclear weapons escalation. This news underlines the urgency of achieving further progress in disarmament.
76.	This Organization has recently marked the tenth anniversary of the partial test-ban treaty. But there have been more explosions on the average each year since the Treaty was signed than in the years of the nuclear age that preceded the Treaty. Testing continues unabated. Two nuclear Powers have deliberately ignored the Treaty and have continued with intensive programmes of nuclear testing in the atmosphere, with scant regard for the environment in which we all live or for the growing outcry from world opinion. The remaining nuclear Powers which are parties to the Treaty have continued with underground tests, thereby affording the two Powers that are not party to the Treaty with a pretext for pressing ahead with their own programmes. There has been a lamentable lack of progress in the preparation of a Treaty which would impose a comprehensive ban on all testing, in spite of the undertaking contained in the preamble to the 1963 Treaty to work for such an agreement.
77.	In the absence of a comprehensive agreement, accepted by all the nuclear Powers and backed by the overwhelming weight of world opinion, there must remain an acute and continuing danger that still more countries will seek to acquire nuclear weapons. The proliferation of nuclear weapons - measurably advances the certainty of nuclear war, and only a universal ban on weapons testing can eliminate this grave threat. I am convinced that the people of every country are sick of war and the threat of war. They do not want nuclear weapons and their attendant threats. They want peace and they want more progress towards it. Is it impossible for Governments to be moved by the desires of ordinary people?
78.	Just as we shall not solve the problems of pollution, or the exhaustion of the planet's resources, or the growing gulf between the rich and the poor, unless we change our attitudes towards the accumulation of things, so we shall not solve the problems of war and of international order unless we change our attitudes towards power and the accumulation of power. Arms are the potential for war, for mass slaughter, for the human family to destroy itself. Let us keep in the forefront of our thinking a conviction that war is now unacceptable as an instrument for achieving national aims.
79.	Might we not then deduce the consequences of this truth? Shall we continue to recognize nations as "great Powers" merely because they have the capacity to inflict greater damage than any other nation? Of course if they acted, under the Charter, as protectors of the human family, they might be so recognized; but in the last 28 years they have demonstrated convincingly their incapacity to rise to such a role; they have failed to match power with responsibility. Sometimes the shepherds have preyed upon the sheep. Might we not therefore respond by questioning the scale of values that puts power at the top? Might we not insist on a different scale of values, a human scale, a civilized scale, a scale based on the belief that the truly great country is the country which shows concern for the quality of life both of its own people and of its neighbours? We have to eliminate the very institution of war from international dealings. Let us therefore start adjusting our attitudes and bring that changed approach to this very Organization. In that way we might prepare the ground for the changes which are required if the United Nations is to meet the needs of human beings here and now and in the challenging years immediately ahead of it.
80.	For-and do we doubt it? -so long as the old attitudes persist, so long will those nations that aspire to so-called greatness strain and swell themselves to reach the critical bulk and dignity. To attain the honour of sitting at the "top table" they will waste natural resources and cause damage and concern to their neighbours. But let us see for what it is the absurdity of a lonely few sitting at their top table with their obscene weapons which they can use only by committing suicide. That "honour" is surely now an empty one-if it ever was otherwise. Let us develop values that are relevant to the real world and get to grips with the real business of mankind.
81.	In the case of at least one of the great Powers many citizens are realizing the basic truth about power in the nuclear age and are moving to work out its implications. But in the meantime, what do we, the smaller Members of the United Nations, do  —  we whose requests and pleas are arrogantly brushed aside, perhaps not even listened to?
82.	The small Powers should demand a more effective voice in disarmament negotiations. Let us begin at this session of the Assembly with a concerted call for the earliest possible conclusion of a treaty to ban all forms of nuclear-weapons testing. If no significant progress is made through the existing machinery within one year, the Assembly should, I suggest, consider calling a general conference to draft such a treaty.
83.	We have also to confront the simple fact that in the last 10 years or so international law and international organizations have been the casualties of the cold war. We face a desolate landscape within the United Nations. Some Powers have either ignored the United Nations or brought threats to it only when diplomacy had failed and it was too late for the United Nations to act effectively. How often have they then blamed the United Nations and justified their own unilateral actions by its alleged ineffectiveness? It is now for the smaller countries to take up the task of making this Organization work. If the great Powers will also show a change of approach, the United Nations, and mankind with it, will get back into business.
84.	I have already mentioned the possibility of a concerted call for a treaty to ban all nuclear-weapons testing. The small Powers may also wish to consider carefully the possibilities of partial disarmament or demilitarization on a regional basis where circumstances and geography make it appropriate. One of my Government's first acts after election last year was to change New Zealand's vote at the Assembly in order to express its sympathy with the concept of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean. At the Conference of the Commonwealth Heads of Government in Ottawa in August, New Zealand joined in a unanimous endorsement of the action of the Foreign Ministers of the Association of South-East Asian Nations in adopting a declaration to make South-East Asia a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality. In the words of the Commonwealth communique of 10 August 1973, we regard that initiative as a positive contribution towards peace and stability in that region. New Zealand looks with favour also on the establishment by treaty of nuclear-free zones such as that accorded by the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), and we intend to consult with our Pacific neighbours about the feasibility of establishing a similar kind of nuclear-free zone in the South Pacific region.
85.	In the field of the settlement of disputes the small nations could achieve gains by showing a readiness to submit disputes to the International Court or to arbitration. There is a disturbing tendency for some influential countries to pay lip-service to the importance of international law and the role of the Court, but in practice to take all possible steps to avoid its jurisdiction. The more countries that accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court the more internationally unacceptable such evasive practices will become and the greater will be the pressure for the unreserved acceptance of the Court's jurisdiction.
86.	Small nations can help to prevent wars and to assist the peaceful resolution of tense situations by strengthening the peace-keeping role of the United Nations. They can do this by earmarking units on which the United Nations may call for peace-keeping purposes. My own Government has decided to train units of its defence services in readiness for participation in future United Nations peace-keeping operations. Small nations may, I believe, express justified disappointment at the lack of progress hitherto recorded by the Assembly's Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations. Recognizing the valuable contributions made by Canada and one or two other members, they should press for the completion of the Committee's mandate set out in resolutions dating from 1967. There is no doubt that the Secretary-General must be given moral and practical support in the initiatives he may have to take in the exercise of his responsibilities in regard to peace and security.
87.	If we think of ourselves as a single family, and if we are going to work together for economic advancement, for the prevention of pollution and other ills, and to escape the threat of war, it follows that we must work together on racial discrimination, which is, justly, one of the major preoccupations of our Organization. This has been a year in which a number of situations affecting human rights have constituted gross affronts to the ideals of the United Nations. In some countries with serious racial problems great efforts have been made and substantial progress achieved in the direction of racial equality, as has happened, for example, in our host country during the lifespan of the United Nations. In other countries racial segregation continues, notoriously, to be enshrined in government policy. In still other countries members of a racial minority who wish to emigrate are subject to onerous conditions and delays, and in yet* another country, members of a racial group have been expelled at short notice and stripped of their possessions without compensation. To these and other situations the response of the United Nations membership has varied widely; some have virtually ignored them.
88.	My own Government is opposed to racial discrimination and oppression no matter where it is practised, by whom, or in whatever form. We have been combing through United Nations resolutions and taking whatever action is appropriate to ensure that our own house is in order. Above and beyond those obligations we have voluntarily accepted a visit from a United Nations representative investigating the problems of indigenous populations. New Zealand is, as far as I know, the first country to show a United Nations mission all aspects of its internal racial situation. We hope that the report of this mission shortly to be presented  will be of value not only to New Zealand but to the United Nations as a whole.
89.	In concert with others, New Zealand will work towards re-establishing the Organization as a protector of the interests of the majority of States, and in particular of the small States. The calls for justice and equity made by the huge new membership must be listened to and heeded. The aspirations of the smaller Powers, their fears, their determination to build a world without war, a world where the rule of law prevails, a world where the weaker will not be subservient to the political and economic interests of the stronger-these demands cannot be ignored. We agree with the Secretary-General that we need action, innovation and determination if mankind is not to be overtaken once again by the dark destructive or selfish side of human nature. We are eager to play our part in creating a true family of man.
﻿1.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the Soviet delegation I should like to congratulate you on your election to the post of President of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly. In discharging your duties, you may be assured of our firm intention to help make this session a successful one. The Soviet Union seeks to ensure that every session of the General Assembly yields practical results in strengthening peace and the security of peoples.
2.	The past year has been crowded with major international events. Some of them, even if viewed separately, represent historic milestones. However, what chiefly characterizes this entire set of events is the development and strengthening of the shift from an extended period of tension in the world to detente and business-like co-operation. From this standpoint, the past year can in a sense be described as having marked a turning-point.
3.	The war in Viet-Nam was brought to an end. The flames of one of the most dangerous breeding grounds of war were stamped out. The just cause of the Viet-Namese people gained a major victory.
4.	In southern Asia, steps are being taken to bring about a further easing of the tension which several times in the past has led to open hostilities. It is gratifying that all three of the States on the subcontinent-India, Pakistan and Bangladesh-are involved in this process.
5.	The positive changes in the situation in Europe are even more clearly apparent. The task of normalizing relations between the States of Eastern and Western Europe is virtually complete, and we hope that no one will create artificial obstacles to the completion of this process. The convening of the all-European conference'' marked the opening of a new and extremely important stage in the work of guaranteeing security and organizing peaceful co-operation on a continent-wide scale.
6.	The danger of a global clash between the two world-wide social systems which would inevitably result in a terrible catastrophe for all mankind has been lessened. That is how the entire world views the Agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the Prevention of Nuclear War,  which was concluded during the visit to the United States by L. I. Brezhnev, tire General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
7.	Today, the principle of peaceful coexistence is not only recognized as the only possible basis for relations between the socialist and capitalist countries but is increasingly being given practical effect and embodied in treaties and agreements. The process of detente is a broad and deep one which is involving an increasing number of States and affecting more and more important areas of the relations between them.
8.	This gives us reason to hope that, as Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev noted in a recent statement, "the present detente is not a temporary phenomenon but the beginning of a fundamental reorientation of international relations".
9.	The changes for the better in international affairs arouse particular satisfaction in the Soviet Union. Not, of course, that other peoples are any less interested in peace than the Soviet Union, It is just that to us the increasing trend towards detente and co-operation is also confirmation of the correctness and consistency of the foreign policy pursued by the Soviet Union.
10.	Peace and friendship between peoples have always been the watchword of Soviet foreign policy and its unchanging goal. That goal was defined by V. I. Lenin, the founder of the Soviet Socialist State and head of its first Government. It has been and continues to be the basis of the foreign policy guidelines laid down at all Congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Our country has taken this position under all circumstances, regardless of the configuration of the international situation. It must be clear by now to any unprejudiced person that this is the long-range, permanent policy of the Soviet Union and is not merely a response to immediate circumstances. It is determined by the very nature of our social system.
11.	The shift in the course of international events in the last few years indicates clearly that ensuring a lasting peace on earth is not simply a noble but remote ideal; it is, rather a completely attainable goal of practical politics.
12.	Another fact is no less obvious. The positive results that hive been achieved up to now did not come about of themselves.
13.	A great deal of intensive effort has gone into the various international measures which led to detente. Sometimes the result is a treaty of agreement drawn up on a page or two of official stationery, but how much labour has gone into every article and paragraph! These agreements are generally preceded by an intensive process of feeling out, by discussions and intensive negotiations. A State visit or international conference lasting no more than a few days crowns the labour of many years.
14.	Obviously, there is no Government that will not say it wants peace, lasting peace, indeed eternal peace. If such pronouncements are not to remain an idle dream, however, they must be backed up by unremitting efforts that go on day after day.
15.	The Soviet Union exhorts its allies as well to follow this course. Indeed, we go beyond exhortations; acting in close co-ordination and in the light of international developments, we take concrete initiatives. At the recent Crimean meeting of leaders of the Communist and workers parties of the socialist countries, it was emphasized that all the States concerned must now join efforts in consolidating the favourable changes that have come about in international affairs, must consistently give practical effect to the treaties and agreements that have been concluded and must advance steadily towards the main objective, which is that of ensuring a lasting peace.
16.	It is a secret .to no one that detente has its enemies whose resistance must not be underestimated. There is also a certain inertia to be overcome. After all, what we are trying to do is to solve problems that have built up over a period of years or even decades.
17.	However, the supporters of detente are more numerous, and what matters is that their efforts should increase and not slacken.
18.	In a number of capitalist countries, a trend towards broader co-operation with socialist States has emerged and is becoming increasingly apparent. Far-sighted political figures in those countries, taking a realistic, responsible view of the world situation, show a willingness to join efforts in working out solutions which give equal weight to the interests of all concerned. It goes without saying that this benefits not only the States directly concerned but the entire cause of peace.
19.	Detente gives the non-aligned and neutral States a greater opportunity to exert a positive influence on international developments, A good many useful ventures, including some within the framework of the United Nations, got their start because of the political influence which these countries exercise. The results of the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries at Algiers showed once again that when the Conference participants speak out in favour of detente and co-operation and against the forces of aggression and oppression of peoples, their voice is convincing and authoritative.
20.	By its very nature, detente cannot simply be a matter of improving relations between a few States or certain geographical regions. If it is to become irreversible, it must be a matter of concern to all States and ultimately become universal.
21.	The United Nations has 135 Member States, all of which, when they joined the Organization, assumed an obligation under the Charter to maintain international peace and security. If that entire potential for peace was translated into action, it would indeed give powerful impetus to the advance towards a reliable system of security for all peoples.
22.	One sometimes hears it said that now that the Soviet Union and the United States are improving their relations and concluding important agreements which help to lessen international tension, there is nothing left for other States to do but to stand by passively. Some go further than that and try to foster the false notion that all of this damages the interests of other countries.
23.	Apart from the fact that such assertions,, whether intentionally or unintentionally, distort the actual state of affairs, their practical effect can only be to paralyse initiative and hamper detente.
24.	Is it possible to conceive of a broader sphere in which energies can be brought to bear than that of peace? Peace offers vast scope for all countries. Every State, large or small, bears responsibility for maintaining security throughout the world. The whole question is where its policy leads to — whether it helps detente or hinders it.
25.	It is important to mark out the political paths to further detente. However, it is no less important that meaningful activities should be undertaken. These efforts cannot remain shut up in government offices. They must be supported by broad, tireless work on behalf of peace by the most varied social forces. Parliamentarians and businessmen, political parties and trade-union, youth, women's and veterans' groups, scientists and artists-all can play a part if there is a determination to work for peace. Millions upon millions of people must be drawn into the movement for a lasting peace.
26.	Yes, the situation in the world has definitely improved in the past year. It is incomparably better than 5 or 10 years ago. But does that mean that all is bright on the international horizon? No, not by any means.
27.	In several parts of the world, the danger of war still exists. In some the guns are already speaking, while in others the finger is poised on the trigger.
28.	The situation in Indo-China is still a complicated one. Military operations are now of a relatively limited nature, but tensions cannot be completely cleared away in that area unless the political settlement if fully implemented in keeping with the legitimate rights and interests of all the peoples of Indo-China.
29.	The key to this lies in strict compliance by all parties to the Paris agreements on ending the war and restoring peace m Viet Nam. in respect for the agreements reached in Laos, and in permitting the people of Cambodia to settle their internal affairs as they see fit and without foreign interference.
30.	True to its internationalist convictions, the Soviet Union will continue to give the necessary aid and support of the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and to stand beside the patriotic forces in Indo-China.
31.	Again and again we find ourselves returning to the situation in the Middle East, which, it must be stated bluntly, presents a danger because of the continuing Israeli aggression. Surely we cannot lake comfort in the fact that right now the breeding ground of war is not aflame but merely smouldering. The flames of war may shoot up at any moment, and who can say what the result will be'?
32.	The aggressor seized foreign lands before the eyes of the entire world and is holding on to them by force. In doing so, he is flagrantly violating the rules of international law. One need only recall the latest acts of provocation against neighbouring Arab countries, which were just recently the object of renewed condemnation by the Security Council. Furthermore, all this is not simply a gesture of recklessness or desperation by a handful of people, but the calculated policy of the State of Israel.
33.	No Arab can be made to believe that he must reconcile himself to the existing situation. The Arab States, which have been the victims of imperialist aggression, want only one thing - the restoration of what was taken from them by force -and they are right.
34.	The Soviet Union remains convinced that the Middle East problem can be solved. The basis for a solution exists in the form of the well-known Security Council resolutions, which as was confirmed once again by the recent discussion of the Middle East question in the United Nations are supported by an overwhelming majority of Stales Members of our Organization. The aggressor is becoming increasingly defiant in his refusal to agree to a settlement.
35.	Every effort must be made to see that Israel and the countries and circles that support its present policy understand at long last the need for a more sober approach and that they truly *et out on the path leading to a solution of the problem.
36.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, its position is clear, the situation in the Middle East must be resolved un the basis of the complete I repeat, complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from occupied Arab territories and of respect for the independence and inalienable rights of the States and peoples of the area, including the Arab people of Palestine. Our main, decisive interest in the Middle Fast is to promote the achievement of a just and lasting peace. The Soviet Union wishes to state tins once again from tins rostrum in the most categorical terms.
37.	In order to obtain a proper perspective in a situation characterized by the extreme complexity of the interplay of various factors, one must appraise events in all their fullness and constant flux. That is particularly true at the present stage of the situation, which is dynamic and full of contrasts.
38.	If one views unsolved problems without reference to the positive results that have already been achieved, it is easy to take an extreme position and deny the very possibility of resolving acute, controversial issues. In our opinion, however, there is no place for this approach to international phenomena, including the activities of the United Nations.
39.	Equally unproductive is the other extreme that of presenting the situation in rosy hues and failing to see that what remains to be done is far more than what has already been accomplished.
40.	Both extremes are bad. All States, all Governments and all political figures must, if they are conscious of their responsibility, regard it as their first duty in (he international arena to work actively for peace.
41.	A whole series of problems are clamouring for solution. It cannot be said that the United Nations is not dealing with them. It may well be asked, however, how many of them are really being solved, and the answer is not a comforting one. It must be acknowledged that some problems become harder rather than easier to solve as time goes by, but they may become even more difficult if they are put off further.
42.	The problem of problems is that of the continuing arms race. The development of techniques of mass destruction and the stockpiling of weapons have long since gone beyond the point where using them becomes an absurdity, for, as V. I. Lenin foresaw half a century ago, this process is "undermining the very conditions for the existence of human society". It must be obvious to all how ruinous it is to go on replenishing the arsenals. Yet. only in recent years has it become possible to take the first I repeat, the first step towards limiting the arms race.
43.	It would be wrong to underestimate the importance of the measures that have already been taken. These measures serve to impede to some extent the unrestrained proliferation of armaments, particularly the most destructive types.
44.	Ten years have passed since the signing of the Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, which was the first in a series of agreements. The fact that some countries have not acceded to the Treaty does not nullify the indisputable fact that it is beneficial to the peoples of the world.
45.	The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons  has gained wide recognition, and it has also been extremely helpful in curbing the unclear arms race.
46.	Success has been achieved in preventing of the emplacement of nuclear weapons in several important natural environments, namely the sea-bed and the ocean floor and outer space. Bacteriological weapons which are among the most deadly, have been banned and eliminated.
47.	 Just recently, an important frontier was crossed when, as a result of agreements reached between the Soviet Union and the United States, mutual limitations were imposed on strategic arms and principles were formulated for negotiations on further such limitations. In conjunction with the historic conclusion of the Agreement between the Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America on the Prevention of Nuclear War, these accords contribute significantly to an improvement in the international atmosphere.

48.	However, further efforts are needed, and they cannot, of course, be confined to two nuclear Powers, even though those two may be militarily the mightiest in the world. We could, in particular, find it gratifying if other States were willing to adhere to the principles jointly laid down by the Soviet Union and the United States for renunciation of the use of force and decisive action to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war; that would be of exceptional importance in ensuring lasting peace throughout the world.

120.	Huge sums continue to be spent for military purposes, and military planning goes on.
121.	Since the United Nations first began to function, the Soviet Union has consistently sought to turn events in the direction of disarmament. We have always urged that it is of the utmost importance to ban nuclear weapons and ensure that nuclear energy is used exclusively for peaceful purposes. I might recall that back in 1946, the first year of our Organization's existence, the Soviet Union placed on the negotiating table a draft international convention to prohibit the production and employment of weapons based on the use of atomic energy for the purpose of mass destruction; it did so in the belief that the aspirations and the conscience of nations called for such a convention.
122.	How much discussion there has been since that time, and how many resolutions have been adopted by the Security Council, the General Assembly and various committees and commissions! If this were not such a serious matter, one could speak sarcastically about the mountains of paper that have been used up in the process. The essential point, however, is that there has been little change in the situation.
123.	It would not occur to anyone to deny that the solution of the problems of disarmament involves great difficulties. And yet the international questions which have been successfully resolved up to now also appeared forbidding at the outset. Consequently, references to objective difficulties do not reveal the main point. The crux of the matter lies in political considerations. And responsibility for political considerations rests primarily with the people who are invested with power, those who stand at the helm of government.
124.	There is hardly any point in digging about in the past, in analysing all the proposals which have been made or in dwelling on the positions of individual States. All that is quite well known. The walls of the United Nations have heard many speeches on the subject of disarmament.
125.	Today, however, we all have more experience in settling international problems than we had yesterday. And it suggests to us that even in the field of disarmament real progress can be achieved in some areas. All that is needed is to follow in practice a truth which in theory is certainly recognized by all: not to proclaim "all or nothing", but to single out one after another those problems on which agreement can be reached even at the present stage, and then solve them. Experience has shown that this approach can prove its worth even in such matters as vital to the security of the State as that ultimate weapon, the nuclear missile. Is that not demonstrated by the Soviet-American agreements dealing with that matter?
126.	Neither can there be any doubt about another matter. Those agreements would not have been possible if they had put either side at a disadvantage, if the principle of equal security had not been scrupulously observed.
127.	But if, on such a basis, two countries have been able to achieve a limitation of arms, then why cannot, say, five Powers act similarly, provided, of course, that there will be no threat to the security of any of them? And if that can be done, what is there to prevent such a method from being applied to a wider range of countries? The greater the number of States that participate in a practical solution of the disarmament problem, the more tangible will be the benefit for the security of all peoples.
128.	Furthermore, we believe that the successes achieved on the path towards detente already make it possible for considerable additional resources to be made available to assist the developing countries.
129.	In view of all these considerations, the Soviet Union wishes to propose that the question of the reduction of the military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council of the United Nations by 10 per cent and utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries should be included in the agenda of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations as an important and urgent item.
130.	If our proposal meets with general agreement, and if the General Assembly adopts an appropriate resolution, a beneficial and useful step can be taken.
131.	The States which are permanent members of the Security Council of the United Nations are known to have the largest military budgets. This is taken into account in our proposal.
132.	In our view it would be appropriate to take as the starting-point for the proposed reduction the level of military budgets for the current year, 1973. That proportion of the funds made available by such a reduction which would be used to benefit the developing countries could, for example, amount to 10 per cent.
133.	Needless to say, such a step would require "the participation of all the permanent members of the Security
Council without exception. It would also be desirable for other economically and militarily powerful States to reduce their military budgets.
134.	We suggest that the funds made available for economic assistance to the developing countries should, first of all, be granted to those countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America which have experienced great difficulties this year because of grave natural disasters such as drought and floods.
135.	The distribution of these funds should be carried out on an equitable basis. The amounts to be granted to individual countries, and the time-limits within which they are to be provided, could be determined by an international committee appointed on an ad hoc basis from among representatives of the developing countries, the States which are permanent members of the Security Council and other countries which reduce their military budgets.
136.	It is obvious that the reductions in military expenditure would also benefit the States carrying out such reductions. They would be able to channel considerable funds towards the non-military needs of their own people and an improved standard of living.
137.	The United Nations has laid the groundwork for fruitful activities on behalf of peace in a number of important fields.
138.	Specifically, at last year's session, the General Assembly voted by a large majority in favour of the settlement of two major problems: the non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVIII], and the question of a World Disarmament Conference [resolution 2930 (XXVII].
139.	But has this clearly expressed will of the peoples of the world, this opinion of the overwhelming majority of the States Members of the United Nations been taken into account by all States? Unfortunately, that cannot be said to be true. It is a known fact that the Governments of some States have taken a position which prevents those decisions from being put into effect.
140.	The Soviet Union believes that the earliest possible implementation of the solemn declaration of the General Assembly, speaking on behalf of the members of the United Nations, concerning their renunciation of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, would be an effective means of ensuring that one of the principles of the United Nations Charter was laid down as a law of international life. To that end, a forceful decision in the matter must be taken by the Security Council.
43. For its part, the Soviet Union is ready to negotiate and to formalize reciprocal undertakings with all -and I stress, all — the nuclear powers on the non-use of force, including, at the same time, prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons.
44. The time has come to undertake practical preparations for the convening of a World Disarmament Conference. Arrangements must finally be made so that the Special Committee provided for in the General Assembly resolution relating to preparations for that Conference can carry out the functions entrusted to it. There is no need to prove how desirable it is for all the nuclear Powers to take part in the Committee's work.
145.	There are some who contend that the World Disarmament Conference could not be productive because of the large number of participants. But who ever said that complex problems must necessarily be settled by two or three States, or that a large-scale international conference will not reach agreement?
146.	We harbour no illusions that the World Disarmament Conference will do away with all problems at one stroke. Let it go on for several months, or even several years. How can there be any objection to that if the Conference makes a contribution to the practical solution of urgent disarmament problems?
147.	It is also argued that the Conference might hamper the efforts at solutions involving a smaller number of States. We feel that such fears are unfounded. Multilateral efforts can only help bilateral ones, and vice versa.
148.	Although detente and the development of peaceful co-operation are measured, not in decades, but merely in years, into this short period of time there have been compressed events which are significantly changing the face of the world.
149.	Memories are still fresh of a time when relations between the Soviet Union and the major capitalist countries were marked by tension and, in the case of some of them, by outright hostility. The fact that those times are now behind us is not welcomed by all. But all who are concerned for peace welcome the fact that those relations are now on a new track.
150.	The Soviet Union and France have been dealing with each other in a consistent and serious manner for a number of years. Both countries have acquired useful experience and are using the favourable trends of detente to develop both their bilateral ties and political co-operation in international matters, and especially European matters. The Soviet Union values that important achievement.
151.	The radical changes achieved by the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany in their relations demonstrate that the two States are guided not by considerations of expediency, but by the long-term interests of their peoples and the interests of peace in Europe. A spirit of realism has also prevailed in the approach of the Federal Republic of Germany to questions which had long divided it and the Polish People's Republic and the German Democratic Republic. Many obstacles to the establishment of normal relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the other socialist countries of Europe have been removed, although in the Federal Republic of Germany itself, from all indications, such a policy is not to everyone's liking. The influence of forces clinging to old, outworn policies can still be felt there even today.
152. A few days ago the General Assembly congratulated the representatives of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, two independent sovereign States, on their countries' admission to membership in the United Nations. This is one of the most important indications of the changes which are taking place in the world. We warmly welcome the presence in this hall of the delegation of the fraternal German Democratic Republic, and we are also gratified to see here the delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany.
153.	It is not difficult to gauge the significance of the historic fact that the General Assembly of the United Nations, pursuant to Security Council recommendations, enthusiastically adopted the decision to admit these two States to membership in the United Nations. That fact shows merely that such a decision was long overdue. It is in keeping not only with the interests of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany, but also the interests of all States throughout the world.
154.	In a mere 18 months or two years an enormous distance has been covered in relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. As a result of Soviet-American talks at the highest level — during the visit of President R. Nixon to Moscow in May of last year and the visit of the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, to the United States this year — a firm basis has been laid for the development of relations between the two countries in a way which is fully in keeping with the principle of peaceful coexistence and which opens up vast possibilities. A number of agreements in various fields have been concluded. All these agreements have been made public; they speak for themselves. And they have not remained mere pieces of paper; much work has been done to give them concrete expression.
155.	It is of fundamental importance that the improvement in Soviet-American relations is being achieved on the basis of mutual recognition of the opposition between the two States' social systems and ideologies, and on the understanding that the rapprochement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America is directed against no one and threatens no one's interests.
156.	The Soviet Union is convinced that if both sides unswervingly carry out all the obligations they have assumed, including the strict observance of a cardinal principle in international relations, that of non-interference in each other's internal affairs — a principle on which our whole approach is based-then Soviet-American relations will be a permanent favourable factor promoting international peace-a point which is of historic significance.
157.	Relations between the Soviet Union and Japan are not at a standstill. The Soviet Union intends to continue to work to ensure that these relations become relations of genuine good-neighbourliness and co-operation. That is quite feasible if both countries constantly bear in mind the fundamental long-term interests of peace and security in the Far East.
158.	The Soviet Union is ready to expand its relations of mutually advantageous co-operation with all countries of
Europe and the other continents which so desire, whether in the search for solutions to current international political problems, wide-ranging economic agreements, joint efforts to use the benefits of scientific and technological progress or the exchange of spiritual values.
159.	On the first day of the present session of the General Assembly the second phase of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe began. This is a great and unprecedented endeavour. For the first time all European States, together with the United States and Canada have sat down at the same table in order jointly to determine measures that would help to assure the peoples of Europe a peaceful future for as long as can be foreseen.
160.	The Soviet Union views the prospects for the work of the Conference with considerable optimism. Its participants have already to a certain extent found a common language; there are, at least, no differences between them in agreeing that the Conference faces tasks of great importance which will require business-like and constructive consideration. If such an approach prevails to the end, the participants in the Conference will be able to place their contribution to the strengthening of general peace in the scales of history with a sense of satisfaction. That will benefit not only States directly concerned with European affairs, but all peoples of the world.
161.	There is a possibility of achieving a good and, in terms of its potential consequences, even a historic success as a result of the Conference. All that is necessary for this is for all participants to display a responsible and serious approach to the problems before them. Nobody should yield to the temptation to teach others how to manage their internal affairs. It must be admitted that some would like to try to impose their own internal practices on others. No, internal practices, internal laws, represent the line before the threshold of every State at which all others must stop.
162.	Were we to embark on a course of imposing our own practices on other countries, whether in the field of economic life or ideology, it is probable that those who are trying to persuade us to adopt the laws .morals and customs of others would disagree. And that is understandable and justified. If States and their representatives to the United Nations tried to act in that way, none of us here would advance one step in important matters and people would, not without justification, draw an analogy between the activity of the United Nations and the Biblical legend of the Tower of Babel, where those involved ceased to understand one another and failed to complete what they had intended to build.
163.	Meanwhile, some in the West are not averse to launching noisy propaganda campaigns and even to resorting to the methods of blackmail in order to cover up their own attempts to interfere in the affairs of other countries. Matters have gone so far that they are attempting to arrogate to themselves the right to dictate right and left by whom and how the question of emigration from this or that country should be handled, how many emigrants there should be and when and just where they should go. In doing so, they do not hesitate to praise to the skies those who represent no one but who, whether deliberately or inadvertently, are merely an unwitting weapon in the hands of the forces opposed to the relaxation of tension in the world.
164.	The Soviet Union decisively rejects such an approach and condemns it. We will not allow anyone to interfere in our internal affairs.
165.	The question that inevitably comes to mind is this: do the organizers of these campaigns seriously think that only the Soviet Union, only the socialist countries are interested in international detente and in the development of trade, scientific and technical and other forms of co-operation and that others are merely doing them a great favour by agreeing to hold talks on these matters?
166.	Anyone who is interested in the slightest degree in seeing an improvement in the international situation is well aware that this is not the case, that this is a reciprocal process governed by the mutual interests of the parties concerned and, above all, by the interests of the people.
167.	The main thing now is not to let the basic, truly important problems facing States be overshadowed by a poisonous atmosphere deliberately cheated over trumped-up questions.
168.	The Soviet Union considers it desirable to supplement political detente in Europe by military detente. This cause may be served by yet another major undertaking by a number of States: the talks opening on 20 October 1973 on the mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe.
169.	As a result of the positive changes in the international situation, it is also becoming possible to view the situation in Asia in a new light.
170.	In Asian affairs, as in international affairs in general, the policy of the Soviet Union is a policy directed towards peace, security and co-operation. The Soviet Union extends its hand to any State which shares these goals. A shining example of this is the uninterrupted development of relations between the USSR and India, a great, peace-loving Asian Power. It is further demonstrated by the history of friendly relations between the Soviet Union and many other Asian countries. Our fundamental belief is that there are no problems in relations between the Soviet Union and the States of Asia which could not be solved at the negotiating table.
171.	The Soviet Union is the initiator of the concept of collective security in Asia. This idea is constantly gaining strength; scepticism is being dispelled and the unfounded suspicions are disappearing.
172.	In a recent speech in Alma Ata, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, L. I. Brezhnev, said that we support collective security in Asia because "we are seeking to eliminate war, armed conflicts and imperialist aggression on the continent of Asia; we want the conditions for unhampered development and national revival to be guaranteed every country and people; we want a spirit of trust and
mutual understanding to prevail in relations between the countries of Asia".
173.	The Soviet Union is in favour of equitable participation in the system of collective security by all Asian countries, without any exception. Any intention of directing collective security in Asia against any State is totally alien to us, despite allegations to the contrary.
174.	The positive changes which have recently become apparent on the Asian continent also include the emergence of new, constructive factors in the situation on the Korean peninsula and this is, first and foremost, to the credit of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. That being so, it would be all the more inadmissible for new, artificial obstacles to the peaceful and democratic unification of Korea to be added to the old forms of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people.
175.	There is, of course, no need to recall in detail in this Assembly the consistent support which the Soviet Union has given and continues to give to the developing States of Asia, Africa and Latin America. On more than one occasion the United Nations has been the arena for fierce political battles with colonialism of every kind, and the Soviet Union has always resolutely defended oppressed peoples and given all possible support to their struggle for national liberation.
176.	We are well aware that this is a difficult and grim struggle, and some very recent events remind us yet again that it may take tragic turns.
177.	In Chile, as we know, the lawful Government has been overthrown. The elected President, Salvador Allende, his country's most outstanding patriot, has been killed. The forces of reaction have struck a blow at the Chilean people's desire for true independence and freedom.
178.	There was serious provocation of another Latin American State, Cuba, whose embassy and one of whose ships were fired upon. Surely the heads of the military junta realize that such acts can only be described as international brigandage and acts of aggression?
179.	An anti-Soviet campaign has been stirred up in the country; there are instances of arbitrary and violent action against Soviet institutions and citizens who were sent to give friendly assistance to the Chilean people at the request of the lawful Government of the country.
180.	What can one say about this? There can be no doubt that history will bring to account those who attempt to prevent the peoples from breathing the air of genuine independence or to drown in blood their right to national freedom.
181.	For its part, the Soviet Government could not remain indifferent to the intolerable situation that was developing and took the decision to break off diplomatic relations with Chile, or, more precisely, with the regime of the military junta.
182.	There is no doubt that the just cause of the Chilean people will triumph in the end, despite the current tragedy.
183.	States which have embarked on the course of political independence have always found and will continue to find in the Soviet Union a friend ready to aid them in consolidating their economic self-sufficiency, to share its knowledge and experience and to assist them in their moments of difficulty. Expansion of co-operation with developing countries is an integral part of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union.
184.	It is our conviction that the relaxation of international tension is conducive to a situation where young States can, in peace, devote all their efforts and resources to economic and social progress, to raising the living standards of their people, and to shaping their own future without fear of outside interference.
185.	The healthier the over-all world atmosphere becomes, the more anachronistic are the remaining vestiges of colonialism and the reserves of apartheid and racial discrimination, the stronger is the condemnation they merit and the more vigorous must be the struggle to bring about their complete elimination. It is the clear duty of the United Nations to contribute to the speediest possible elimination of these shameful survivals of colonialism wherever they still exist, be it in Angola or Mozambique, Bissau or Southern Rhodesia, South or South-West Africa.
186.	It is our aim that the voice of the fighters should be clearly heard here, within the walls of the United Nations, that the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted by the fifteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly [resolution 1514 (XV)] should be fully implemented and that the racists and colonialists should be finally deprived of the opportunity to receive support from outside, in particular from certain Member countries of the United Nations, something which is still a feature of current international life.
187.	Those who struggle against colonialism and racism for their national liberation and for their inalienable human rights and dignity enjoy the unwavering support of the Soviet Union. Let there be no doubt that the Soviet Union will continue to do its utmost to ensure that this struggle ends in a decisive victory.
188.	In the struggle for peace, the Soviet Union and the countries of the socialist community are one with the developing States and we value this highly. With some of these countries we have well established relations; with others, relations are only now beginning to develop. But apart from this, the platform of the struggle for further detente offers ever-greater opportunities for co-operation. We believe that the fullest possible advantage should be taken of them.
189.	Throughout its history, the United Nations has operated in varying political weather, and so far the fine days have been far fewer than the bad ones. What has enabled it not merely to survive but also to do many useful things? The fact that it was founded for the purpose of maintaining international peace. And this task remains permanently relevant. From another point of view, the United Nations Charter contains adequate provisions for the fulfilment of the Organization's lofty mission. The
United Nations has demonstrated its strength in those cases where the purposes and principles of its Charter have been strictly observed, and its weakness when departures from the Charter have been permitted. What matters is that this world Organization should remain in the mainstream of international politics, contributing to the solution of crucial problems.
190.	This does not in any way imply that the Soviet Union is inclined to neglect even one aspect of the diversified activities of the United Nations, whether of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian nature. It actively assists in putting into practice everything of value-1 repeat, everything of value — that the collective wisdom and experience of States can produce.
191.	Indeed, a few days ago, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR ratified two important international legal instruments pertaining to respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms and the protection of human dignity and the interests of society as a whole. These documents were carefully and thoroughly elaborated in United Nations bodies and were subsequently approved by the General Assembly. I am referring to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex] and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [ibid.]. These two Covenants do not merely contain wishes or recommendations of a declaratory nature, but provide for quite specific obligations on the part of States parties to them. We appeal to countries which have not yet signed or ratified these Covenants to follow our example and to take steps to ensure that they come into force as soon as possible.
192.	The peoples of the world expect from the United Nations measures which will contribute to a further improvement in the international situation. With favourable changes taking place in the world, opportunities are increasing for the United Nations to make its own, major contribution to the consolidation of detente and to making it stable and irreversible.
193.	For its part, the Soviet Union is sparing no effort for the triumph of the cause of peace on earth. This is the essence of its peace-loving policy and its peace programme, launched by the Twenty-fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Every State, every statesman can be confident that he will continue to find in the Soviet Union a faithful partner at all times and in all cases where action is taken to prevent the danger of war and contribute to peace.﻿35.	I should like to add my congratulations to those so well expressed by the Minister for External Relations of Brazil to our new President, Ambassador Benites of Ecuador, whose long experience at the United Nations and his many contributions to international law and to the inter-American system all ensure that this twenty-eighth session of the Assembly will have outstanding leadership.
36.	I come before you today  —  confirmed in office but two days ago  —  as probably the world's most junior Foreign Minister. That President Nixon should ask me as my first official act to speak here for the United States reaffirms the importance that my country attaches to the values and the ideals of the United Nations.
37.	It would be idle to deny that the American people, like many others, have sometimes been disappointed because this Organization has not been more successful in translating its architects' hopes for universal peace into concrete accomplishments.
38.	But, despite our disappointments, my country remains committed to the goal of a world community. We will continue to work in this Parliament of Man to make it a reality.
39.	Two centuries ago, the philosopher Kant predicted that perpetual peace would come eventually — either as the creation of man's moral aspirations or as the consequence of physical necessity. What seemed Utopian then looms as tomorrow's reality; soon there will be no alternative. Our only choice is whether the world envisaged in the Charter will come about as the result of our vision or of a catastrophe invited by our short-sightedness.
40.	The United States has made its choice. My country seeks true peace, not simply an armistice. We strive for a world in which the rule of law governs and fundamental human rights are the birthright of all. Beyond the bilateral diplomacy, the pragmatic agreements and dramatic steps of recent years, we envisage a comprehensive, institutionalized peace encompassing all nations, large and small, a peace which this Organization is uniquely situated to foster and to anchor in the hearts of men. This will be the spirit of American foreign policy. This attitude will guide our work in this Organization.
41.	We start from a bedrock of solid progress. Many of the crises that haunted past sessions of the General Assembly have been put behind us. Agreement has been reached on Berlin; there is a cease-fire in the Middle East; the VietNam war has been ended. The rigid confrontation that has dominated international life and weakened this Organization for a quarter of a century has been softened.
42.	The United States and the Soviet Union have perceived a commonality of interests in avoiding nuclear holocaust and in establishing a broad web of constructive relationships. Talks on stretegic arms limitation have already produced historic accords aimed at slowing the arms race and ensuring strategic stability; we have today resumed negotiations on this subject. The positive results we hope for will enhance the security of all mankind.
43.	Two decades of estrangement between the United States and the People's Republic of China have given way to constructive dialogue and productive exchanges. President Nixon has met with the leaders of that great nation; we have agreed to a historic communique  that honestly sets forth both our differences and our common principles; and we have each opened a liaison office in the capital of the other.
44.	Many other countries have seized the initiative and contributed, in substance and spirit, to the relaxation of tensions. The nations of Europe and North America are engaged in a conference to further security and cooperation. The two German States have taken their place in this Assembly. India, Pakistan and Bangladesh have begun to move towards a welcome reconciliation. North and South Korea are at last engaged in a dialogue which, we hope, will lead to a new era of peace and security between them.
45.	Yet these achievements, solid as they are, have only made less precarious the dangers and divisions inherited from the post-war era. We have ended many of the confrontations of the cold war; yet, even in this room, the vocabulary of suspicion persists. Relaxation of tensions is justified by some as merely a practical interlude before renewed struggle. Others suspect the emergence of a two- Power condominium. And as tension between the two original blocs has eased, a third grouping increasingly assumes the characteristics of a bloc of its own — the alignment of the non-aligned.
46.	So the world is uneasily suspended between old slogans and new realities, between a view of peace as but a pause in an unending struggle and a vision of peace as a promise of global co-operation.
47.	In 1946 James Byrnes, the first Secretary of State to address this Assembly, spoke of how the United Nations could "help to break down habits of thinking in national isolation and go far to bring about understanding and tolerance." 
48.	The United States will never be satisfied with a world of uneasy truces, of offsetting blocs, of accommodations of convenience. We know that power can enforce a resigned passivity, but only a sense of justice can enlist consensus. We strive for a peace whose stability rests not merely on a balance of forces, but on shared aspirations. We are convinced that a structure which ignores humane values will prove cold and empty and unfulfilling to most of mankind.
49.	The United States deeply believes that justice cannot be confined by national frontiers; that truth is universal, and not the peculiar possession of a single people or group or ideology; that compassion and humanity must ennoble all our endeavours.
50.	In this spirit we ask this Assembly to move with us from detente among the big Powers to co-operation among all nations, from coexistence to community.
51.	Our journey must begin with the world as it is and with the issues now before us. The United States will spare no effort to ease tensions further and to move towards greater stability. We shall continue, in the spirit of the Shanghai communique, our search for a new relationship with the People's Republic of China. We shall work to promote positive trends elsewhere in Asia. The uncertain peace in Indo-China must be strenghened; the world community cannot afford, or permit, a relapse into war in that region. We shall continue to pursue vigorously the building of constructive relationships with the Soviet Union. We shall strive to promote conciliation in Europe. In the negotiations beginning next month we shall seek a reduction of the military forces that have faced each other for so long across that divided continent. We shall give new vigour to our policy of partnership in the Western hemisphere. We shall honour our pledge to promote self- determination, economic development and human dignity across the continent of Africa. We shall press on with strategic arms limitations talks. We consider them crucial for security and stability in this period. We shall search for solutions to the world-wide problem of conventional weapons, which drain our resources and fuel the fires of local conflict.
52.	In all these efforts the United States will be guided by certain fundamental principles.
53.	We have no desire for domination. We will oppose — as we have consistently opposed throughout this century — any nation that chooses this path. We have not been asked to participate in a condominium; we would reject such an appeal if it were made.
54.	We will never abandon our allies or our friends. The strengthening of our traditional ties is the essential foundation for the development of new relationships with old adversaries.
55.	We will work for peace through the United Nations as well as through bilateral relationships.
56.	We recognize our special obligation, as a permanent member of the Security Council, to assist in the search for just solutions in those parts of the world now torn by strife, such as the Middle East. While we cannot substitute for the efforts of those most directly involved, we are prepared to use our influence to generate a spirit of accommodation and to urge the parties towards practical progress.
57.	But progress on the traditional agenda is not enough. The more we succeed in solving political problems, the more other and perhaps deeper challenges emerge. As the world grows more stable we must confront the question of the ends of detente. As the threat of war recedes, the problem of the quality of life takes on more urgent significance.
58.	We are, in fact, members of a community drawn by modern science, technology and new forms of communication into a proximity for which we are still politically unprepared. Technology daily outstrips the ability of our institutions to cope with its fruits. Our political imagination must catch up with our scientific vision. This is at the same time the greatest challenge and the greatest opportunity of this Organization.
59.	The pollution of the skies, the seas and the land is a global problem.
60.	The increased consumption of cereals has reduced world food reserves to dangerously low levels.
61.	The demand for energy is outrunning supply, and the need for technological innovation is urgent.
62.	The growth of the world's economy is inhibited by restrictive trading blocs and an insufficiently flexible international monetary system.
63.	The exploitation of the resources of the ocean beds, which is essential for the needs of burgeoning populations, requires global co-operation lest it degenerate into global contention.
64.	Challenges of this magnitude cannot be solved by a world fragmented into self-contained nation States or rigid blocs.
65.	I do not intend, today, to cover the whole agenda of international co-operation. Rather, I shall speak briefly of some illustrative areas for common action. I pledge the readiness of the United States to solve these problems co-operatively and to submit proposals Jmed at their resolution.
66.	First, a world community requires the curbing of conflicts. The United Nations, in its 28-year history, has not always been idle in this sphere. In Indonesia, the Indian subcontinent, the Middle East, the Congo, and Cyprus, it has shown its ability for effective fact-finding, mediation and peace-keeping missions. This central aspect of the United Nations work must be strengthened. On a small planet, so bound together by technology and so interdependent economically, we can no longer afford the constant eruption of conflict and the danger of its spread.
67.	Yet, in recent years, we have found ourselves locked in fruitless debates about the inauguration of peace-keeping operations and over the degree of control the Security Council would exercise over peace-keeping machinery — an impasse which has ensured that permanent peace-keeping machinery would not come into being. Each peace-keeping unit we have formed has been an improvisation growing out of argument and controversy.
68.	We should delay no longer. The time has come to agree on peace-keeping guidelines so that this Organization can act swiftly, confidently and effectively in future crises. To break the deadlock, the United States is prepared to consider how the Security Council can play a more central role in the conduct of peace-keeping operations. If- all countries concerned approach this problem with a desire to achieve a co-operative solution, the United Nations can achieve a major step forward during this session.
69.	Secondly, a world community must have the widest possible membership. The exclusion of any qualified State denies representation not only to Governments, but to peoples. Membership in this body should be a step towards reconciliation, not a source of conflict. The time has come for North and South Korea to be offered their rightful place here without prejudice to a future evolution towards unification. In this spirit also, we support the permanent membership of Japan in the Security Council.
70.	Thirdly, a world community must assure that all its people are fed. The growing threat to the world's food supply deserves the urgent attention of this Assembly. Since 1969, global consumption of cereals has risen more rapidly than production; stocks are at the lowest levels in years. We now face the prospect that, even with bumper crops, the world may not rebuild its seriously depleted reserves in this decade.
71.	No one country can cope with this problem. The United States therefore proposes that a world food conference should be organized under United Nations auspices in 1974 to discuss ways to maintain adequate food supplies and to harness the efforts of all nations to meet the hunger and malnutrition resulting from natural disasters and that nations in a position to do so offer technical assistance in the conservation of food. The United States is ready to join with others in providing such assistance.
72.	Fourthly, a world community cannot remain divided between the permanently rich and the permanently poor. Let us therefore resolve that this Assembly, this year, initiate a search, drawing on the world's best minds, for new and imaginative solutions to the problems of development. Our search must be candid and realistic, but it must also be free of peremptory demands, antagonistic propositions, ideological confrontation, or propagandistic rhetoric, or we will surely fail.
73.	The United States is prepared to join this new search, providing freely of the experience gained over two decades. We have learned not to exaggerate our capacity to transform nations, but we have also learned much about what progress is possible. We will participate without pre-conditions, with a conciliatory attitude and a co-operative commitment. We ask only that others adopt the same approach.
74.	In this spirit, the United States is willing to examine seriously the proposal by the distinguished President of Mexico for a charter of the economic rights and duties of States." Such a document will make a significant and historic contribution if it reflects the true aspirations of all nations; it will accomplish nothing if it is turned into an indictment of one group of countries by another. To command general support, and to be implemented, the proposed rights and duties must be defined equitably and take into account the concerns of industrialized as well as of developing countries. The United States stands ready to define its responsibilities in a humane and co-operative spirit.
75.	Fifthly, a world community must harness science and technology for the benefit of all. We must begin to match our remarkable technological skills with our equally remarkable technological needs. We must find the means for the co-operative and judicious development of energy resources. We must responsibly confront the problems of population growth, which are fast pushing humanity towards the limits of what our earth can sustain. We must embark on a new scientific revolution to increase agricultural productivity in all lands. No field of human endeavour is so dependent upon an open world for its advancement, no field is so in need of international co-operation to cope with its potential dangers.
76.	Are we prepared to accept the imperatives of a global society and infuse our labours with new vision? Or shall we content ourselves with a temporary pause in the turmoil that has racked our century? Shall we proceed with one-sided demands and sterile confrontation? Or shall we proceed in a spirit of compromise produced by a sense of common destiny? We are convinced that we must move from hesitant co-operation born of necessity to genuine collective effort based on common purpose.
77.	It is a choice no country can make alone. We can repeat old slogans or strive for new hope. We can fill the record of our proceedings with acrimony, or we can dedicate ourselves to dealing with man's deepest needs. The ideal of a world community may be decried as unrealistic, but great constructions have always been ideals before they can become realities. Let us therefore dedicate ourselves to this noblest of all possible goals and achieve at last what has so long eluded us: true understanding and tolerance among mankind.﻿56.	 This year the General Assembly once again looks to Latin America to provide a distinguished figure to preside over its proceedings. The honour, Sir, has fallen to you, and to your country. May I take this opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption of this high and responsible office, and also to express my confidence that our deliberations will be guided into constructive and productive channels with your experienced hand at the helm?
57.	The membership of the United Nations at this moment stands at 135. This is a large membership when compared with the 51 States which signed the Charter as founder Members In 1945, of which my country was one. One of the objectives then, and in the intervening years, was to strive for universality in the Organization so that "We, the peoples," of the Organization could justifiably speak as "We, the peoples" of the world. That desirable objective has been brought a step nearer realization by the admission during the current Assembly session of three new Members — the Bahamas, the Federal Republic of Germany, and the German Democratic Republic — representing between them a considerable population and a diversity of cultural, social, historical and political backgrounds and philosophies.
58.	The admission of the two Germanys is the fruit of a policy of detente actively pursued in Europe, and is a striking example of the fact that accommodation can be reached between parties with widely differing political persuasions and conflicting interests, provided that the will is there and the effort is conscientiously and patiently made. It is a lesson from which we can all profit for the lessening of hostility is conducive to the buttressing of peace, which is the raison d'etre of this Organization.
59.	The spirit of detente abroad was one of the main themes of the statements made in the general debate at last year's session of the General Assembly. The passage of time enables us to consider its consequences in better perspective and to take stock. Those countries which have adopted the course of detente appear to be consolidating their contacts and relationships to their mutual benefit and, in many ways, to the benefit of others. At the same time, some other Governments with seemingly irreconcilable differences have begun to follow their lead and to open up a cautious dialogue with one another. This attitude is highly commendable and ought to be endorsed and conscientiously emulated by all of us, for the single, overriding imperative of international relations is international peace. This is a fact which should be borne in mind, particularly by smaller countries, for they, too, have a duty to work towards a relaxation of tension after the example set by the major Powers. It would be a tragedy if the world should move out from under the shadow of major-Power confrontation only to be faced with the threat of increasing conflicts of smaller scale. Such a tragedy must be averted by responsible leadership in this Organization, as well as by the individual efforts of each one of us.
60.	In its external relations, South Africa, for its part, remains willing to pursue all avenues of contact and communication, with the object of relaxing tensions and creating conditions favourable for the solution of problems of concern to us. Where our efforts in this direction have been reciprocated the results have been encouraging. South Africa remains ready to enter into discussions with any country, on the African continent or elsewhere, which shares our approach, an approach rooted firmly in the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes. South Africa harbours no aggressive intentions against any country; hence our willingness to conclude non-aggression pacts with other States in Africa. Accusations that we have committed acts of aggression are totally unfounded. We are irrevocably opposed to the use of force and violence in international relations.
61.	It is deplorable that force and violence in the form of indiscriminate attacks against innocent, uninvolved and unsuspecting individuals and groups should have become a characteristic of our times. Terrorism takes many forms, but a common component is the utter disregard by the perpetrators for established authority and their determination to subvert, and if possible destroy, constitutionally established law and order, both national and international. It is doubtful that the international law of sovereign States can survive in a meaningful way if the international community should fail to discharge its responsibilities to curb this evil. It is a source of concern to my Government that so little progress has been made on this urgent world problem in the Ad Hoc Committee on International Terrorism, which held its first session in July and August this year. My Government considers that the Assembly should urgently commence drafting a general convention on terrorism. We cannot afford to evade or to confuse the issue while terrorism is rampant.
62.	If we, the international community, resolve that we shall settle our political differences without having recourse to force, if we renounce irresponsible methods of terror and violence, and if we continue to make progress in disarming a world bristling with lethal weapons, we can direct our energies and our resources to the solution of the world's other pressing problems, which are many. A number of these are problems of a non-political nature, and confront mankind as a whole. I suggest that the most basic problem of all, and one which encompasses a host of supplementary problems, is how in the future we shall balance the world's rapidly increasing population against our planet's dwindling resources, taking into account the rising economic and social expectations of the very same people whose numbers are increasing at a phenomenal and unprecedented rate. We have, for example, already been given a disturbing reminder this year of the difficulties of providing everywhere the most elementary of man's needs: food. The spectre of famine was raised by the devastating drought in West Africa, end drought conditions, floods and other natural disasters elsewhere. Let me at once express South Africa's sympathy to those who have suffered as a result. These disasters and the consequential threat of famine should not be seen as isolated occurrences. They are a foretaste and a warning of the problems that will have to be dealt with in the future.
63.	Another serious problem with which mankind will have to deal is the potential energy crisis. It is necessary that there be the closest co-operation between the developed and the developing nations in the consideration of this matter, for, after making due allowance for the need to protect the quality of our environment, energy is the key to the material improvement of man's estate. We are faced with the possible gross depletion of the total known reserves of all sources of energy if energy is in future consumed at the rate forecast today. It is, therefore, essential for all of us that the different energy-producing resources of the earth be rationally exploited in the interest of mankind as a whole.
64.	Nuclear energy undoubtedly occupies a key position in supplying mankind's energy needs of the future. Nuclear power reactors which will supply only about 51,000 megawatts of electricity in 1976, are expected to contribute as much as 564,000 megawatts in 1985 and then to double their supply in the space of the next five years. In terms of total world requirements of electricity, nuclear energy is expected to supply 23 per cent by the year 2000 as compared with half of 1 per cent in 1970.
65.	South Africa is one of the world's major producers of uranium. We possess large exploitable deposits of low- grade uranium and we provide a stable supply of a portion of the world's uranium on a competitive basis. At the present moment we are engaged in assessing our capability of supplying this nuclear fuel in an enriched form since enriched uranium is the fuel for most nuclear powered reactors.
66.	Having said this, let me add that South Africa's atomic energy programme is devoted to peaceful purposes exclusively. It has always been our policy, and it remains our policy, to sell uranium only on condition that the uranium be made subject to International Atomic Energy Agency or equivalent safeguards to ensure that it is not diverted to military purposes. In the same spirit, the uranium enrichment project to which I have just referred will also be applied for peaceful purposes only. To that end, the South African Government proposes to negotiate, at the appropriate time, an agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency for the application of safeguards to the enriched uranium produced by the project, so as to ensure that the product is used solely for peaceful purposes.
67.	We believe that this development will not only herald a new era of industrial and economic growth in South Africa but will also enable us to make a contribution to the efforts of the international community to solve the potential world energy problem.
68.	May I at this point digress to refer in a few words to the unfortunate events at Carletonville of which mention has been made in the course of the general debate. The tragic loss of life is deeply regretted. Sympathy with the next of kin was expressed by my Prime Minister and others immediately after the incident. A memorandum compiled by my Mission, in the course of reproduction as an official document,  will place the matter in perspective. Meanwhile I would simply ask that judgement on the incident not be formed purely on the basis of emotion. What transpired at Carletonville will be determined by the judicial inquiry which has been instituted.
69.	Turning now to the question of South West Africa, may I say at the outset that my Government has noted with regret the repeated calls of the Security Council to terminate the contacts between South Africa and the Secretary- General. Those contacts represent a voluntary attempt to use the facilities of the United Nations for the pursuit of a peaceful settlement of the problem. That is one of the primary purposes of this Organization. Yet the call is now apparently to bypass and to set aside the machinery which the United Nations offers for the peaceful settlement of problems. This must inevitably serve as an encouragement to those who advocate confrontation, force and violence as a means to an end in South West Africa. And that course is being advocated despite the fact that in the 14 months between March 1972 and April 1973 during which contacts were made, more real progress was achieved in the search for a solution to the problem in the United Nations context than in all the preceding years.
70.	For the first time in the history of the Territory, directly as a result of the contacts, representatives of black, white and other groups from throughout the territory have been brought together around the table under the chairmanship of a Prime Minister of South Africa for the purpose of discussing and trying to resolve issues with Territory- wide implications. We consider that this is a significant and important development for, as my Prime Minister has declared, it is the inhabitants of South West Africa themselves who must decide their own future and not South Africa or the United Nations.
71.	We for our part do not consider that we have the right to impose a settlement on the Territory and we do not believe that the United Nations has the right or indeed wishes to impose a settlement on its inhabitants. We shall respect their wishes.
72.	We have indicated that any exercise to ascertain the wishes of the population will not be compromised by any existing political and administrative arrangements. And we have stated, with regard to the question whether individual population groups may suddenly become independent as separate entities, that we do not envisage such an eventuality. We expressed the latter position in dealing with a point raised by the Secretary-General whether the possibility could arise, in the light of South African legislation, that one or other of the population groups might acquire separate independence before the South West African people as a whole had exercised their right to self-determination.
73.	We believe that all this, taken together with the other points set out in the South African statements reproduced in the Secretary-General's reports, constitutes progress in the real sense of the word. South Africa, for its part, is ready to engage in further contacts, for we believe that we ourselves as well as the United Nations should persevere in searching for a solution.
74.	We realize that there are those who believe that progress has been too slow. On the other hand, they too should realize that this is a most complicated and intractable problem and that it cannot therefore be solved overnight. This is fully recognized by the Secretary-General, who stated in his report of 30 April of this year that:
"Should the Security Council decide to continue these efforts", — that is, the contacts — "it should bear in mind my earlier statement to the effect that time and protracted discussion will be required if any progress is to be achieved." 
75.	South Africa's presence in the Territory is accounted for by the undertaking we have given to ensure that its inhabitants are able and ready to exercise their right to self-determination and independence. We have no designs whatsoever with respect to any part of South West Africa's territory. In the meanwhile, we believe we have a duty to continue to assist in the development of South West Africa in all spheres: economic, social and political. We derive no financial or economic advantage whatsoever from our presence in the Territory. Every cent which accrues from taxation levied on income derived within the Territory, including profits on foreign investments and operations in the Territory, is reinvested in South West Africa for the benefit of all its inhabitants. In addition, South African taxpayers contribute to the Territory's advancement on current account alone — that is, excluding payments to finance capital projects — funds which in the last few years have varied between $60 million and $80 million per annum. It will be appreciated that our resources are not unlimited. Moreover, we have responsibilities also to our own peoples in South Africa, where there is an increasing need for funds for development purposes. Nevertheless, we make this Contribution to South West Africa in the genuine belief that it is our duty to do so.
76.	One cannot of course forecast the outcome of the Security Council's consideration of the Secretary-General's latest report. We recognize that the gap separating us, although narrower than it has ever been as a result of our contacts with the Secretary-General, still exists. But we would hope that the Council and this Organization as a whole will be guided by the imperative need for peaceful evolution by consent of those directly concerned, namely, the inhabitants of South West Africa, both black and white. We believe it is crucial that all the segments of the population of South West Africa should be enabled to get together to sort out their problems and to resolve them to their own satisfaction, in a manner consistent with the peaceful objectives of the Charter
77.	As I have indicated, a start has already been made in this direction. We have also been encouraged in this regard, by a series of discussions which have recently taken place and which are continuing between representatives of the white group in South West Africa and representatives of such groups as the Hereros, the Namas and the Damaras as well as of the organization known as the Voice of the People. The latter representatives are among those who are known to be opposed to the South African Government. Nevertheless, they have all in the course of these discussions expressed themselves as favouring dialogue in South West Africa and as being opposed to violence as a means to an end. As an example of these discussions, I may mention that Mr. Clemens Kapuuo of the Hereros and Mr. D. F. Mudge, a member of the Executive Council for South West Africa, met in Windhoek on 24 September. In a joint statement issued shortly thereafter, they declared that they were both in favour of contact and dialogue as a method of solving the problems of South West Africa and that they rejected violence. In the course of their discussions, according to the statement, they exchanged views on matters relating to South West Africa in general. It was clear, the statement added, that both of them wished to promote the interests of their respective peoples and of the peoples of South West Africa as a whole. Further meetings of this nature are envisaged.
78.	These meetings of individuals of differing views and attitudes are an indication of the desire of the inhabitants of the Territory to involve themselves jointly and directly in the future evolution of South West Africa, and we hope that they will receive encouragement to seek progress in this way. We for our part will afford them every encouragement.
79.	In this world of continual change, we recognize and accept the need for change also in areas of our own responsibility. Our policies are anything but rigid or static. My Prime Minister has stated in Parliament that the South African Government is a Government of change, and that it will continue to bring about change in a systematic and orderly way as warranted by changing circumstances and changing requirements. But we believe in change by evolution, not by violence. This is why we attach special importance to the consultations which are continually in progress between the Government and the leaders of the black and other peoples in South Africa.
80.	We have stated on many occasions that our policies provide-for the different black nations in South Africa to achieve self-government in the geographic areas of their jurisdiction and to advance to complete sovereignty and independence in the sense in which this concept is generally understood. In other words, each of them would qualify for membership in this Organization. They are aware that they can negotiate their independence, in the full sense of the word, with the South African Government at any moment of their choice, as the South African Prime Minister has repeatedly stated.
81.	Eight black nations, totalling more than 14 million people, have already achieved self-government in varying degrees. Six of them have their own Parliament, their own Cabinet and Prime Minister, the latter answerable to their Parliament. The two other black nations, including the 4 million Zulus, have Legislative Assemblies, with executive power vested in an Executive Council. During the course of the last two years, five elections have been successfully held to elect members of these Parliaments. A sixth election is still to be held.
82.	Arising from this political progress, the South African Government and the Prime Ministers and other leaders of all the various nations are continually in dialogue with each other. Frequent contacts take place at all levels from the Prime Minister downwards and in the private as well as the public sector. In fact, my Prime Minister has, during the seven years of his premiership, held more official discussions with the leaders of these nations than have all his predecessors together. Many of these leaders, moreover, travel abroad and state their positions publicly. Their opinions on matters of detail falling within the over-all objectives of South African policy do not always coincide with the opinions of the South African Government — but it is their prerogative and duty to put the position of their peoples as they see it. The South African Government regards these contacts and discussions as essential for the promotion of peaceful evolution.
83.	One of our concerns, in this evolutionary process, is the question of human dignity. The South African Government is fully conscious of the importance of recognition and acceptance of the human dignity of the individual, and my Prime Minister has publicly stressed the central position it must take in future political developments in South Africa. Earlier this year in Parliament he said he was at all times prepared to do away with unnecessary measures if these measures stood in the way of healthy relations in South Africa.
84.	There is nothing which exercises the minds of South Africans more than the solution of our own special political problems. It is after all our future we are building and it is our security that is at stake.
85.	We ask the international community to respect our desire to resolve our problems without interference. Let me repeat, however, that we are at all times ready to enter into discussions concerning our internal policies with anyone who is genuinely interested therein. But in the final analysis, it is we ourselves who must solve our problems and solve them we must and shall, whatever the sacrifice, if we are to continue to live in peace and prosperity in South Africa.
86.	This brings me to the end of my prepared statement. Before resuming my seat, may I refer briefly to the efforts made to prevent me from addressing the Assembly. I do not intend to deal with the accusations levelled against my Government in the course of these efforts, for they are irrelevant to the issues before the Assembly. I must, however, totally reject them.
87.	We have witnessed here an attempt to violate the principle of freedom of speech and expression in this august Assembly. It was an attempt to deprive the representative of a Member State of his inherent right to participate in the proceedings of the General Assembly and to state the case of his country. If it had succeeded it would have put the clock back 2,000 years. For it was the Romans who introduced the concept audi alteram partem: listen to the other party, a principle which has survived for over 20 centuries and is still observed and cherished in all civilized societies. The actions of some representatives were unworthy of the dignity and the status of this Assembly.
88.	Moreover, far from humiliating me and my country, they have succeeded only in furnishing proof of the length to which they will go to undermine a principle which forms one of the main corner-stones of the United Nations and without which it cannot survive.
89.	Finally, in view of what has happened here I must place on record my strongest possible objection to the unprecedented, illegal and unconstitutional action by the General Assembly concerning South Africa's credentials. My Government views it in the most serious light indeed.