Mr. President, first of all, I should like to congratulate you on your election as President of the current session of the General Assembly and I am confident that you will preside well and make positive contributions to the current session.
86.	New and important victories have been won by the people of all countries in their struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism since the start of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly last year. The numerous third world countries have become the main force in the revolutionary struggle against the two hegemonic Powers. More and more people have seen through the so called detente played up by the superPowers. All the basic contradictions in the world are further sharpening, particularly the contradiction between the two superPowers on the one hand and the people of all countries on the other and the contradiction between, the two superPowers themselves. It is now evident to all that the world today is amidst more intense turbulence and unrest.
87.	What should be noted here first is the great October war in the Middle East. The heroic people of Egypt, Syria, Palestine and other Arab countries, in defiance of superPower obstruction and disruption, boldly took up arms and successfully rebuffed Israeli Zionist aggression. This fight exploded the myth of Israeli "invincibility", upset the state of "no war, no peace" imposed by the superPowers and demonstrated the might of the united struggle of the Arab people.
88.	In this Middle East war, the Arab countries used oil as a weapon to deal a heavy blow at Zionism and hegemonism. This was a historic, pioneering action. Its impact far exceeds the scope of the Arab people's anti-imperialist struggle. It has opened up a new dimension for the third world's struggle in defense of national resources against imperialist plunder and exploitation.
89.	The African people's struggle for national liberation has made great progress. Portugal is one of the oldest colonial empires. The downfall of the former Fascist regime in Portugal is a victory for the African people, who have persevered in a long armed struggle, as well as for the Portuguese people, who have persistently opposed the reactionary colonial war.
90.	The peoples of IndoChina have steadily achieved new successes in their struggle against United States aggression and for national liberation. The VietNamese people have carried on an unremitting struggle for the strict implementation of the Paris Agreement of 27 January 1973 and against the Nguyen Van Thieu clique's violations of the Agreement. In Laos, the Provisional Government of National Union has been formed. The Cambodian people have grown ever stronger in their fight against the traitorous Lon Nol clique. The struggle of the Korean people for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland has won ever wider support. There is a growing tendency among the SouthEast Asian countries to free themselves from superPower interference and contention.
91.	The struggle of the Latin American peoples against hegemonism and in defense of their State sovereignty, independence and national economic rights and interests has continued to surge forward. Those peoples initiated the struggle fair the zone of exercise of their maritime rights of 200 nautical miles, which has become the common demand of the great majority of nations.
92.	The Asian, African and Latin American peoples have supported each other in struggle, and they have become ever more keenly aware that unity is strength. At various conferences, they have strongly denounced colonialism, racism, Zionism, imperialism and hegemonism. Their just struggles and those of the people of other countries, supporting and complementing each other, are pounding away at the old international order, which the superPowers vainly attempt to maintain.
93.	In the past year, the contention between the two superPowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, for spheres of influence and world hegemony has become more intense. This is a fact which no agree menu between them can cover up. The Soviet leadership has lauded these agreements to the skies, as if the mere conclusion of agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union would bring detente to the whole world and usher in a "new stage of history", namely, a "world without war". "Detente" has become a kind of quack medicine hawked by the Soviet leadership everywhere. But none of us will forget that it was after the reaching of a stack of agreements at the second United StatesSoviet talks that the Middle East war broke out, and that it was after the reaching of more agreements at the third United StatesSoviet talks that the Cyprus events occurred.
So then, where is the "detente"? Has not there been ample manifestation of the contention between the two superPowers during the Middle East war and the Cyprus events?
94.	To keep a "balance of power" the United States and the Soviet Union reached certain agreements on "strategic arms limitation". But is has become more evident since their third summit talks that, at bottom, these agreements serve the purpose of bigger and more intensified contention. As far as balance is concerned, it has always been relative and temporary whether in nature or in human society, while imbalance is absolute and constant. In the real life of today, there is in fact no "balance of power" between the two superPowers. Instead, each side is desperately trying to outstrip and overwhelm the other, and the wildest arms race is on. No wonder the superPower with the label of "socialism" has, of late, arrogantly boasted that it is "on a historic offensive along the entire front of the global confrontation", and that the pace of its advance is "rapid".
95.	Lenin pointed out: "The content of imperialist politics is 'world domination' and the continuation of this politics is imperialist war." So long as imperialism and social imperialism exist, there will be the danger of war, and genuine detente or "lasting peace" will be impossible. Today, the danger of war comes from the superPowers. One superPower is trying by hook or by crook to carry out infiltration and expansion abroad and squeeze into the other superPower's spheres of influence in Europe and other parts of the world in order to supersede that superPower and realize its own wild ambition of world domination. With this fierce contention between the superPowers going on as it is, eventually either the superPowers will go to war against each other or the people will rise in revolution; either the war will give rise to revolution, or revolution will prevent the war. As Chairman Mao Tsetung has said: "The danger of a new world war still exists, and the people of all countries must get prepared. But revolution is the main trend in the world today."
96.	By stepping up their contention for world hegemony, the two superPowers are bound to hasten the process of their turning into their own opposites. Nowadays, not only have the third world countries risen one after another in revolt against them, but the second world countries in between the superPowers and the third world have also stood up to resist in various ways control and bullying by the superPowers. Beset by troubles at home and abroad, both superPowers are having a very tough' time. One superPower has already overstretched itself and is in a dilemma, unable to attend to all its troubles at the same time. The other superPower is in an even worse predicament. It has wild ambitions but lacks strength, and its difficulties abound. They are both in the plight described by the Chinese verse: "Flowers fall off, do what one may." Overestimation of the strength of the superPowers does not square with the facts. In the final analysis, it is not the one or two superPowers but the people of the world in their thousands of millions who determine the destiny of the world.
97.	The Chinese delegation would now like to state its views on a number of questions confronting the General Assembly at its current session. First, we
would like to state our views on Africa's fight against colonialism.
98.	China consistently supports the liberation struggles of all oppressed nations and peoples and considers this to be her bounden internationalist duty. In Africa, we firmly support the peoples of Mozambique, Angola, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Azania and other regions in their just struggle against colonialism and racism. We hail the birth of the Republic of GuineaBissau and warmly welcome its admission to the United Nations. We firmly demand that Spain terminate its colonial domination in Spanish Sahara and sincerely hope that the Arab countries concerned will work together with the people of Spanish Sahara to seek a reasonable solution to the existing questions of this region through friendly consultations on the basis of unity against colonialism.
99.	We hold that the colonial peoples can win national liberation only by relying mainly on their own efforts to wage a tit for tat struggle against colonialism. Moribund colonialism relies on armed force to carry on its deathbed struggle, and it will never step down from the stage of history unless it is defeated by the armed struggle of the colonial peoples. Both the birth of the Republic of GuineaBissau and the more recent agreement on the independence of Mozambique are in essence the result of the long and persistent armed struggle of the people of GuineaBissau and Mozambique, and are by no means favors bestowed by colonialism.
100.	The downfall of the former Fascist regime in Portugal, which persisted in the colonial war, is, of course, an important event. But this development in no way implies that Portugal will bring independence to the colonial peoples on a silver platter. Recently, under the pressure of the people, the new Portuguese Government had to recognize the right to independence of the peoples in the Portuguese colonies. This is a manifestation of the general trend. But it is yet to be seen whether the new Portuguese Government will suit its actions to its words. Even when that Government has reached an agreement with a colony, it remains to be seen whether the agreement will truly by implemented. The declaration of the Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] adopted at the eleventh ordinary session points out that, if Portugal does not take a clear position on the right to total independence of its colonies in Africa, there will be no other way but pursuit and intensification of the struggle for national liberation.
101.	We warmly endorse this correct stand. According to our experience in China, all reactionaries habitually use counterrevolutionary dual tactics, and we must use revolutionary dual tactics to deal with them. Armed struggle is fundamental, but negotiations are not excluded. Sometimes negotiating is tit for tat; and sometimes not negotiating is also tit for tat. Even in negotiations one must base oneself on fighting. In the course of negotiations, the fundamental interests of the people must be protected. The armed forces of the people must be strengthened, and not weakened.
102.	Moreover, it must be pointed out that while old line colonialisms have not died out, neo colonial isms of various descriptions, including the neo colonialism flaunting the banner of socialism are stepping up their infiltration. These neocolonialisms are sowing discord among African countries and within the national liberation movements to split and demoralize them in a vain attempt to supplant old line colonialisms and control the regions concerned. Sharp vigilance should be maintained against this. The future of the African liberation struggle is bright, but the road ahead remains tortuous. We believe that the great and increasingly awakening African people, strengthening their unity and persevering in a long struggle, will certainly surmount all difficulties and triumph in the end.
103.	Second, on the Mi 'die East question, we wish to say the following.
104.	The Arab people brought about an excellent situation through fighting the October war. This war has strengthened the confidence of the Arab people in victory over the Israeli aggressor and broken the stalemate that was deliberately created by the superPowers. Now, a disengagement has been effected between Egypt and Israel and between Syria and Israel, but the Middle East question is still far from being settled.
105.	The essence of the Middle East question lies in Israeli Zionist aggression and the contention between the two superPowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, for hegemony in the Middle East versus the struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples against aggression and hegemony.
106.	The Chinese Government and people always support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. From the very beginning, we have refused to have any contact with the Israeli Zionists, who persist in aggression. We have firmly opposed the contention between the two superPowers in the Middle East and opposed their support of and connivance with Israel, and we have constantly exposed the truth that social imperialism is giving sham support while actually attempting to control the Palestinian and other Arab peoples.
107.	It is well known that the United Nations has held innumerable discussions on the Palestine question and adopted countless resolutions thereon, of which the one referred to most often is Security Council resolution 242 (1967). All these resolutions have the common feature of twisting the question of the restoration of the Palestinian.people's national rights into a so called "question of refugees". This is a gross injustice. We have always opposed it and will continue to oppose it.
108.	Now, the Arab countries have proposed the discussion of the question of Palestinian national rights at the General Assembly session, so that all countries may hear directly the voices of the millions of Palestinian people and the 100 million Arab people and so that more countries may understand and support their just position. This is entirely necessary.
109.	The restoration of Palestinian national rights and the recovery of the lost Arab territories form a struggle that is an integral whole. There can be no settlement of the Middle East question so long as the lost Arab territories are not recovered and Palestinian national rights are not restored. Whatever maneuvers they may engage in, the two superPowers will never succeed in their attempt to sacrifice the Palestinian national rights and undermine the militant unity of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples.
110.	We hope that the United Nations will rectify its longstanding unjust attitude on the Palestine question, recognize the Palestinian people's national rights and support their restoration. But historical experience merits attention. No unrealistic hopes should be pinned on United Nations resolutions. In the final analysis, the Arab countries can recover their lost territories and the Palestinian people can regain their national rights only by relying on their own close unity and unremitting struggle, with the support of the peoples of the whole world.
111.	Third, our views on the question of Cyprus are as follows.
112.	The question of Cyprus is a legacy of imperialist colonial rule. The internal cause of the recent eruption in Cyprus is the lack of a satisfactory solution to the question between the two communities on the island; and its external cause is the attempt of each of the two superPowers to put this island of strategic importance under its own influence and control.
113.	One superPower stirred up trouble by pulling wires behind the scenes. The other superPower, pretending to "uphold" the independence of Cyprus and feeling anxious, like an ant on a hot pan, issued one government statement after another, supporting one side one day and the other side the other, sowing discord and fanning the flames of trouble. Racking its brains for ingenious devices, it turned up with proposals, first for the sending of a "United Nations special mission" and then for the convening of an international conference with the participation of the five permanent members of the Security Council. Anyone with a discerning eye will see that its "mischievous" actions serve neither the interests of the independence of Cyprus nor the interests of the Greek and Turkish communities or the countries directly related to these communities, but are aimed at meddling in the Cyprus question and further squeezing into the eastern Mediterranean. In quest of hegemony in the Mediterranean, it has redoubled its efforts to threaten, cajole, subvert and undermine the Balkan countries, causing their grave uneasiness and aggravating tension in this region.
114.	We hold that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus must be respected. We hope that a reasonable solution will be found so that the Greek and Turkish communities can live together in equality and harmony. Cyprus, Turkey and Greece are all friends of China. We have all suffered from imperialist tactics of sowing discord and divide and rule. As for the questions left over from history, we believe that they will not be difficult to resolve so long as the Greek and Turkish communities in Cyprus and the countries concerned seek to do so by peaceful means and through patient consultations. We should be constantly on guard against superPower meddling and intervention.
115.	Fourth, on the questions of the South Asian subcontinent and nuclear free zones, we hold the following views.
116.	The dismemberment of Pakistan by India with the backing of the Soviet Union gave rise to turbulence and unrest on the South Asian subcontinent. Great efforts have been made by the Government of Pakistan to promote a normalization of relations between India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. By April this year, the Indian Government had finally implemented in full the resolutions of the General Assembly and Security Council of 1971 on the ceasefire between India and Pakistan, the withdrawal of troops and the repatriation of prisoners. This ought to have created favorable conditions for the relaxation of the situation on the South Asian subcontinent. But a new wave arose when the previous one had barely subsided. In May, India exploded a nuclear device allegedly for peaceful purposes. In June, the Indian Government imposed on the people of Sikkim the so called "Government of Sikkim Bill", which it had concocted singlehandedly. And, more recently, the Indian Parliament adopted a constitutional amendment, making Sikkim a so called "associate state" of India. To put it bluntly, this is the annexation of Sikkim. It is another naked act of expansionism perpetrated by the Indian Government after dismembering Pakistan by armed force.
117.	The Indian Government's annexation of Sikkim has aroused the opposition of the Sikkimese people as well as the Indian people and met with condemnation by India's neighbors and world public opinion. The Soviet propaganda organs, alone, sing the praises of India. This shows that Soviet revisionist social imperialism is the boss behind the scenes of Indian expansionism.
118.	The Soviet Union is unscrupulous in its efforts to interfere in, subvert, divide and control the South Asian countries. It is conspiring to engineer another dismemberment of Pakistan. It dreams of opening a corridor to the Indian Ocean to serve its interests in its contention with the other superPower for hegemony in the South Asian subcontinent and the Indian Ocean. The two superPowers are competing with each other in setting up military bases in the Indian Ocean, some of which are overt bases while others are covert ones, nominally for civilian, but actually for military, use. The turbulent situation in South Asia and the Indian Ocean calls for vigilance.
119.	The turbulence and unrest in South Asia totally contradict the desire for peace of the peoples of all countries in this region. The proposal put forward by Pakistan for the establishment of a nuclear free zone in South Asia [AI9706] is entirely, reasonable. China gives it her firm support. We also firmly support the proposal of Iran and Egypt for the establishment of a nuclear weapon free zone in the Middle East [AI9693 and Add./J]. China is a nuclear country, although her nuclear weapons are still in the experimental stage. We are developing nuclear weapons for defense and for breaking the nuclear monopoly and ultimately destroying the .nuclear weapons. The Chinese Government has solemnly declared on many occasions that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons. It consistently holds that the nuclear countries should undertake not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear countries or nuclear free zones. We are ready to make such an undertaking in regard to the proposed nuclear free zones in South Asia and the Middle East. We hope that all the other nuclear countries will do the same.
120.	Fifth, I turn to the questions of Cambodia and IndoChina.
121.	In the past year, the Cambodian people have continued to win new victories in their war against United States aggression and for national salvation. The People's Armed Forces of National Liberation of Cambodia launched sustained offensives on all fronts and kept annihilating the effective strength of the enemy. The liberated zone is expanding and becoming ever more consolidated. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, head of State of Cambodia, is the Cambodian people's sole lawful Government. It has been recognized by more than 60 countries, and its friendly relations with third world countries are developing steadily. It enjoys a high international prestige. After the tour of Prince Sihanouk, Deputy Prime Minister Khieu Samphan visited many countries in Asia, Africa and Europe this year. They were both accorded a warm welcome in the countries they visited. The just struggle of the Cambodian people has won support on an ever wider scale from people all over the world.
122.	The traitorous Lon Nol clique is a handful of national scum repudiated by the people of Cambodia. This clique is rent by disunity and beset with numerous contradictions. In the areas under its rule, the economic situation is deteriorating and mass movements are raging like a storm. It is in a dire plight. Of late, it has advanced a proposal for socalled "peace negotiations", attempting to achieve a demagogic effect. We all know that the key to restoring peace in Cambodia lies :n the cessation of United States aggression and interference in Cambodia. So, the purpose of that socalled proposal is simply to cover up the fact of United States aggression and interference in Cambodia and prolong the moribund life of the Lon Nol clique. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia has already opposed and rejected that proposal. The Chinese Government resolutely supports the solemn and just stand of the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia.
123.	It is utterly illegal for the Lon Nol clique to usurp Cambodia's seat in the United Nations. Last year, some people used procedural tactics to postpone for a year the discussion on the question of restoring the lawful rights of the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia. That was wholly unjustifiable. The Chinese Government firmly maintains that this session of the General Assembly should adopt a resolution to immediately expel the representatives of the traitorous Lon Nol clique and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia its rightful seat.
124.	More than one year has elapsed since the signing of the Agreement on ending the war in Viet Nam, but peace has not yet been restored in South Viet Nam. The Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam has worked tirelessly for the strict implementation of the Paris Agreement. But its efforts have met with obstruction and sabotage from the Saigon administration. Relying on massive United States military aid, the Saigon administration refuses to implement important provisions of the Paris Agreement, with the result that the situation in South Viet Nam has thus far remained tense. We demand that the United States Government strictly comply with the Paris Agreement and stop its involvement and interference in South Viet Nam, so that peace can really be restored in Viet Nam.
125.	The Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam is the authentic representative of the South Viet-Namese people. The Paris Agreement recognizes the fact that there exist two administrations in South Viet Nam, namely, the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Saigon administration. It is unreasonable that the United Nations should accept only the observer of one side, that is, the Saigon administration. To rectify this irrationality, we hold that the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam should be invited to send its observer to the United Nations.
126.	Sixth, with regard to the Korean question, our views are as follows.
127.	The General Assembly at its last session reached a consensus on the Korean question, confirmed the three principles of Korea's independence, peaceful reunification and great national unity and decided to dissolve the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.1 This was a welcome development.
128.	The facts over the past year show that the United Nations should not rest content with the progress made but should continue to go forward. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has made many efforts to push ahead the north south dialog and promote the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. But all these efforts have been unreasonably rejected by the South Korean authorities. The proposals on minor issues advanced by the South Korean authorities are wholly aimed at covering up their unwillingness to conduct negotiations on the fundamental question of reunifying the north and the south. What they really want is division, not reunification. On the pretext of a so called threat from the north, the South Korean authorities have taken a series of "emergency measures", depriving the South Korean people of all basic democratic rights. They have arrested, tried, imprisoned or murdered large numbers of people of various strata who call for democracy, freedom and peaceful reunification, ranging from young students and professors to political figures. Even people like former President Yoon Bo Sun and Catholic Bishop Chi Hak Soun have not escaped such persecution. Before the case of kidnapping Kim Dae Jung is closed, the South Korean authorities have already gone ahead with more sinister actions. Today, South Korea is in fact under the reign of terror of a Fascist dictator. It is mainly because they have the backing of United States troops that the South Korean authorities dare so feverishly to repress the people and sabotage the north south dialog. In order to eliminate outside interference in Korea and promote the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, the withdrawal of foreign forces from South Korea is entirely necessary.
129.	In paragraph 2 (c) of the explanatory memorandum attached to the request for the inclusion in the agenda of the twenty ninth session of an additional item on the question of Korea, which was submitted by the United States and other countries [see A/9741 and Add. 15], it is asserted that the United States troops under the United Nations flag have not interfered in the internal affairs of the host country. This makes a mockery of common sense. Does not the presence of tens of thousands of United States troops serve to embolden the South Korean rulers, to say the least? The consensus of the last session of the General Assembly affirmed that the reunification of North and South Korea should be achieved by peaceful means without interference by outside force. As a logical consequence of affirming this principle, the foreign troops under the United Nations flag should be withdrawn from South Korea. As for the statement contained in the draft resolution annexed to the explanatory memorandum that "tension in Korea has not been totally eliminated", well, to put it bluntly, this is another way of referring to the so called threat from the north, which is a myth that has long been exploded. By now even that neighboring country which has all along supported South Korea no longer believes in this myth. The assertion that the "United Nations Command" cannot be withdrawn because of the existence of this "threat" is sheer deception.
130.	The Chinese delegation is firmly against that draft resolution. It strongly maintains that the current session of the General Assembly should discuss and adopt the draft resolution submitted by Algeria and other countries for the withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations [see Al9703/Add.3].
131.	Seventh, the Chinese delegation's views on the question of disarmament are the following.
132.	It is quite understandable that disarmament is a matter of concern to people when the arms race, and especially the nuclear arms race, between the two superPowers has become more intense and glaring. But hopes are one thing, reality another. For instance, we all talked about disarmament here a year ago. Now, after a year has passed, have the armaments accumulated by the two superPowers decreased, or have they increased? In our view, they have increased. Is the danger of war greater or less than last year? In our view, at least one cannot say it is less.
133.	Why is this so? First, because the two superPowers are fiercely contending with each other on a global scale. And their arms expansion and war preparations serve their policy of hegemonism. Secondly, because the superPowers, when faced with increasingly acute economic troubles, inevitably turn to the further militarization of the national economy as the way out. In this regard, the present situation resembles that of the 1930s in many ways.
134.	Disarmament is an old issue, and China's views on it are well known. We are in favor of disarmament. But we favor genuine and not sham disarmament, still less empty talk about disarmament coupled with actual arms expansion year after year. Some say that to hold a disarmament conference is better than none. We understand this well intentioned desire. But we consider that, when the arms race between the two superPowers, which directly threatens the people of the world, is being stepped up, and when the superPower with the label of "socialism" is actually bent on using empty talk at a disarmament conference as a cover for its arms expansion and war preparations, the convening of a nominal disarmament conference or its preparatory meeting will only pro* duce the effect of lulling the people of the world.
135.	The Chinese Government is in favor of holding a genuine world disarmament conference. But the conference must have a clear aim and the necessary preconditions. The clear aim is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and absolutely not the so called limitation of strategic arms. The necessary preconditions are: all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear superPowers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against nonnuclear countries and nuclear free zones for example, the Soviet Union should, first of all, undertake obligations in respect of the nuclear free zone in Latin America and they must withdraw from abroad alt their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible for all countries, big and small, on an equal footing, to discuss with equanimity and resolve the question of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and other questions, free from any threat of force.
136.	In the absence of a reduction of the armaments of the two superPowers, what should the numerous small and medium countries do in the face of their threat? In our opinion, the small and medium countries should strive to strengthen their necessary and independent defense capabilities in the light of specific conditions. This is a fundamental and reliable abroad.
13>. As expected, the Soviet Government, which comes up with some novelties each year, has put forward this year an item entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate for military and other purposes incompatible with the maintenance of international security, human well being and health" [item 103J. The letter requesting the inclusion of this item as an important and urgent matter in the agenda of this session [A 19702] is so obscurely worded that one cannot make out its real meaning. We would rather wait till the Soviet representative explains the matter in clear and simple language before acting whether it deserves some comment,
138. Eighth, the Chinese delegation would like to state the following views on the question of defending State sovereignty and national economic rights and interests.
139* Inspired by the victorious struggle which the Arab countries and people waged with oil as a weapon, the third world countries have started an immense tide of struggle to defend their State sovereignty, control their national resources, develop their national economy and oppose exploitation and plunder by imperialism, and particularly that of the superPowers. Through the efforts of numerous small and medium steed countries from all parts of the world, the General Assembly at its sixth special session finally adopted the Declaration and the Program of Action on the Establishment of a Hew International Economic
Order. This was a significant victory for the united struggle of the third world countries. It marks a new trend in the struggle of the people of the world against imperialism, and particularly against hegemonism, a trend of deepening this struggle by carrying it into the economic field.
140.	Since the sixth special session, the developing countries have strongly demanded the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration and the Program of Action and the continued transformation of the old international economic relations based on exploitation and plunder. More and mote developing countries are taking bold action to control their national resources and the production and pricing of their raw materials. They have further united themselves in various raw material producers' organizations to strive to break superPower manipulation and monopoly. An important part of this struggle of the third world is the work of formulating the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, initiated by the President of Mexico.
141.	But the superPowers have done their utmost to belittle or deny the great significance of the Declaration and the Program of Action and tried by all means to obstruct the realization of the just demands of the third world. One superPower openly declared its disagreement with certain principal paragraphs in the two documents and obstinately refused to implement their provisions. The other superPower has set in motion its propaganda machine to vilify the Declaration and the Program of Action as showing "regionalism" and "economism", "reflecting group interests", and so on and so forth. This fully shows that both superPowers want to preserve the old order of exploitation and plunder.
142.	Some people say that the current economic difficulties are caused by the increase in oil price. This is a specious statement. In the final analysis, the present economic difficulties are the inevitable outcome of the imperialist system; they are not due to increase in the prices of raw materials, still less to any alleged misdeeds on the part of the oil producing countries. Those people are daily spreading the idea that Arab and other oil producing countries have reaped a windfall of tens of billions of United States dollars through the oil price rise. But they forget that the international monopoly capital has reaped an immeasurably greater amount of super profits through long years of plunder and exploitation and through the forcing down of the prices of oil and other raw materials. Ever since the emergence of colonialism and then imperialism, the parity between the prices of raw materials and industrial goods on the world market has always been unfair. Particularly in times of economic crises, the colonialists and imperialists invariably use every possible means, including the forcing down of the prices of raw materials, to shift the grave consequences of economic crises on to the broad masses in the colonies and semi colons, i.e., the developing countries of today. The imperialists regard this state of affair* **s normal and reasonable, and even as sacred and inviolable. Now, this sacred and inviolable state of affairs is being violated. To fly into a rage is futile. To bluff is also f 'tile. The profound significance of the oil battle lieu in the fact that the developing countries have united themselves and independently exercised control over their national resources and fought against plunder, exploitation and the shifting of crises on to them. Of course, higher oil prices have caused non oil producing countries of the third world some temporary difficulties. Ways should be sought to resolve these difficulties, but this struggle and its great historic significance must not be negated on this account.
143.	Combating maritime hegemonism and formulating a new law of the sea is an important aspect of the struggle of the developing countries to safeguard state sovereignty and develop their national economy. At the recent Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea held in Caracas, the great majority of the developing countries were for the establishment of an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles. Driven by circumstances, the two superPowers ostensibly gave up their opposition an attitude in which they had persisted all along. But, as if by agreement, they both raised a number of preconditions and restrictions under the name of a "package deal". The substance of these preconditions and restrictions is insistence on "freedom of passage" through straits within territorial seas and on "freedom of fishing" and "freedom of scientific research" in the exclusive economic zones. Nominally they have accepted a 200 nautical mile economic zone, but actually they want to emasculate the exclusive economic zone so that it will be devoid of any concrete substance and the developing countries will be left with nothing whatsoever. To put it bluntly, the "freedoms" demanded by the superPowers are their freedom to plunder the developing countries and their freedom to pursue hegemonism.
144.	In particular, the super Power which claims to be "the natural ally of the developing countries" has put on an even more wonderful show. Assuming a compassionate tone, it exclaimed that international trade and security would be impaired if freedom of passage through straits within territorial seas should be denied, and that if it was not allowed to go fishing iii the exclusive economic zone, the fish there would die uselessly. You see, how kindhearted it is. In fact, these are but crocodile tears, which cannot disguise its vicious super features.
145.	It is a serious struggle to defend State sovereignty, control national resources, develop national economy and combat superPower plunder and exploitation. The super Powers have bound to put up a desperate fight, but it will be of no avail. At the sixth special session of the General Assembly and the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea at Caracas, numerous developing countries came forward to expose and condemn the superPowers and resolutely called for smashing the old international order and taking their destiny into their own hands. This is a thing that has never happened before. The superPowers have never been so isolated. The situation is excellent. We are confident that the numerous developing countries, closing their ranks, allying with all forces that can be allied with and persevering in struggle, will surely continue to win new victories.
146.	International developments show that the world has changed enormously and profoundly. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution this torrential tide is sweeping into every corner of the earth. Storms have broken out even in places that have been rather quiet for decades. The world situation at present is indeed aptly described by the verse, "The wind sweeping through the tower heralds a rising storm in the mountains." And this wind is gathering momentum. At such a juncture , it is our hope that this session of the General Assembly will do some useful things to advance the cause of human progress. The Chinese delegation is ready to work with all of you toward this end.
Mr. President, let me begin by congratulating you warmly on your election to this high and responsible office. Your unanimous election is proof of the confidence placed in you and in your country and of the certainty that you will make this particularly important General Assembly session a success. To these congratulations I should like to add our sincere thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Benites. We were very happy to be able to begin our co-operation in the United Nations under his wise and experienced leadership.
36.	I also wish to welcome most warmly the three new Members: Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea- Bissau. We are looking forward to co-operating closely and trustfully with these countries in the framework of our Organization.
37.	The twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly is being held against a background of international events and developments which must be regarded as a challenge to political reason. We share the deep concern that permeates the introduction to the Secretary-General's report on the work of the Organization despite intensive efforts to achieve detente, the number of conflicts involving the use of force is not on the decline; the global network of economic relations is in many places damaged, in some already torn: there is a shortage of raw materials, a struggle over prices; inflation and monetary fluctuations are driving us towards a crisis; the economic situation in some parts of the world has continued to deteriorate dramatically; hunger is still spreading. There are still people who are denied their elementary rights; the gap between the proclamation and the realization of human rights continues to be unbearably wide. Many people no longer believe that their problems can be settled by mutual agreement. This feeling of desperation not only breeds resignation and fatalism; it also generates action that is unjustifiable from any point of view, acts of individual terrorism in the shadow of which no country can feel safe - a terrorism that also leaves its mark on countries not involved.
38.	But our chief concern must be to prevent any further breaking up of international solidarity and to reverse the process of disintegration.
39.	The Federal Republic of Germany has gone through certain experiences which distinguish it from many other countries represented, here and which determine the nature of our participation in the work of this great world Organization. With your permission I will mention those experiences, in order to illustrate that what we need today is not less but more international solidarity.
40.	The Federal Republic of Germany emerged from a separation into states of the indivisible German nation. We are therefore more deeply conscious than others of the fact that States, however great may be their need for existence, are imperfect entities. Our citizens are less inclined to think in terms of nation-States, to regard their Government and their political institutions as the source of all wisdom and to believe that those institutions alone can cope with the massive problems inherent in the pursuit of peace, freedom, human dignity and welfare. We therefore view with concern the re-emerging tendency in some parts of the world to overrate oneself as a nation and the attempts of some countries to increase their prosperity at the expense of their neighbors' procedure that has always resulted in the weakening of all. The Federal Republic of Germany therefore trains its policy on the objective of European unity. We are convinced that only a united Europe can effectively solve the existing political, economic and social problems confronting the member States of our Community. That Community is also willing to share responsibility for solving problems beyond its frontiers; the more closely it is knit together, the more it will be able to do in this respect. This morning [2238th meeting] my French colleague mentioned the request for the granting to the European Community of observer status in the United Nations. This request is further proof of a determination of the European Community to co-operate actively in the solution of world-wide tasks.
41.	The other experience of the Germans has been that force, rather than solving problems, in fact makes them all that much more difficult to settle. Once reconciliation had been achieved with the neighbors in western Europe, especially with the French people, the Federal Government under the then Chancellor, Willy Brandt, and under my predecessor and now Federal President, Walter Scheel, concluded agreements on the renunciation of force with those countries from which we have been separated by a sorrowful past characterized by force and conflict. The Federal Government and I can say this also on behalf of all responsible political forces in the Federal Republic of Germany bases itself on the principle of the renunciation of force. As the United Nations Charter expressly lays down, peoples may and should, in the exercise of their free self-determination, manage their own affairs. This also implies, in our view, that divided countries may reunite if that is their own free decision and that nations may join supranational communities. But if force enters into the conduct of international relations, then it will be the seed from which ever more conflict and violence will spring, and consequently will be the source of distress, want and disaster.
42.	Both these experiences, the imperfection of our States and the senselessness of force, have led the Federal Republic of Germany of necessity on to the road taken by this world Organization. Only by means of a well-structured international order can the people in our State systems find the framework within which they feel confident they can live in security.
43.	On behalf of my country I speak up for the form of co-operation embracing all mankind, the most important model of which is the United Nations, a form of co-operation which, though it is certainly a laborious and tedious way, is the only worthy one and promises to be more successful in the end. Peace, freedom, human dignity, welfare and a reliable system of international relations are indivisible.
44.	Today more than at any other time in the past it is the political will for co-operation that counts. The international institutions cannot be stronger than that political will. This is a question not merely of being willing to play a constructive part in bringing about international treaties, but also of being resolved to comply with them.
45.	This is the prerequisite for the working of that new form of international relations the development of which has governed the period since the Second world war which, we may hope, will also have been the last world war. It is a precondition which will have to be established in all countries, but not only on the part of governments.
46.	I am deeply convinced that it is also the individual citizen in our countries who will have to develop a willingness to act in a way which I have tried to describe as international solidarity. The problems that have been the subject of United Nations conferences in past months and will be the subject of other conferences in the months ahead for instance those on commodity and developing problems, population trends, the use of the high seas, and the world food problems are matters which concern every individual. A government's sense of the common responsibility and its willingness to play a constructive part in resolving these problems depend on the degree of understanding of their peoples.
47.	International co-operation in its multifarious forms has created a framework within which it has been possible to bring about extraordinary changes in the world in the past two and a half decades. Let me mention only two of those changes: the process of liberating the former colonial nations which is reflected most strikingly in this very Assembly where the original 51 members have now become 138; and the development by the United Nations of a peace-creating and peace-preserving policy, which has helped prevent the spread of local and regional conflicts.
48.	Increasingly, doubts are being voiced today about those same international rules and organizations whose often quiet work in the background has made such developments at all possible.
49.	On behalf of the Federal Government I would like to state the following.
50.	We want to strengthen the United Nations and enhance its possibilities of action. Whatever its imperfections, there is no alternative to the United Nations. Those who have the peaceful development of mankind at heart must support it.
51.	The tasks of the many regional groupings are complementary to the universal tasks of the United Nations. For us, the standing of the United Nations is not in any way lowered because of the fact that we are a member of a defense alliance, and that, together with others, we seek political and economic union in Europe. This diversity of international groupings is commensurate with the diversity of international relations. This pattern is useful as long as no organization turns against others and as long as all respect the rules we have all agreed upon within this widest framework. My country will abide by both these principles.
52.	Organizations are the work of men and, as such, imperfect; moreover, times and problems change. For the Federal Republic of Germany there is no reason to question the foundations of the existing international order. Rather, we have to develop its rules and institutions and adapt them to the new requirements, Let us join in studying all aspects of the United Nations system and considering where the Organization itself or the rules upon which it is based can be improved and its problems thus resolved. The Federal Republic of Germany will assist in such a review in the same spirit in which it is seeking within other organizations, especially GATT and IMF, to bring about an organic reform of the international system.
53.	We shall have to examine very closely the forms of international co-operation we have developed to see whether they are suited to removing the causes of the crises that have arisen in many parts of the world. In the United Nations Charter the solution of world-wide economic, social and humanitarian problems receives the same priority as the aim of safeguarding peace. Both realms are indivisible. We know that peace is more than a state in which fighting may have stopped for a while. An international economic order embracing the principle of equality and partnership in trade relations also will in itself help to safeguard peace.
54.	Those who still doubt the need for rapid action will have had their eyes opened by developments in the past 12 months. The prices of many major primary commodities have escalated in hitherto unknown proportions; energy prices have risen vertically. You all know the consequences: alarming balance-of-payments deficits on the one hand; vast surpluses on the other. This has piled plenty of additional fuel on the fire of world-wide inflation. Data which had served as a valid basis for economic planning were called into question overnight. In many countries there is a growing feeling of uncertainty in the face of an economic trend which appears less calculable than ever in the past. The consequences affect all. The difficulties facing the industrial countries are considerable, but they are not to be compared with those of the least developed countries, which are lacking in natural resources and whose very existence is threatened. We have to tighten our belts, but for them it is a question of survival.
55.	This is a challenge which does not distinguish between different systems: it affects all nations, rich and poor, developing and industrialized.
56.	I place very much weight on this point. An exacerbation of the conflict of interests between commodity-producing and industrialized countries not only creates problems between those directly concerned, but also strikes first and most tellingly at third countries. This kind of situation results in new tensions, and many countries would be sorely tempted to try to save their own skins without consideration for others. Let us guard against such a temptation.
Terrible experiences of the past have taught us that seeking refuge in economic isolationism does not remove the difficulty. On the contrary, world economic relations are so intertwined that action which is felt to be egotistical is bound to produce counter-measures. Consequently, the "every man for himself' approach leads straight to economic chaos and creates tensions between States and their peoples. What we want is just the opposite: we want to remove existing disparities, especially the gulf between developing and industrialized countries; we want to quell further conflicts; and we want to avoid the situation of some being entirely dependent on others. To achieve this aim we shall have to bring about a world-wide improvement of our economic and social structures; we shall have to boost productivity and encourage sensible growth without neglecting the task of protecting the environment a task which has lost none of its urgency since the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm in 1972. When the commodity-producing countries seek to obtain higher market prices for their raw materials, they must be assured that there will be no excessive price fluctuations in the commodity markets. At the same time, we must seek to ensure long-term supplies of those commodities. But in the interest of all we must make sure that the bigger proceeds from energy and raw materials are reasonably used and thus fed back into the international economy. The money should be used where it is most urgently needed.
57.	We are prepared to help find solutions, both regional and world-wide, that will prevent any threats to the international monetary system.
58.	At the sixth special session of the General Assembly last April the important dialog on world-wide economic problems was begun. We shall have to continue that dialog with much patience and resolution and with a good sense of judgment. No one will benefit from decisions that are not supported by all the world's major trading partners; no one will benefit from resolutions that question the world economic order based on division of labor and freedom of trade or that represent an attempt to replace such an order by a system of global dirigisme.
59.	True, the present world economic system is not without defects and weaknesses. We must therefore develop it still further, improve it and adapt it to the needs of all nations. The Federal Republic of Germany has made specific contributions towards this end and is willing to carry on along this road.
60.	We appreciate the need for the industrial countries to make their markets more accessible to products from the less-developed countries. The European Community, of which my country is a member, has been catering to this need for a good number of years by granting general tariff preferences. It is currently negotiating a comprehensive system of mutual economic relations with 44 African Caribbean and Pacific countries.
61.	The Federal Government supports co-operative projects also by private companies in developing countries. It is trying by appropriate measures to steer investment activities towards the least-developed countries.
62.	In recent years the Federal Government has constantly increased the share of its development aid that goes to those countries that are in special need of international solidarity, and it will continue to do so.
63.	The Federal Republic of Germany has declared its readiness to provide, as a member of the European Community, a substantial contribution towards the emergency operation of the United Nations for the benefit of the most seriously affected countries, as soon as, the other countries involved have agreed to play a corresponding part.
64.	The Federal Republic of Germany is taking part in the fight against hunger in the world and in efforts to solve the world food crisis. Within the European Community, too, our contributions are sizable. We help supply fertilizers. The President of the United States of America [2234th meeting] and his Secretary of State [2238th meeting] have rightly re-emphasized before this Assembly the importance of this problem.
65.	Higher commodity prices and the problems they entail confront us with tremendous economic difficulties. Nevertheless, the Federal Government will make special efforts to continue to ^increase its development aid. In the years ahead it intends to increase that aid at a higher percentage rate than the national budget as a whole. For 1975 this has already been decided. Multilateral aid will continue to feature prominently in our development-assistance program.
66.	We are making efforts to increase and intensify exchanges in the field of science and technology. All countries should have access to the scientific and technological resources of this world, so as to become more and more able to solve their problems on their own. This, too, is the aim of our projects in the sphere of educational aid. We welcome the idea of a United Nations conference on science and technology, and we shall do our best to encourage the promotion of that project.
67.	Last year's events have once again thrown into relief the interdependence of the world economy and have made clear to us how sensitive the complex economic mechanisms of highly developed countries are. Even their capacity has its limits. Their economies can function only under their own laws, and domestic stability plays a great role in this. Only countries with a well-functioning economy can be good trading partners to developing countries; only they can help and, over the long term, attend to the problems of others beyond their own frontiers. Industrial countries with economies shaken by inflation are bound to lose in efficiency.
68.	Hence, the results of the Federal Republic of Germany's consistent policy of domestic stability benefit others as well.
69.	We are aware that the solution of economic and social problems is possible only When the political prerequisites are there, the most important being an ail-out effort to ensure peace. This task remains^ the prime mission of the United Nations. We can note with satisfaction that in many parts of the world hard work is being done to eliminate conflicts and tensions. To encourage and support those efforts is important.	
70.	With regard to peace and security, the obvious cases today are two areas whose conflicts have a direct bearing on us Europeans particularly; they are the Middle East and Cyprus. The conclusion of the disengagement agreements in the Middle East has generated new hopes for a comprehensive peaceful settlement of the conflict.
71.	Such initial steps must be followed by others, in order to establish an equitable and lasting peace ensuring the existence of all States and peoples in that region while taking into consideration the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The progress; made so far is an indication that even among the parties to the conflict the conviction has grown that a genuine solution can be attained by peaceful means only. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes this development, in which the efforts made by the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger, played a decisive part.
72.	Peace in the Middle East will set free powerful forces that can be harnessed to the reconstruction and development of the whole eastern and southern Mediterranean areas. The Federal Republic of Germany and its European partners will not fail to co-operate. By initiating a European-Arab dialog, the nine members of the Community have already laid the first foundations for that great task.
73.	The Federal Government most deeply deplores the recent events in Cyprus with its tragic consequences for the country and its people. We hope that those involved in the conflict will succeed soon in finding a negotiated settlement securing the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus and restoring to that country external and internal peace.
74. Both in the Middle East and in Cyprus the United Nations used its instruments to help in the efforts to bring about a cease-fire and make negotiations possible. I wish in this connexion to emphasize the valuable work done by Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim, to whom we owe appreciation and gratitude.
75.	We thank the soldiers of the peace-keeping forces for their dedication in the service of the United Nations, and we pay a tribute to those who gave their lives in that service.
76.	The Federal Republic of Germany recognizes the important functions of the peace-keeping forces and has therefore been supporting the actions in the Middle East and Cyprus by voluntary additional contributions. The efficiency and possibilities of action of the United Nations forces could be further enhanced if we succeeded in agreeing on general guidelines for peace-keeping operations. We should increase our efforts to bring about such an agreement.
77.	What concrete contribution can we make to an active peace policy? The foreign policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is geared to furthering detente. Detente in itself will not remove existing differences, nor automatically provide more security. But the policy of detente is an effective instrument in the efforts to eliminate old conflicts and prevent the emergence of new ones and it is only.
in an atmosphere of detente that efforts at arms limitation and arms control with due regard to security interests will make any sense at all.
78.	The Federal Government includes in its policy of detente the most difficult and burning problem prevailing in Germany itself the division of our country with all its painful consequences for the people. I wish to repeat what the Federal Government made clear at the twenty-eighth session [2119th meeting] from this rostrum. We cannot and will not accept the division as history's final dictum on the German nation. That dictum will be spoken by the German people themselves. The Federal Government sticks to its policy of working for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people will regain its unity in free self-determination.
79.	This does not prevent us, however, from exhausting the full measure of co-operation attainable in the, circumstances. This, our policy, has paved the way for contractually, settled relations with the other German State, the German Democratic Republic. It has since been seen that co-operation between the States of a divided country in the United Nations is possible despite fundamental differences of political views, that it is beneficial for all, andI should think for the world Organization too.
80.	Detente in Europe had to begin Where differences clashed their hardest., that is, in Berlin. The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin of 3 September 1971 opened the way. Hence, one of the criteria by which to measure detente is the manner in which that Agreement works in all its parts. Berlin's secure future is an indispensable element of detente in Europe, and it remains a vital interest of our policy.
81.	The Federal Republic of Germany wants to see the policy of detente effectively continued. It is in this spirit that the Federal Government cooperates actively and constructively in the Geneva Conference on Security arid Co-operation in Europe and in the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. We do not seek advantages benefiting just one side; we seek a way that will facilitate the coexistence of nations on the crowded European continent, and it is our hope that these conferences will bring us nearer the time when, in Europe, a highly armed East and West will no longer confront each other.
82.	We cannot and will not reconcile ourselves to the thought that the arms race in which not only the great Powers participate is being carried on and on. The economic resources of mankind must increasingly be used to put an end to hunger and misery in the world, but they should be concentrated on that task now, not after there has been a winner in the arms race.
83.	That is why I feet that, even more that hitherto, we must seek practical, controlled measures of disarmament and arms control. As before, the Federal Republic of Germany is determined to contribute actively to this. Disarmament and arms control are an integral part of our policy. We are prepared to assume additional responsibility also in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament and are certain that we will have an opportunity to do so in the near future.
84.	In this connexion I wish to underline the great importance which we attach to the policy of the non- proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Federal Republic of Germany intends to participate in the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons scheduled for 1975. It hopes that this will provide it with another opportunity to help oppose anything that might jeopardize the policy of non-proliferation.
85.	In this General Assembly the Federal Republic of Germany focuses its special attention on three sets of problems of world-wide co-operation, namely, the strengthening of the international order and its institutions; the improvement of international economic relations in the spirit of partnership and solidarity; and concrete contributions to detente and disarmament with a view to ensuring a lasting peace. It does so in the awareness of, and with respect for, the expectations, the wishes, the hopes and longings of the people of the German nation and all other nations. All our endeavors are ultimately aimed at enhancing the welfare of each individual human being.
86.	This idea leads us to a central aspect of the United Nations work to which this General Assembly should also devote its full attention. I mean the question of individual human rights, of the protection of the individual within the community, and I should like to warn against the illusion that it would suffice to guard the outward order by outward means against war and destruction. What we need is not just the formal recognition of human rights but also their universal acceptance and application so as to endow the outward measures for the preservation of peace with inner firmness and the power of conviction.
87.	These are elementary rights which must be respected and applied all over the world: in Europe and I mean all parts of Europe less than on other continents.
88.	We expect that the entry into force of the two International Covenants on Human Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI)] which the Federal Republic of Germany ratified in December 1973 will spark off fresh impulses.
89.	As a new member of the Commission on Human Rights, we want to co-operate responsibly in that body's efforts to give effect to human rights. We want to help and do our best to ensure that the individual shall be protected both from arbitrary treatment by the State and from want, and that population groups shall be protected from discrimination on racial, religious, political and other grounds.
90.	We welcome the decision of the Commission on Human Rights and its bodies to prepare studies on the subject of self-determination. The rights of self-determination is a regulative principle to be applied not only in the sphere of decolonization or to one particular continent but in all parts of the world.
91.	Self-determination and human rights are the central issues at stake also in southern Africa. The problems of decolonization and the elimination of racial discrimination in that region will again be occupying the attention of this General Assembly. We have left no doubt about our attitude; we demand that any remaining colonialism be eliminated. We condemn all forms of racial discrimination. We can note today with satisfaction that since the last session of the General Assembly fundamental changes have begun.
92.	We welcome Portugal's historic decision to recognize the independence of Guinea-Bissau and to open the road to independence for Mozambique and Angola. We see in this a confirmation of our view that courage, energy and wisdom can solve these problems too.
93.	The guarantee of individual human rights, the total ban on racism in any form or place, and the achievement of the self-determination of nations are tasks which my people, prompted not the least by its own historic experience, would like to help to accomplish sincerely and energetically.
94.	In his treatise Of Eternal Peace, written in 1795, the German philosopher Immanuel Kant, whose two hundred and fiftieth birthday we celebrate this year, drew up principles for international co-operation. These universal aims are also pursued by the United Nations. The principles which this Organization established for international coexistence almost three decades ago are today sure of world-wide recognition. However, white solemn declarations and resolutions are a good thing, we must do more. It will be the task of the General Assembly at the present session to give practical impetus, to point the way for our future work, so that by concrete measure seven if they are only small steps ahead we come nearer to achieving the aims of the United Nations. At the end of this session of the General Assembly we shall be judged by the progress we have made along this path.
Sir, my first words will be to offer you my personal congratulations and those of my country on your election to the distinguished office of President of the General Assembly and to tell you of the hopes this gives us for the success and the efficacy of our work.
105.	A few months ago, in this very Hall, you participated actively in the special session on raw materials and development. Your election to the presidency of this twenty-ninth session rightly confirms the importance of the role you have played, and since virtually all international relations now fall within the realm of our debates, it provides you with an arena commensurate with your abilities and experience as a statesman. In honoring you, the community of nations is also honoring your country, Algeria. Everyone can understand why France has special reasons to welcome this.
106.	I should also like to pay a special tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Benites, who had the rare privilege during the past 12 months of presiding over two sessions of the Assembly, during which he displayed outstanding qualities as a statesman and jurist and was thus able to crown most prestigiously a career that had been so closely linked to the work of our Organization for so many years.
107.	Lastly, I should like to greet Mr. Kurt Wald heim, with whom I have enjoyed a longstanding friendship. I should like to tell him of the trust and high esteem in which he is held by the French Government for his tireless efforts and for the competence and effectiveness he has shown in carrying out his extremely important and difficult tasks.
108.	This is the first time that I have had the honor of speaking on behalf of France before this Assembly, a privileged forum in which to recognize that there is a basic truth which characterizes the modern world and will dominate our common destiny with increasing severity, regardless of the degree of development or the political philosophies of the societies to which we belong.
109.	In this "little corner of the universe" -to quote Pascal- on this earth which the human eye has been able to contemplate in its entirety for the first time in its history a blue ball, an oasis of life in the blackness of space, a planet which scientific and technological progress has shrunk and at the same time unified by subjecting it to accelerated and profound change men, peoples and States arc dependent on each other and are becoming increasingly interdependent. The death knell will sound for everyone it we fail to appreciate this interdependence, if selfishness, fanaticism, the lust for power and domination threaten the possibilities for a sincere effort to seek together gradual and well-balanced solutions to the difficulties of our times, difficulties which our very progress only serves to accentuate.
110.	The fine name of the United Nations thus takes on renewed significance. The enemy that we must confront together is underdevelopment; it is the tragedy of poverty and hunger which the past year, alas, has shown to be distressingly present; it is the turmoil that inflation is causing in international economic relations; it is disorder, inequality and injustice in all their forms; it is the remnants of racial discrimination; it is everything that still exists to hinder the full recognition of and respect for the rights of the individual and the rights of peoples.
111.	Need 1 stress before this Assembly of nearly 140 nations-and I doubt that anyone can remain indifferent to a reminder of the great universalis! traditions of my country and the message it brought to the world almost two centuries ago that France, with the legacy of the French Revolution, is determined to strengthen the liberal nature of its diplomacy, to be in the vanguard of the peaceful struggle to give the world greater liberty, greater equality and greater fraternity?
112.	I should like to recall here the words spoken by the President of the French Republic last June when the Paris diplomatic corps was presented to him:
"This change signifies, lastly, that France, reaffirming and emphasizing her liberal mission, will do everything in her power to contribute to the dawning of a new era in international relations based on mutual esteem and respect and on a spirit of understanding and liberty, and, Under pressure from the peoples of the world, to ensure that the bastions of constraint and intolerance are toppled. She thus hopes to introduce into relations among States a greater measure of simplicity, trust and, may I venture to say, optimism."
113.	The essence of the "liberal" philosophy which France advocates and which must, in our opinion, be applied by everyone to international relations is this: that order and justice are in no way contradictory but, rather, are complementary; that only progress towards political and economic order, coupled with consideration for the interests of each State, is likely to guarantee our international society the minimum of stability without which there can be no lasting progress for anyone.
114.	This joint effort and the transformation it entails must, of course, be made without losing sight of the ultimate goal of our Organization. The intention to ensure peace and security by gradually eliminating the causes of conflict, whether political or economic in nature, must be matched by the constant concern to eliminate any desire for, or any possibility of, not only conflict but even confrontation.
115.	The two basic principles which my country long ago initiated and advocated -namely, detente and cooperation - must therefore be implemented more and more at the international level.
116.	In the midst of the alarming turmoil of today's world, it is sometimes difficult to perceive practical ways of implementing these principles. However, a closer look reveals a few breaches in the wall, a few rays of light of unmistakable brightness. We are living in a world of light and shadow. Perhaps it might be useful for me to state how France and the French Government currently view the causes for concern and the reasons for hope.
117.	You will not be surprised if first, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, I turn my eyes to Europe. As current President of the Council of the European Economic Community, I can testify to the aspiration of our peoples gradually to organize themselves so that from their age old civilization there can emerge little by little a new political organization based on pluralism but capable also of unifying what must be unified.
118.	This organization of Europe involves, first and foremost, for my country and for its partners in the Community, the creation in the western part of our continent of a coherent entity that will be capable of confronting the problems of our time; one that will be able to make a genuine contribution to detente and cooperation which are so necessary for our world if it is to survive; and, I might say, one that will serve as a model. The task begun nearly 25 years ago, right after a war which we decided would be the last, is not a simple one. But the leaders of our countries are determined not to miss the rendezvous with destiny which history has scheduled for our generation.
119.	That is why you will hear the voice of the European Economic Community becoming more and more distinct. It will speak the language of peace, justice and reconciliation. For, although this Community must of necessity actively pursue its own development, it cannot and it never would wish to turn in upon itself. By virtue of its mission and by necessity as well, the Community is open to the world, alive to the hopes and needs of the underprivileged, aware of its responsibilities in international balance and progress. That is why it intends, through concrete and innovative action, to make its contribution to the necessary effort to restore order to economic, financial and, hence, political relations among the countries of the globe.
120.	The Community is faithful to its traditional friendships, first among which is its friendship with the United States of America and Canada, a friendship which is even stronger now that it is yet better balanced and which is constant and indispensable to peace. And yet it does not forget the role that geography and history have allocated to it in the Mediterranean and in Africa, nor the close ties it has maintained with the Soviet Union and all the countries of Eastern Europe, whose contribution to our civilization is so important and with which we hope to foster genuine detente in the Old World. In this spirit we are taking part, as you know, in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, well aware of the scope of the undertaking and thus of the need to work towards the desired goal with great patience and wisdom.
121.	Another source of comfort and confidence in the future stems from a new and important step our Organization has taken towards its goal of universal representation, which we are now close to achieving. We are happy to welcome in our midst during this twenty-ninth session the representatives of Bangladesh, Grenada and GuineaBissau.
122.	After the trials that marked its birth, Bangladesh, despite serious economic difficulties, courageously is embarking on the path that should lead to reconciliation and cooperation on the subcontinent. May the efforts made by the States concerned achieve the results that we all are hoping for.
123.	There are two reasons why we can be pleased with the decolonization that is under way in the Portuguese Territories of Africa: first of all, because it has come about in connexion with a return to democracy in a country that is a friend of France, and secondly, because it is being done for the benefit of a whole group of courageous peoples that have long had many reasons to ask themselves why they were deprived of the independence which their neighbors enjoyed.
124.	I should like to hail the delegation of the Republic of GuineaBissau and convey to it our best wishes and congratulations. I should also like to pay a tribute to its members and to the representatives of the new Portuguese Government, a tribute that the political wisdom evidenced during the recent fruitful negotiations in Algiers rightly deserves. The European Economic Community, deeply committed to the values of the democracy on which it is founded, can only welcome any agreements which result in the practical application of the principles of selfdetermination on the continent of Africa. It feels that recognition of these principles will soon be extended to Mozambique and then to Angola. It welcomes in particular the agreement that was just concluded at Lusaka.
125.	Allow me to add at this point that France, which was one of the first Powers to foster self determination for many countries that are now influential Members of our Organization, is currently completing its own endeavors in this domain by preparing, with the agreement of the freely elected leaders of the Comoros, the accession to independence of these islands. The French delegation will in a few weeks be pleased to give further information which will emerge from the bill providing for an early referendum in the Comoro Archipelago.
126.	Other aspects of the world situation are, however, more disturbing.
127.	The situation in Africa is still troubled by tensions and the injustices which persist in the southern part. I would like to record once again here France's complete disapproval of the policy of apartheid. Furthermore, France regrets that the efforts made by our Organization to begin a dialog with the Government in Pretoria with a view to leading Namibia to self-determination and independence have remained fruitless.
128.	The situation in the Middle East is still marked by dangerous uncertainty. Following upon the tragic events which have taken place since our last session, disengagement agreements have been concluded thanks to the wisdom of the parties to the conflict and to the tireless diplomacy of the Secretary of State of the United States. These agreements and the stabilized situation on the battlefield, thanks to the control of the United Nations, are the first encouraging steps. However, we must not permit the momentum of peace to grind to a halt. The basic problems have not been settled. The situation is still precarious and it is therefore imperative that the negotiations should be resumed so that an equitable settlement can be reached as soon as possible, one that can be endorsed by the international community, that is to say, the Security Council.
129.	France for its part is still in favor of a settlement based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967), confirmed by its resolution 338 (1973), which provide for Israel's withdrawal from the occupied territories, as well as for commitments to peace giving each State the right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries.
130.	France believes it is high time for the international community to recognize the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, which this settlement should take into account. It is ready to contribute to the quest for a settlement based exclusively on the genuine interests of the peoples of the region and acceptable to the parties concerned -each and every one of them- among which my country is far from forgetting Israel.
131.	Although the crisis which broke out in Cyprus on 15 July and which was singularly exacerbated on 14 August had the highly positive effect of promoting a return to democracy in Greece -and I would like in passing to pay a tribute to the courageous efforts of Mr. Caramanlis- it is yet one more example of the serious difficulties we face this year.
132.	In the first place, the crisis concerns the United Nations which, after trying to promote a settlement to the conflict by sending an international force to Cyprus in 1964 and more recently by sponsoring enlarged talks between the communities, must now do everything in its power to prevent the crisis from deteriorating and to facilitate a speedy settlement.
133.	It is for the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in this matter, which it did as the tragic events unfolded by adopting resolutions that my country helped to draft, as was its duty. We remain convinced that respect for these resolutions by the parties concerned is still the indispensable basis for an equitable settlement.
134.	Troubled by this dispute and anxious to restore harmony in Cyprus and between two countries linked to the European Economic Community by the same tie, the nine members of the Community have felt it to be their duty, during the course of several meetings, to add their efforts to those of the Security Council.
135.	The most serious problem in Cyprus today is, without question, that of the refugees. We feel that permitting these people to return to their homes freely is consistent with both justice and public international law. We therefore believe that we should make an urgent appeal on this point in the hope of preventing the inception of another tragic refugee problem such as those which, unfortunately, we have already had, which are poisoning the international atmosphere. The problem in Cyprus can be resolved only by negotiation, without recourse to force. In this respect, we consider the talks now under way between the leaders of the island's two communities to be encouraging. I hope that these talks will pave the way, if the necessary gestures are forthcoming, for the negotiations that we should like to see started among Greece, Turkey and Cyprus, countries to which we are bound by longstanding ties of friendship.
136.	There is another region where war continues to wreak havoc in various but no less cruel ways, and that is SouthEast Asia. We welcomed the Paris agreements on VietNam and the hope that they engendered. Can it be said today that those agreements are really being respected? I am fully aware of the difficulties encountered by each of the parties; but how can one fail to hope that they will have the strength to overcome the legacy of the past and ultimately to achieve peace with understanding and reconciliation?
137.	Faced with these highly contrasting pictures, we can probably say that at least the danger of world confrontations involving the fate of all mankind seems to be less threatening than it was a few years ago.
138.	Detente is still fragile. The protective net that it could cast still hangs too slack. Detente obviously remains -and will long remain - linked to a sustained defense effort.
139.	France, for its part has, over the past 15 years, halved the proportion of its gross national product destined for military expenditure. But France has not neglected the need to ensure its security and independence by the means that others have already adopted. As a country that was the battlefield of two world wars, France is profoundly aware of the duty incumbent upon it to be capable of defending its independence. Having noted the refusal, and perhaps even the inability, of the greatest Powers to renounce their nuclear weapons, France has resolved, to its regret, to acquire them itself.
140.	We too have had to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere, which, in terms of number and size, can in no way be compared with the tests previously carried out by others in the same field. We went ahead with our tests only when we were sure that they would cause no harm; and this was verified by our own controls and by those of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. We have now reached a stage in our nuclear technology that makes it possible for us to continue our program by underground testing, and we have taken steps to do so as early as next year.
141.	If, given the present state of the world, no country can renounce the means of ensuring its defense, it is obviously in the general interest gradually to lighten the burden necessarily imposed by the arms race on our economies and, by the same token, on the opportunities for development. Therefore the French Government wishes solemnly to reaffirm that it is prepared to participate immediately in any undertaking designed to lead to genuine disarmament, that is to say, to the effective, gradual and controlled destruction of all existing arsenals. It was in this spirit that France gave its support to the idea of convening a world conference which, if it were to include the five nuclear Powers, might create the conditions under which real progress could be made and might strengthen the foundations for the lasting peace that is the highest aspiration of all peoples.
142.	After this brief review of the world picture as it is today, I should like now to come to what is doubtless the basic issue. I refer to the present state of international economic relations and the outlook for those relations. This vital problem does not appear on our agenda, but is should be, quite clearly, the focal point of our concerns, all the more so since the situation which prompted the convening of a special session of the General Assembly this spring has deteriorated markedly in the last four months.
143.	Insecurity is spreading far and wide. The most striking example of this is inflation, which is becoming rampant and to varying degrees affects every country with its attendant woes. All the elements of a world crisis are already present.
144.	The developing countries, those which are not producers of oil or of important raw materials, are obviously those most affected by the rising prices of the products necessary to economic activity. But the majority of the industrialized countries have also been seriously affected, at least for the time being, There are only two or three major countries among us that are sure of having the resources indispensable to the survival of their economies and their populations, come what may, because those resources exist in their own territories. But although such States, unlike the others, do not have to fear strangulation, none, I repeat, none of the Members of our Organization can remain blind to the serious threats to the mechanisms of the world economy, to the flow of production and trade, and therefore, ultimately, to world peace.
145.	The events we are witnessing are, of course, not lacking in positive features. The general redistribution of trump cards held by the highly industrialized nations and the developing nations begun by still disorganized courses of action will be described in history books as a decisive turning point of the era in which we live. This will be true if this redistribution proves itself eventually to be a transition to a new world order, better balanced and more just, and the prelude to an original and fruitful common effort.
146.	Such a redistribution was both necessary and inevitable. My country, which in the past has constantly warned against the dangers inherent in the progressive deterioration of the terms of trade and in the growing gap between the industrial societies and the less favored countries, is the first to recognize that it would have been unhealthy and, ultimately, detrimental to everyone to cling to a system of inadequate remuneration for basic commodities. The prolongation of this system was doubtless one of the causes of the recent price rises.
147.	This puts me in an even better position to say frankly to this Assembly that none of us can allow himself to ignore the urgency and gravity of the problem which the somewhat random nature of those increases presents not only to my country but, I believe, to all of us. Our world community can withstand the severe disruption of equilibrium that has just occurred only if we make a combined effort, on the one hand, to halt the trends towards a breakdown that are beginning to emerge, and, on the other, to achieve a new world order based on mutual consultation and cooperation.
148.	In the spirit of the Charter, which for 30 years has encouraged us to cooperate in order to ensure economic and social progress for our peoples, appreciable efforts have already been made along such lines. The texts adopted on 1 May by the General Assembly during the sixth special session [resolutions 3201 (SVI) and 3202 fSF/j] are in keeping with this tradition of the Organization. Their significance and importance, I feel, lie not so much in the Program of Action that was outlined as in the clear and precise affirmation of the interdependence of all the elements of the world economy.
149.	That the growth of the world economy is currently being compromised and with it the opportunities for development is so obvious as to make it superfluous to stress the need to open up new vistas in cooperation among our States. Together we must define the main lines along which the world economy must operate. In this connexion, the right of the third world countries not only to receive a fairer share of the fruits of economic and world progress but also to influence the choices on which this activity depends cannot be contested. I would add to this the hope that international aid, which is still indispensable, will gradually give way to structural reforms in which the less favored countries should have a voice.
150.	Although the very great majority of the States that we represent have no intention of withdrawing into themselves, they reject the mechanisms of laissez faire, which are erratic and merciless to the weak, and my country, which has championed international cooperation for many long years now, cannot but give them our complete approval on this point. The march towards a better order is, however, incompatible with disregard for economic realities and laws, the solidarity which unites consumer and producer, and, especially, the basic consideration that no one, no matter how powerful he may be, can be sure of gaining lasting advantages by means of unilateral decisions.
151.	Within a country, when one group in society tries to increase its share of the national income and when, on the other hand, other groups try to prevent their share from being reduced, inflation becomes rampant and restores, after a fashion, an often unjust and precarious balance between the claims of each group. Today this is also what is happening in the world's economy. The free rein given to market trends, the exploitation of strong positions, and the setting up of a sliding scale mechanism or of automatic indexing can lead only to a speeding up of the inflationary spiral. Among nations, as within each nation, nothing can take the place of dialog and negotiation among all the parties concerned. The natural framework for this dialog is, of course, the United Nations, and one can only regret that six months after the sixth special session no serious discussion on setting the world's economy in order has been initiated.
152.	The United Nations, and not only its specialized bodies, has a general competence in this matter and is particularly qualified since it both anticipates and reflects the world community of the future to arrive at a truly "integrated" concept of our planet's economy. But this is a tremendous task and the adjustments to be made are numerous and difficult. The "global" approach within the United Nations must be supplemented by efforts at cooperation and consultation on a regional scale which should, of course, take place within an international framework.
153.	It is in this spirit that the member countries of the European Economic Community have, as representatives know, just embarked on what we both call the EuropeanArab dialog with the 20 countries of the League of Arab States. Of course the undertaking is still in its early stages and it would be premature to specify its goals, but I think it is quite natural for me to mention it today in this forum, especially since you, Mr. President, have played and are continuing to play an important and even decisive role in the conception and application of this undertaking.
154.	The new type of cooperation that we are trying to establish between the two groups of countries does set an example and is promising. It is a question of working together, with all the participants on an equal footing, towards social and economic progress, towards entente and rapprochement between the member countries of the European Economic Community and the member countries of the League of Arab States. It is also understood that the undertaking must not interfere with the interests of any country. On the contrary it must, when the time comes, extend its benefits beyond the European Arab group, especially to the regions close to Africa and the Mediterranean.
155.	My hope is that it will be possible to present some results of this undertaking at the forthcoming session of the General Assembly. However, it might be useful, if our partners in the League of Arab States would agree, to inform the United Nations before that time of what developments may have emerged.
156.	It is in the same spirit of cooperation that the European Economic Community participated in the ministerial conference which took place at Kingston, during which a fruitful dialog emerged between the countries of the Community and the Caribbean, African and Pacific States on the major political trends of their future association. The conference also set an example. Innovative formula were introduced which, I have no doubt, will help to create a new style in relations between industrialized and developing nations, and even in the drafting of a new strategy for development.
157.	The European Economic Community and the United Nations are quite clearly called upon to cooperate more and more often. This is why my delegation, speaking on behalf of the Community [A 19701], has asked for an item to be included on the agenda for this session relating to the granting to the Community of observer status within the Organization.
158.	Another example of this cooperation is quite obviously the Community's offer to participate, together with other States, in the urgent measures advocated by the General Assembly at its sixth special session.
159.	Let me say a word about the Organization to conclude my statement. The Charter assigns it the mission of maintaining peace and contributing to the emergence of a world that is more stable and more equitable. Let us not be complacent; the distance we must still travel before this ideal becomes a reality is great. But let us learn to apply to ourselves the severe judgments we sometimes bring to bear on the shortcomings and plodding of the United Nations. The Charter in itself possesses no magic formula, and no change could give it one. The work of the Organization depends primarily on the determination of the Governments represented here.
160.	One cannot reproach the United Nations for having failed to discern the great issues at stake in today's world or for failing with respect to the great questions of the day because of a lack of imagination or indifference. The problems of development, hunger, the sea and population have been dealt with in four world conferences held under the auspices of the United Nations this year. Let us note, however, that the conclusions drawn from these major international meetings sometimes leave us dissatisfied. This is not only because it is difficult to reconcile so many interests and differing viewpoints, even when goodwill is present. It is, perhaps, also because our methods and our procedures could be improved by concentrating on the most important issues and on the search for effective action.
161.	While these international meetings have the advantage of exposing all points of view, the size and number of the meetings pose problems of organization, method and procedure that are quite different from those the smaller, earlier conferences had & solve. There is a great temptation to use certain stratagems in order to finish more quickly, and it is noticeable that States are in no hurry to put into practice recommendations that have not evolved through the conventional process. Let us then try to act in concert genuinely, in the sole interest of the common good. We can do so within the context of the present Charter, whose potential could be more fully realized.
162.	We are living in an age of transition. All around us we find hope, efforts being expended, and the first stages of entente and union, but at the same time we see opposition, and conflict. Which trend will finally prevail? The one that will inevitably lead to our organizing ourselves and unifying ourselves or the one that will lead, albeit temporarily I hope, to hostility, violence and division? Which will prevail?
163.	The future of this world never before so conscious of its potential unity, never before so torn by real divisions is still uncertain. The task of our Organization is to guide it in the right direction, but that is also and primarily the task of each of the States represented here. The choice is either organization and reason, or passion, violence, rivalry and confrontation, and eventually, chaos and misfortune for us all. The simple statement of this choice is sufficient to explain our determination and our faith in the emergence of universal reconciliation.
Mr. President, I thank you for calling upon me at this late hour when the prospect of lunch must be so much more alluring than the thought of another indigestible speech. I can only undertake that I shall not be over-long or take too much of your time.
203.	I must, however, begin by offering the congratulations of the United Kingdom to you, Mr. President, on your election to the presidency of the Assembly, especially as your country has played such a large and important role in the work of the Organization, and we are all looking forward to a period of constructive work under your guidance.
204.	Like others who have spoken, we also welcome two new Members from the Commonwealth Bangladesh and Grenada as well as Guinea- Bissau, the latest country to achieve its independence.
205.	This is the first time I have had the honor of addressing the Assembly and I regret it will not be possible for me to stay after lunchtime. I must invoke the newcomer's privilege of making some remarks, with your permission, about our hopes and aspirations for this Organization.
206.	I start by giving an assurance that it is the firm policy of my Government to give all possible support to the United Nations. We do so because we believe that this body is the best forum in which to come to grips with many of the daunting problems that face mankind.
207.	It should not need an energy crisis, a population crisis, a raw-material crisis, to tell us that the world is shrinking and making us more interdependent. These are by now the cliches of our perorations; we no longer need to prove the point. Yet when action is needed we still do not behave as though we believe it. To say this implies no criticism of this Organization itself.
208.	Too often we use the United Nations as a whipping-boy for our own inability to act in concert in response to a common problem. The weaknesses in international co-operation which exist today are not United Nations weaknesses. The responsibility rests with us, the Member nations, that have willed that the United Nations should work on the basis of the lowest common denominator of agreement between the Member States. This negative consensus for that is what it is sometimes means little more than a wafer-thin formula to paper over our differences without any real meeting of minds. Such a consensus cannot be construed as universal approval. Indeed, because it happens in this way, there are occasions when the words in which we express this negative consensus have no chance of being translated into action because the action proposed does not correspond with realities. 
209.	What we need in order to be able to act together is positive consensus: a determined effort to reach common ground and an equal determination to work together to overcome the political and economic threats to our peoples.
210.	I do not underestimate the difficulties. Our interests are as varied as the nations we represent. But in the past, diverse nations have successfully sunk their differences and combined to face a common enemy. We face common enemies today: inflation, recession and poverty. Let us unite to defeat them.
211.	But if we are to achieve this positive consensus for which I ask, we need not only sound policies; we need the attitude of mind expressed by the then Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Willy Brandt, when he spoke to this Assembly at the twenty-eighth session and said:
".. .we have not come here to use the United Nations as a wailing-wall ... or to make claims we know cannot be met here in any case, Rather have we come to assume our share in the responsibility for world affairs on the basis of our convictions and within the framework of our possibilities" [2128th meeting, para. 6],
It is in that spirit that the United Kingdom Government is determined to bring to this Assembly the political will to make a responsible contribution to solving the problems before us. This will be the evidence of our pledge of support.
212.	Before I came here I took the precaution of reading the deliberations of the preceding session of the General Assembly. In many speeches then as indeed is the case of speeches on this occasion the recurring theme was the progress of detente. Mr. Kissinger referred then [2124th meeting] to a commonality of interests between the United States and the Soviet Union in establishing a broad, web of constructive relationships. Mr. Gromyko said [2126th meeting] and he referred to it again today that we had achieved a shift from an extended period of tension in the world to business-like co-operation. He knows and the Soviet Union knows that since I assumed my present office it has been my firm desire that the United Kingdom should play a full and positive part in fostering such "business-like co-operation" in our bilateral contacts.
213.	On the level of multilateral negotiations, the talks in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and about mutual and balanced force reductions have been moving, to put it politely, at a very slow pace. I hope we can shift both sets of talks into a higher gear so that we can report some positive results before this Assembly meets next.
214.	The talks in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in particular are given sufficient good will and understanding for the concerns and interests of all the participants ripe for an early conclusion. We have always recognized that the talks on mutual and balanced force reductions would be much more complex and long-term. But our aim in both sets of negotiations should be the same, to achieve in Europe an order which would allow our people to live in security and co-operation and at the same time reduce the crippling burden of arms spending.
215.	It would be a triumph indeed if Europe, which too often in this century has been the center of inhumanity and senseless conflict, could set the pattern for a new order of international relations free of war and the threat of war. Fortunately, it is some years since the threat of war between East and West was a major preoccupation of the United Nations; but the complex of new and interrelated problems are in their different ways as serious a threat to us all.
216.	This transfer of our attention has, of course, been brought about by massive and unprecedented increases in the price of oil. On the surface but only on the surface it might appear that there is a. natural difference of interest between those countries which would like to see oil prices reduced and those which wish to keep them at their present levels or indeed to increase them. That is not so. It is in the interests of both producer and consumer alike that the prices of commodities and of manufactured goods should not chase each other upwards in a never ending spiral.
217.	In the meantime, even if, as we hope, prices will not remain at their present peak, we have to face the problem of how to adapt the world's monetary and economic systems to accommodate the vast oil revenues now accruing to certain countries some of which cannot immediately absorb them.
218.	The objective is clear and quite straightforward. It is to marry the revenue of the oil-producing countries with the' technology of the developed countries, so that the increased production and world trade which would result from such a marriage would be used primarily to benefit the developing countries of the world which need them most. Our knowledge of international monetary mechanisms is sufficiently advanced to enable us to do this and to do it in a way that would be fair both to the oil-producing countries themselves and to those that need the resources. New techniques will be required, but it is by no means impossible to create them if there is the political will and an understanding of the problem.
219.	The unprecedented world-wide economic boom of recent years led to higher commodity prices prior to the recent increases in world oil prices. In turn these higher prices for raw materials found their way into the price of manufactured goods, and the resulting inflation coincided with a period in which the Bretton Woods system for controlling international monetary relationships fell into disarray. Collective action is now urgent if we are to ensure that the large surplus oil funds are used constructively to maintain demand and the level of world trade, because inevitably the surpluses of the oil producers are matched by deficits on the part of the consumers.
220.	In our view it will be an error which will have global consequences if the oil consumers try individually to eliminate their oil-induced deficits in advance of international agreement on the disposal and investment of the oil producers. That way lies general recession, increasing poverty and social unrest The surplus must be taken into account. 
Mr. President, I have already had occasion to congratulate you on your unanimous election, and also to welcome the three new Members to our Organization. On the present occasion I am happy to convey to the Secretary- General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, our appreciation of his ceaseless endeavors in the cause of peace and in the fulfillment of the principles and purposes of the Charter. We are fortunate indeed in having him as our Secretary-General today, when his views are needed on collective and co-operative action to tackle the diverse and urgent problems facing mankind at present.
73.	In the 29 years of its existence the United Nations has come to represent the overwhelming majority of the peoples and nations of the world. While this is indeed a matter for satisfaction, it is the few remaining areas of darkness that command our attention. I refer to the flagrant violation of the human rights of the majority of its people by the Government of South Africa, to the blatant refusal of South Africa to vacate Namibia, and to the continuance of the illegal racist regime in Zimbabwe. These continued affronts to the conscience of mankind are nagging reminders that, as long as some members of the human race are in bondage, the others are not wholly free. In our view, this Assembly should therefore consider more effective means of compelling these regimes practicing racism to respond positively to the collective will of the world represented by the United Nations.
74.	It is a matter of particular satisfaction to us to welcome the new wind of change in Portugal. Guinea-Bissau has attained independence and world recognition by admission to our Organization. We welcome the installation of an interim Government in Mozambique representing the will and aspirations of its people, and we look forward to welcoming Mozambique soon in our Organization as an independent and sovereign member. This is an irreversible trend and we are confident that the people of Angola will also win their freedom soon in conditions of peace and honor. India is appreciative of the decision of the present Government of Portugal to liquidate its colonial empire. This decision will enable Portugal to assume its proper place in the world of today, a place befitting its distinct history and rich culture. I am glad to say that Portugal and India have decided to re-establish diplomatic relations and to develop cultural relations between the two countries.
75.	Now I should like to turn my attention to the areas of conflict. Recent events in Cyprus remind us of the fatal danger of neglecting, until too late,, the potential causes of conflict. In 1960 we saw the freeing of Cyprus from colonial rule and its birth as a sovereign, independent and non-aligned State, whose bi national character was guaranteed by some external Powers. In retrospect, this curious system of external guarantees has proved to be unwise in principle and self-defeating in practice. Recently, one external intervention led to another and a threat to world peace and security was thus created. It is the people of Cyprus who suffered greatly as a consequence and all our sympathies are with them in this moment of crisis and uncertainty in their lives. But the fact that all States without exception have declared their respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of non-aligned Cyprus is a good augury, for it provides the essential elements for a durable structure of peace and a return to constitutionality. We welcome the negotiations taking place directly between the leaders of the two communities in Cyprus which have been arranged with the assistance of the Secretary-General. We hope that their talks will also encompass future internal constitutional arrangements, and that agreement can be reached at an early date so that the withdrawal of foreign forces now in Cyprus becomes possible. The non-aligned countries have already declared their willingness to be available for any assistance that they can render.
76.	The situation in the Middle East may freeze into another period of neglect, if the momentum towards a solution of the basic problems slows down. Only the rapid and full implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) can lead to a just and enduring peace. The restoration of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people is another cornerstone in the structure of a lasting peace. Israel's refusal to vacate Arab territories captured as a result of aggression is a continuing provocation to the Arab States and negates the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. If the catastrophe of another war in the Middle East is to be avoided, Israel should end its aggression and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people should be restored to them.
77.	The war in Cambodia shows no signs of ending, which is a matter of deep concern and anguish for us. In South Viet Nam, violations of the Paris Agreement continue to take place, with the legacies of external interference persisting and jeopardizing the prospects of early implementation of the provisions of the Agreement. How much longer are the peoples of IndoChina destined to suffer the ravages of war with all its frightful weapons? In South Viet Nam international efforts should be directed to the fulfillment of the constitutional provisions of the Paris Agreement. The people of Cambodia should be allowed to determine their future free from external interference and in conditions of peace and security. In Laos we welcome the formation of the Provisional Government of National Union, which is a testimony to the wisdom and statesmanship of the Laotian- leaders. We hope that this development, which has terminated several years of hostilities, will create conditions of peace and progress for the Laotian people.
78.	In our part of the world, I am happy to report that tangible progress has been made in creating an atmosphere of good neighborliness. The Simla Agreement of 3 July 1972 provides a good and common basis for India and Pakistan to turn away from a period of confrontation and conflict to one of peace and co-operation. We have made special efforts to implement the Simla Agreement and, in spite of unfortunate delays, the two countries have concluded some agreements designed to normalize relations. The latest agreement signed at Islamabad on 14 September 1974 provides for the restoration of communications and travel facilities, and we hope that the progress achieved so far will lead to more agreements in other fields and to an era of peace and prosperity for the peoples of India and Pakistan.
79.	We are actively engaged with our other neighbors to develop and extend bilateral and mutually beneficial co-operation in newer fields. The maritime boundary agreement with Sri Lanka is a significant example. Similarly, mutually satisfactory agreements on borders and other long-pending matters have been concluded with Indonesia, Burma and Bangladesh. Our relations with our other neighbors, Afghanistan, Bhutan and Nepal, are characterized by the spirit of mutual understanding and the desire to co-operate for our mutual benefit.
80.	Our underground peaceful nuclear explosive experiment of 18 May 1974 must be seen in the context of our endeavor, at the national level, to develop our natural resources and capacities to the fullest extent for the benefit of our people. The international community has long recognized that nuclear explosive technology can be of great value in the development process. The non-aligned countries had also stressed this in the Declaration adopted by the Third Conference of Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Countries, held at Lusaka from 8 to 10 September 1970. We have no intention of making nuclear weapons. I wish to reiterate once again in this forum our firm and consistent policy to use nuclear energy and technology solely for peaceful purposes.
81.	I should now like to say a few words about the areas of challenge that face the world community. Since the end of the last world war, the principal challenge to mankind has been the discovery of the basis for lasting world peace and security. In recent years, we have seen the evolution of a period of detente and a general relaxation of tensions among the great Powers. We welcome this development as a positive contribution to removing dangers of global conflict. However, the process of detente between the great Powers will have more meaning for the rest of the world if it takes into account the interests of all countries and if the benefits of detente are used to meet the challenges that face mankind, especially disarmament and development.
82.	Disarmament has been the subject of continuous discussion in multilateral forums since the days of the League of Nations. But progress was slow, and the arms race entered a qualitatively new phase with the stockpiling of nuclear weapons to such an alarming extent that they are capable, if used, of destroying their targets five times over and obliterating all signs of modern civilization. India feels that nuclear dis-armament should receive the highest priority in our deliberations, for it provides the key not only to the prevention of wars of mass destruction but also to the release of resources for tackling what the Secretary-General has called the other "ancient enemies of mankind poverty, disease, natural disaster" [A/9601/Add.I]. Progress towards disarmament is possible only if nuclear-weapon States abjure all nuclear weapons and accept equal obligations with the rest of the world community. We support the early convening of a world disarmament conference after adequate preparation and with the participation of all States.
83.	The holding of the Caracas session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea was an event of outstanding importance. Significant progress was made, as nearly 150 countries worked to reconcile their interests, which were sometimes widely divergent. As a developing country with a long coast-line, India attaches special importance to this .Conference. With several years of preparatory work behind us, it. is our hope that further progress will be made towards an equitable and universally acceptable treaty on the law of the sea during the third session of the Conference to be held in Geneva next year.
84.	During this year there have been major changes in the international economic scene. This world body dealt with the problems of development not only in the sixth special session held earlier this year but also in the World Population Conference which has just concluded in Bucharest, and it will deal with them further in the World Food Conference which is to be held in November. We are particularly appreciative of the fact that for the first time population questions have been accepted as an integral part of the developmental process. We hope that the World Food Conference will be a first step in tackling, at the international level, an important problem which so far has been neglected by the international community.
85.	The problems of development will acquire ever greater urgency and importance with the rapid depletion of natural resources and the increasing population of the world. They are already assuming global proportions, and their effects will be felt everywhere. They cannot, be solved nationally or regionally, because there is already a growing and irreversible trend of interdependence among nations. Only global solutions can cope with global problems. Every problem today is virtually a world problem and calls for a world response.
86.	The earth's resources are finite, and so is its capacity to absorb wastes. The world is in the grip of economic forces that appear to be uncontrollable. There is rampant inflation as well as stagnation in production. These phenomena have aggravated an already iniquitous situation with extremes of poverty and wealth in the world. In some parts of the world there seem to be no limits to the appetite for consumption, while in other countries millions of people are short of even the essentials of simple and plain living^ such as food, clothing, housing and medicine. The future growth of the developing countries is at the mercy of the high world prices of fertilizers, fuel and industrial goods. What are the global options available in this grave economic situation? It is not enough for the affluent countries to confine their concern to monetary fluctuations. There is an imperative need to help the countries most seriously affected by the current economic crisis. Any long-term global balance between demand and supply and natural resources must take into account, first and foremost, the requirements of those countries.
87.	We welcome the statement of the Secretary- General in the thought-provoking introduction to his report that "it is an underlying assumption of the United Nations that no problem of human relations is insoluble [ibid.]. It is in that spirit that we view the decisions of the sixth special session which are designed to pave the way to a new international economic order. While we appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-General in trying to maintain the momentum generated by the special session, we note that he has himself pointed out that "failure to sustain international action and collective responsibility may easily put in question the actual survival of millions of people" [ibid.].
88.	An emergency operation has been entrusted to the Secretary-General to provide immediate practical assistance to the most seriously affected countries, which have been rendered unable to meet the mounting costs of their essential imports [resolution 3202 (S-VI), chap. X], The responsibility for their present predicament is clearly not their own; they have been reduced to this precarious situation by economic events outside their control. In recognition of this fact, the sixth special session decided that emergency measures were necessary for assisting these countries, and it also envisaged the necessity for medium-term assistance to them. However, we are disappointed at the offers received so far of help for these countries. If tragic consequences to many countries and general disillusionment as to the effectiveness of international co-operation are to be averted, assistance must be forthcoming quickly and in adequate measure.
89.	Perhaps at no time before in human history has mankind been confronted with problems of the present scope and scale. And at no time before has man been so conscious of the unity and common destiny of his own kind. Nor has he ever been in a better position than now to regulate his resources, his consumption and his environment in such a manner as to meet his material and spiritual needs. There is no forum more appropriate than the United Nations for meeting to the full extent the challenges facing us. There is no better time than the present, and the lead can only come from those who are blessed with the means to do so.
At the outset of my remarks, I wish to associate myself with all those who have expressed sorrow and sympathy at the disaster which has befallen Honduras.
213.	Next, a special word of congratulations to the new Members of the United NationsBangladesh, Guinea-Bissau and Grenada. The Jewish people, which was deprived of its independence for hundreds of years, is, perhaps more than any other, in a position to value the significance of national sovereignty and spiritual freedom. In the name of Israel and its people I wish them prosperity and progress.
214.	Likewise, I cannot refrain from extending my warm greetings to Portugal, which has chosen the path of decolonization and of its own liberation from the burdens of empire.
215.	And now, turning from those who have gained their freedom to those who have not, I am in duty bound, both from a human and a Jewish point of view, it draw the attention of this Assembly, and, thereby, that of world opinion, to the suffering and distress of a small Jewish community numbering 4,500 souls, all that is left of the ancient Jewish community of Syria, which is subjected to unceasing oppression.
216.	Human rights are indivisible, and the freedom of the individual concerns us all. I am "my brother's keeper": it is in this spirit of international solidarity that I express the hope that the Jewish community of Syria will, as an act of humanity, be finally allowed to go.
217.	In turning now to the situation of another Jewish community -the Jews of the Soviet Union, numbering more than 3 millionI voice the hope that the Soviet Government will recognize and respect the national rights of this Jewish group and permit those who so wish to leave for Israel and be reunited with their families and their people. The Jewish people, divided a? it is between East and West, has always been the first and principal victim of wars, both hot and cold, and is second to none in its yearning for peace and detente. Conflict with Powers great and small is not our desire, but we can neither keep silent nor rest until the right of every Jew to go to Israel is recognized.
218.	The Soviet Union, as a multinational State, cannot indeed it has no right to ignore the aspirations of members of the Jewish national group to full national life in their historic homeland. It is not possible to solve the problem of the rights of the Jewish people in the Soviet Union, a problem anomalous from the national point of view, by means anomalous in human and moral terms. The granting of permission to go to Israel to those who want to go will not only solve an agonizing Jewish problem which is unique in human history, but, I believe, will also provide the solution for a Soviet problem with which the Soviet Government has struggled for many years.
219.	In expressing appreciation for what has already been done, I appeal to the Soviet Government to show greater generosity, to cease harassing those who have applied to emigrate, to release the prisoners of Zion, to open the gates, and they will earn the praises of civilized men everywhere for their humanity.
220.	Our world is at a crossroads: on the one hand, affluence, waste and indifference; on the other, starvation, short expectation of life and untold suffering. Each of the States Members of the United Nations, and the Organization as a whole, must, as soon as possible, base its economic, technological and political cooperation on the concept of one world, all of whose parts and policies are interconnected. If not, the most gloomy of prophecies on the fate of humankind will be realized, and this at a time when man has reached the heights of scientific and technological advance. Unlimited resources to eliminate starvation and sickness are at hand. What is lacking is the goodwill, human responsibility and governmental understanding to establish a new international system which will advance mankind to lives of greater dignity and happiness, lives without war, lives of plenty and spiritual satisfaction. To this end it would be well to examine anew the existing international in order to see whether it is able to cope with these great and urgent tasks.
221.	Social justice is a concept which is no longer confined to the boundaries of States. Our world is now faced with stark alternatives: to proceed along the false path, whose end cannot be seen, of a widening gap between rich and poor nations; or to embark on constructive international cooperation.
222.	As Jawaharlal Nehru so wisely put it: "The law of life should not be the competition of acquisitiveness but cooperation, the good of each contributing to the good of all."
223.	The alternatives faced by our generation are cooperation or decline. {Let us cooperate. Israel, though small in size and limited in resources, and itself still in the stage of development, is doing its best to cope with the manifold problems of a poor and semiarid land, and with the integration of hundreds of thousands of refugees. Nevertheless it has in the past provided such assistance as it could to other developing countries in all continents in the fields of science, education and economic and social development, and will gladly extend such aid in the future.
224.	One year has passed since the Yom Kippur War -a bloody encounter started by Egypt and Syria, reinforced by contingents from other Arab States, and enjoying the material and political support of the Soviet Union. More than 2,500 Israeli soldiers lost their lives in that war, more than 12,000 Egyptians and more than 3,000 Syrians and others. Most of them died in the bloom of youth and left bereaved parents, widows and orphans behind them. Israeli prisoners were savagely maltreated in Syrian and Egyptian prisons. More than 40,000 men were wounded, and many permanently disabled. The agony of bereavement of the widows, of the orphans and of the disabled is shared equally by the peoples on both sides of the lines.
225.	Following this war the Security Council adopted resolution 338 (1973), paragraph 3 of which reads:
"The Security Council
"Decides that, immediately and concurrently with the ceasefire, negotiations shall start between the parties concerned under appropriate auspices aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in the Middle East."
226.	It is not to the credit of the Security Council that it was only in October 1973 -24 years after the signature in 1949 of the General Armistice Agreements between Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria- that it specifically called for peace negotiations. That, at any rate, was progress and it is better late than never. But why did so important and essential a resolution have to wait until the end of the sanguinary war of October last?
227.	The disengagement agreements between Israel and Egypt, and between Israel and Syria, also represent a measure of progress. Since the 1967 Arab Summit Conference in Khartoum, with its triple negatives -no peace, no recognition, no negotiations- this was a first positive step. It was taken in the light of the experience of the war, and as a result of the constructive initiative of the United States and of the remarkable efforts of its Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger.
228.	But here, too, the same grave question presents itself: why did that come so late, and why only after bloodshed? After all, partial arrangements could have been reached without war, and before the war, both in the Suez Canal area and on the Golan Heights. In 1971 Israel responded affirmatively to the American proposal for proximity talks for a partial agreement with Egypt, and there was no reason why, as time went on, we should not have responded in the same way to proposals for similar talks with the other neighboring States. It was the other side that rejected the proposal and thus killed that constructive initiative for no good reason. In the event we did finally have face-to-face talks, that is to say, something more than proximity talks, at the first session of the Geneva Conference, at the negotiations between Israel and Egypt at kilometer 101 on the CairoSuez road, and on the occasion of the signature of the agreement with Syria in Geneva. Why then should this have been done at the cost of tens of thousands of casualties on both sides?
229.	If further proof were required, the October War showed clearly that there is not, there cannot be, and there never will be, a military solution of the ArabIsrael conflict, which persists beyond all reason and beyond all political realism: a conflict which saps the very marrow from the bones of all the peoples of the area and, despite the extensive resources of our area, debilitates their economies and their societies.
230.	Let us look at the facts. In this war the aggressors enjoyed three marked advantages which, under normal circumstances, should have been decisive: first, overwhelming strength in manpower and modern sophisticated weaponry; secondly, initiative; and, thirdly, surprise. Yet despite these great advantages the citizen army of Israel rapidly overcame the effect of the surprise, halted the forward movement of the attacking forces and passed over to a bold counteroffensive which brought Israel troops well beyond the former ceasefire lines in the Golan Heights and into large areas to the west of the Suez Canal, thus surrounding the Egyptian Third Army. I do not think that any particular military expertise is required to realize what would have happened to the aggressors' forces if, at that stage, the Security Council had not hurriedly called for a ceasefire, which, of course, it did not do earlier, before it became clear that the wheel had turned in Israel's favor.
231.	That is the essential difference between an Israeli victory and an Arab victory. If the Arab armies had triumphed, the world would have witnessed an act of genocide, whereas the Arab defeat was limited to the field of battle, and in fact opened the window to the beginnings of reason and to a small step, a very small step, in the political sphere.
232.	If, despite the advantages which the Arab armies had in manpower, armaments, initiative and surprise, these were the results of the October War, what could another war bring, besides more victims, and more suffering? Another war like that would only create new complex problems the solution of which will be infinitely more difficult.
233.	I do not mention these things with joy, but with sorrow. I do not wish to exult in the Israeli victory nor to embarrass Egypt and Syria. On the contrary, at this time when it is the duty of us all to make a special effort to advance towards a political settlement, it is incumbent that all refrain from provocative statements and disparaging slogans. I recall these things only because I want to repeat, and to emphasize, that there can be no military solution to this pernicious conflict. Reinforcement of the armaments of the Arab countries might encourage new aggression but it cannot decide the issue in a new war.
234.	After the October War, there can again be no doubt that not a single one of the problems encompassed in the ArabIsraeli dispute can be solved by war, and that, in the same way, there is no problem, including the question of the independent identity of the Palestinians, which cannot be solved by sincere negotiations between the parties. Let us therefore do our utmost to ensure that the unnecessary war of Yom Kippur 1973 will be the last war ever to be fought between Arab and Israeli.
235.	Israel has naturally drawn its conclusions from the last war. But we wish to continue to progress along the political road, which opened after the war. However, if a new war is forced on us, we shall be ready. I hope and pray that our neighbors have also drawn conclusions from October 1973, and that they agree with us that it is time to finally abandon the course of armed force so as to devote their efforts consistently, patiently and seriously to the political option.
236.	The disengagement agreements between Israel and Egypt on the one hand and between Israel and Syria on the other, in which the emergency forces of the United Nations under the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral are playing a praiseworthy part, may provide a suitable opening. These agreements are not only military in character; they also have their political aspects.
237.	First, the very fact of negotiations, sometimes indirect and sometimes direct, is a political and psychological step forward for all those who desire peace in our area and in the world.
238.	Secondly, an emended period of tranquility at the fronts has also made a contribution to the creation of the new climate and also possibly of a new dynamic for a political solution.
239.	Thirdly, the disengagement agreements include the following paragraph:
"This agreement is not regarded by Egypt and Israel as a final peace agreement. It constitutes a first step toward a final, just and durable peace according to the provisions of Security Council resolution 338 (1973) and within the framework of the Geneva Conference."5
There is a similar paragraph in the IsraelSyria agreement.6
240.	But the disengagement agreements and mutual observance of the ceasefire are not enough. We must go forward with negotiations, without prior conditions, keeping constantly in mind the idea of peace and mutual tolerance in order to plant the seeds of trust which are vital for the creation of an atmosphere of conciliation, compromise and understanding.
241.	This objective is at cross purposes with the continuation of a state of belligerency, which not only contains within itself the dangers of renewal of hostilities, with all their horror and suffering, but also diverts the major part of the human resources and the wealth of the area to the buildup and maintenance of huge armies at the cost of its social and economic development. This useless aberration has already held back an entire generation, and its persistence will cause further suffering to millions.
242.	There is a historical paradox here. The Middle East is one of the richest areas of the globe. It has natural wealth, fertile soil, abundant water for irrigation, international lines of communication, incomparable sites for pilgrimage and tourism and old, historic peoples possessed of ancient cultures and modern skills alike. But this bountifully endowed area is still, from the social and economic point of view, one of the most backward in the world.
243.	It would not be difficult to prove that the expenditure of vast treasure on weapons of war and on the maintenance of huge armies is one of the main factors in this backwardness. The Soviet Union is doing no service to the people of the area when it counts weapons of war among its main exports to some of the countries of the Middle East as if these, and not means of production and technological agreements, can raise these nations from their misery. This Soviet policy, which is inspired by a one-sided, antiIsrael attitude and by incitement to intransigence and inflexibility, is one of the principal causes of tension in the Middle East and is used deliberately as a major means of Soviet implantation in a number of the countries of the area at the expense of their sovereignty. It is a policy that stands in stark contradiction to the spirit and objectives of detente, on which the hopes of all of us rest.
244.	I am bound to state with emphasis that either detente will be global and apply to the Middle East as well, or there will be no detente at all. Detente which does not include the Middle East is without political or strategic meaning.
245.	Peace and cooperation between the peoples of our region are needed not only to strengthen our economies and develop our societies but, not less vitally, to ensure the true independence of all peoples of the Middle East. There is no validity in a peace which serves the interests of one side only; and there is no substance in a peace dictated by one side to another or by a third party extraneous to both. Such a peace will always be precarious and temporary. As Albert Einstein once said: "Peace cannot be kept by force; it can be achieved only by understanding". Only a peace founded on respect for the interests of both parties can be genuine, stable and durable. The geo-strategic conditions which have evolved in the Middle East make such a peace possible, that is to say, a peace which will provide on the one hand a satisfactory solution for the interests of all the Arab States and also for the needs of the Palestinians, and on the other a solution for Israel's vital need for defensible borders.
246.	Israel would be prepared to give favorable consideration to a significant territorial compromise, but it cannot compromise on its security. In short, I sincerely believe that it is possible to achieve peace agreements which will serve the reasonable interests of the parties to the dispute and will open a new chapter in the history of each of the States of the Middle East and of the whole region. But up to now the Arab States have, regrettably, pursued a sterile policy of "not an inch", while Israel has set her face towards peace, a peace of equitable compromise, even though it might be painful to both sides. In order to reach this lofty objective we would prefer negotiations for a full and integral peace agreement. But, if it transpires that the conditions are not yet ripe for this, the possibilities might be examined of reaching interim agreements, based on compromise, which will put an end to belligerency in its various components, that is to say, interim agreements providing for effective mutual security arrangements that in the course of time will lead to negotiations for a peace treaty which will determine, inter alia, the final borders.
247.. Israel is cognizant of the existence of the question of Palestinian identity. It holds that it can and should be resolved in the context of the settlement of the dispute with its neighbor to the east. It is there, on both sides of the Jordan, that the great majority of the Palestinian population is concentrated. Moreover, most of the citizens of Jordan are Palestinians and most of the Palestinians are Jordanian citizens. It is also a fact that the area east of the Jordan is an integral part of the historic land of Israel or Palestine and that it is already the national home of the Palestinians. If there is any ethnic significance in the Palestinian concept it applies equally to the peasant, the townsman and the Bedouin east of the Jordan and to the peasant, the townsman and the Bedouin to its west. It is in the light of these considerations that the Israel Government, on 21 July 1974, resolved that:
"The Government will work towards negotiations for a peace agreement with Jordan.
"The peace will be founded on the existence of two independent States onlyIsrael, with united Jerusalem as its capital, and a JordanianPalestinian Arab State, east of Israel, within borders to be determined in negotiations between Israel and Jordan. In this State, the independent identity of the Jordanian and Palestinian Arabs can find expression in peace and good neighborliness with Israel."
248.	However, the Palestinian community in general must in no way be equated with the terrorist organizations. From my own personal acquaintance with this community I refuse to identify it, or at least its great majority, with the terrorist group known as the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], which is not a national liberation movement but the roof organization of disunited and splintered terrorist groups whose pretensions are not supported by the broad masses of the Palestinian population. It is a fact that more Arabs than Israelis have been killed by these organizations. It is also a fact that more terrorists have been killed in the armed clashes between regular Arab forces and the terror gangs and between the rival terror gangs themselves than by Israeli security forces.
249.	These facts are obvious to anybody who cares to examine them. We refuse to recognize the PLO and we will not recognize it, because of its doctrines and of its deeds alike. The charter of Palestine, which embodies the political ideology of the PLO, stands in direct contradiction to the Charter of the United Nations. It denies absolutely the right of Israel to exist and postulates its destruction as a principal objective.
250.	This ideology is accompanied by the criminal methods of warfare used by the organizations which make up the PLO, methods such as indiscriminate terror, deliberate murder of women and children, pupils and teachers, athletes at the Olympic Games, passengers on a Sw.ss airliner, chance visitors and Jewish and Christian pilgrims at airports, and Arab women workers in Galilee. In reality the situation here is not that of a subject people trying to liberate itself with its own underground forces, but of gangs of desperadoes imposing themselves on a people and attempting to form and dominate it by means of the destruction of another people: this at a time when there is ample room for two States, Jewish and Arab, to coexist in peace in the historic land of Israel or Palestine on both sides of the Jordan, their common border to be determined by negotiations.
251.	It is of course no secret that with the* parliamentary situation existing in the General Assembly, the preconceived ideas held by a great number of those taking part here, and the irrelevant considerations which guide many delegations, a majority might concede the PLO demands. A resolution that would do so will be regarded by Israel as an arbitrary resolution, one impinging on its fundamental rights, illegal and not binding in any way. Every representative here would reject a resolution which strikes at the foundation of his country's being. One cannot ask of any nation to agree to its own elimination or to commit suicide.
252.	Understanding for the needs of the Palestinians -certainly; satisfaction of the demands of arch murderers who appoint themselves as saviors- decidedly not.
253.	I regret that many Members of the United Nations do not delve into this problem thoroughly, with the consequence that, either deliberately or through misunderstanding, they reward these murderers and in so doing stoke the fires in the Middle East. Israel will not submit to violence and terror. Terrorism is an infectious disease which knows no national frontiers. Many States have already paid the price of submission to terrorism, and I am afraid that the last word has not been said on the subject. Following the latest terrorist attacks in Paris and at the Hague, President Valery Giscard d'Estaing said: "Violence, which is sometimes presented and justified as an avant-garde act, is nothing but the rising to the surface of those depths of barbarism and primitive cruelty of which humanity has devoted all its efforts to rid itself." These are trenchant words, but there is need for action and for courageous cooperation in order to put an end to manifestations of terror before further disasters occur.
254.	The essence of the PLO is terror. It is no coincidence that whenever a concrete proposal for a political solution is put forward, the PLO leadership rises up against any such peace initiative. Its insistence on including the question of Palestine in the agenda of this General Assembly session is designed, above all, to destroy the prospects of the political efforts at the very beginning. A debate on this matter cannot fail to poison the international atmosphere. Acceptance of the PLO demands may well condemn the prospects of the negotiating process to failure, just when the first ray of light has been glimpsed on the horizon.
255.	Palestinians who wish to give constructive expression to their independent identity can be helped to do so in the context of the negotiations with Jordan. Moreover, I would not agree to a genera! settlement without including in it the satisfaction of the needs of the Palestinians. It is, after all, not Israel which has prevented the crystallization of what is known as "Palestinian identity". To the extent that such a desire existed among the Palestinians, it is the Arab States that have frustrated it during all these years. If not, how can one explain the fact that during 19 years of Arab rule in the Gaza Strip and on the West Bank, this identity never achieved any definite form or full expression?
256.	The joint communique by Egypt, Syria and the PLO in Cairo, on 21 September 1974, also deals a blow to the prospects of a constructive solution to the issue of Palestinian identity. In the same way that the PLO bends all ,ts efforts to prevent political progress in the area, certain Arab States are whittling down the hopes for a solution of the Palestine question by granting the terrorist organizations the monopoly of representation of the Palestinians, when they know perfectly well that these organizations are not able to be a party to negotiations because of what they are.
257.	There is no sadder example of the heartless attitude of the Arab Governments than the freeze they have imposed on the status of the 1948 refugees. It is true that many of them have been absorbed in the economies of the Arab States in which they now live, but there has been a deliberate policy to prevent a constructive solution to this sore problem in order to exploit human suffering for political and propaganda ends. If the problem in itself were not so sad I would say that there is nothing more ludicrous than the annual fundraising efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to make up the deficit in its budget, and this at a time when the Arab oil States command the biggest monetary reserves in the world.
258.	Israel did not adopt this course-not towards the 600,000 Jewish refugees who fled the Arab States stripped of all their possessions and not towards the survivors of the millions of Jews destroyed by the Nazis, with the blessing of the Mufti Haj Amin el Husseini, who found refuge among his own kind in Nazi Berlin and Fascist Rome. All of these were fully absorbed in Israel -economically, socially and culturally.
259.	In the light of the vast economic opportunities which now exist in the Middle East, the refugee problem must and can be solved. Far more difficult refugee situations in other parts of the world have been solved long ago. Given goodwill -without which no problem can be resolved- the question of compensation for both Arab and Jewish refugees can be settled. Israel is contributing and will continue to contribute its share in the solution of this painful human problem.
260.	There are those who foresee the approach of war on this or that front in the Middle East. As far as Israel is concerned, we shall faithfully observe the ceasefire and the separation of forces agreements, on a reciprocal basis, until they are replaced or supplemented by new agreements. But in the same way as we shall display the utmost goodwill in seeking to achieve balanced and constructive progress in the political sphere, we shall neither submit nor lend ourselves to the blackmail of threats of war or even of war itself.
261.	We want to see progress in the efforts to achieve a political solution, both as an end in itself and as a means of avoiding war. In the face of the rapid rearmament of the other side, we shall strengthen our forces in order to prevent war or to gain victory if, God forbid, it should break out anew. At the same time, we shall continue to seek a settlement of the conflict by peaceful means. In other words, we shall prepare for the worst and hope and work for the best.
262.	In one of his recent speeches, President El Sadat said that our generation must be satisfied with the end of belligerency and that the treaty of peace would be signed by the coming generation. I am astonished that so distinguished a statesman should renounce the great and historic opportunity to bring about peace and cooperation. I trust that this was not his last word. Peace should not be postponed to the next generation. It is the duty of the generations which have taken part in the war to overcome their differences and to assure peace for their descendants. Let us all do our best to secure peace speedily in our time. It is possible. In order to achieve it, one needs perhaps more courage than is needed for the decision to go to war. Let us all demonstrate both wisdom and courage for the benefit of all the peoples of our region.
Mr. President, I congratulate you most warmly on your election to the President's chair, for which your qualities and long experience as Foreign Minister of your country so admirably fit you. I wish you well in the direction of our business, which includes many important and some difficult issues. The year of your presidency will be an important year. We shall in fact be getting to grips with matters which are central to the future welfare, and even the existence, of human society.
4.	First of all, I must speak of the recent tragic death of our beloved Prime Minister, Mr. Norman Kirk, who last year spoke for New Zealand in this debate. He was a good and humane man -a champion of the poor and the weak. We were deeply touched and comforted by the sympathy shown to us by people from all over the world at the time of our loss. Such solidarity occurs only when we lose a leader who has risen above local concerns, as he did one who has worked to advance the cause of the whole human family. The response to his death suggests that multitudes hunger for new attitudes among the leaders of nations. New Zealand will miss him greatly. But my Government will still try to bring to reality his personal vision of a new world social and economic order. We shall continue to strive, as Mr. Kirk did, to translate into international terms the vision of a decent and humane society which motivates our policy at home. Our goal remains to help to harness the great resources and skills of the people of this planet, so that everyone, not just a few, will have a chance to live as human beings should. We shall continue to work to strengthen the United Nations as a center for harmonizing the actions of nations and for protecting the rights of the smaller nations.
5.	The last three years have witnessed a remarkable change in national attitudes. In 1972, the year of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm, the international community became aware of, and accepted the existence of certain physical limits to economic growth: limits to the availability of natural resources and of food; limits to the amount of pollution that can be discharged into the environment before inevitable and unwelcome consequences follow. In 1973 the world began to receive sharp, warnings of some of these physical limits, particularly in the supply of energy and of food. It became painfully apparent that our ability through existing institutions to make efficient and humane use of the world's talents and resources for the common good was more limited than we had thought and more limited than we could put up with.
6.	In 1974 it became obvious that the world had better make a more serious effort to understand the interdependence of all peoples and all States. At a number of historic conferences the nations at last started to study realistically the fundamental changes that will be needed if we are to bring about the new order that the world requires a new order that will ensure a more equitable use of the world's resources to meet the demands of the future. These conferences included the sixth special session of the General Assembly, on raw materials and development, the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, the World Population Conference, 1974, and, soon, the World Food Conference. The common theme of these conferences was, and will be, interdependence. Whatever subject is studied, the same lesson emerges: we are one people, we are all one of another; and if we ignore that truth all of us will suffer and none of us may have a future in any meaningful sense of the word at all. At one time only visionaries and preachers spoke in such terms. Now the message has spread to the so-called practical people.
7.	Governments, in their concern about the state of the planet, are having to look up from problems of local tension and conflict which are themselves hard enough to solve and to face fundamental issues affecting the very survival of humanity. The great issues of today are population, food, energy, natural resources, the environment and the embracing need for an economic order which will enable all people to realize their full potential as human beings. For the immediate and foreseeable future these constitute the agenda these will be the primary concerns of the international community and of the United Nations. Our success in dealing with them will largely determine the climate in which relations between States will develop in the next decade.
8.	Detente is not just a question of political relations between the great Powers. True, detente must be based on a general acceptance of the interdependence of the great Powers and the small, of developed and developing nations. It must be based on the willingness of all of us to work together to solve the problems about which I have spoken. What alternative is in fact open to us?
9.	To deal first with the subject of food, the shortage of food is growing worse. The international community has recognized the urgent need to act and to deal with the situation. Without food there can be no human energy. The World Food Conference will be a vitally important meeting. World food stocks have sunk to the lowest level in 50 years. We are now living literally on a hand-to-mouth basis. The assessment prepared for the World Food Conference has indicated that there will be a very significant food deficit in developing countries in the 1980s. Others have forecast the possibility of mass starvation by the end of the century. As a matter pf Immediate anxiety, a grave food shortage looms next winter. Weather conditions have reduced the harvests in the United States and Canada, and, therefore, the possibility of their being used, as they so often have been, as a backstop. The drought in the Sahel has brought famine to Africa. Further shortages seem likely to hit countries in Asia.
10.	Weather is one cause of these troubles but nations are also at fault. The institutions for producing and marketing and distributing food have failed us. Above all, they have failed those countries and those people on the lowest incomes. There is an enormous unused potential for food production, but the international community has not yet devised ways of sharing its resources and skills for the benefit of all. The World Food Conference must provide the framework for such co-operation. If a crisis situation is developing, there will be a tendency to concentrate on short-term food aid. A world food security arrangement, which has so far eluded our efforts, is more necessary than ever be-fore. We must ensure that arrangements are made for sufficient stores of food, so that people do not starve in the emergencies which past experience teaches us will unfortunately occur from time to time.
11.	The world, however, cannot just rely on the traditional food producers, There is a fundamental imbalance in food production. The answer is not to produce more and more food in the rich countries and ship it off as aid to distant parts. We must give top priority to increasing national production in developing countries. In many regions there are untapped resources of land and water. These can and must be utilized to expand food production. It is essential that the World Food Conference produce arrangements that will transfer agricultural technology to developing countries and increase the supply of the agricultural inputs they must have: money, energy, fertilizer, seeds, chemicals and equipment.
12.	Most of New Zealand's special expertise is in the varied field of agriculture. We have shaped our development assistance and technical co-operation according to programs to make it available to others who need and want it. In the last year over 30 per cent of our bilateral aid involved the transfer of agricultural technology, materials, equipment and training. In providing this aid we are making a strong effort to ensure that it is practical and literally down to earth. Our friends in the South Pacific tell us that in the past years their islands have been nearly buried by feasibility studies, surveys and reports by international experts. They have been studied and surveyed beyond all bearing. What they want now is action. So do we. We do not underestimate the value of research. Our own agricultural success has depended on it very much indeed. But we think that if production is to be increased, as it should be, this will be done by men prepared to dirty their hands in the field, and not by those who polish the seat of a chair in a distant office. We for our part try to avoid inflicting on other people chair polishers disguised as experts. And we hope that the students from other countries whom we train in New Zealand will get the message that countries are developed only by hard work and effort, and that workers are deserving of equal respect whether they wear collars and ties or just shirts.
13.	As a major agricultural exporter, New Zealand certainly shares the interest of developing countries and other States in the orderly marketing and distribution of food. We are constantly working for the elimination of barriers to trade and for the creation of stable markets at fair prices. Obviously in this area we are working in our own interest; but we believe also that we are working in the interests of others just as much as in our own. The World Food Conference should provide constructive guidance to the multilateral trade negotiations at present under way. We hope it will also give the incentive to remove the present stumbling blocks to progress in these negotiations. This is an area of activity in negotiations in agricultural trade that is usually dull and hard, and greatly complicated by national politics. But if food is to be produced in much greater quantity and it must be if the rapidly growing number of people are to be fed we must get an imaginative breakthrough in this vital field.
14.	I have spoken of our concern about the world food shortage. I have said that we wish to make available to developing countries the benefits of the technology and expertise that we have built up in our agriculturally-based economy. Together with our colleagues from Sri Lanka, we have promoted emergency arrangements to ensure that the countries most in need can obtain sufficient supplies of nitrogenous fertilizers at prices they can afford.
15.	We are convinced that real and lasting progress can be made by developing countries only if aid policies are closely co-ordinated with trade and monetary policies. The sixth special session of the General Assembly was an historic event, in some ways a revolutionary event. Its consequences will work themselves out over many years.
16.	But the most important revolutions, we believe, occur in men's minds, not in the streets. Colonialism collapsed in two decades because of a conviction that its day was over. As the cumulative result of years of effort in education, sometimes through oratory and pressure, the conscience dormant in most people was brought to life and even the colonial Powers came to share this conviction, some more slowly than others. But I believe that we are now on the brink of another and even more profound shift in attitudes. We are beginning to accept, not just in words, but through practical decisions, that all members of the world society in which we live have a just claim on the wealth and the more decent life that that society can make possible. To discuss a new economic order is now to discuss reality.
17.	A momentum has been established. Much more discussion will no doubt be required before consensus is reached on specific actions and before the change in attitudes is complete. But to achieve this we have to keep up the momentum and concentrate the energies of the international community on a manageable, realistic field of action. For our part we would like to suggest that the Assembly at this session identify as priority tasks for the coming year the four main issues for priority action: food, trade access, reform of the monetary system and emergency assistance. We think it would be useful if at this session the Assembly directed the subsidiary organs of the United Nations to bear this in mind in drawing up their own agenda and work programs.
18.	At the sixth special session, the General Assembly established an emergency program of measures to help the countries hardest hit by the economic situation [resolution 3202 (S-VI)]. My country has allocated $10 million for this program. At the meeting to be held on 27 September on this subject I shall give more details of this contribution. However, we believe that a firmer basis should be established within the international community for providing large-scale emergency assistance whenever the need arises. We must have the means to avert the risk of the energy crisis or any other similar catastrophe creating a "fourth world" of countries so hopelessly placed that they are without any prospect of economic and social development for decades to come. My Government accepts that developing countries must increase their share of international trade, principally through improved access to the markets of the developed countries of the world. We support the generalized system of preferences and we are at present reviewing the New Zealand scheme with a view to introducing improvements into it.
19.	New Zealand does not play a major role in the world financial institutions. But we have supported, and will continue to support, the principle that the developing countries should be full participants in discussions leading to major decisions on the international monetary order.
20.	L turn now to disarmament. Against this back-ground of human need, which all the speakers this morning touched on, it is surely tragic folly, to squander resources at an ever-increasing rate to perfect weapons of destruction. We already have enough nuclear weaponry to obliterate all life from this earth several times over. Almost everyone says he wants to stop the arms race and to use the scarce resources that would be saved for constructive purposes: for aid and human welfare. Each year this Organization solemnly proclaims how essential it is that additional resources be devoted to economic and social development. Each year it proclaims the need for disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament. Yet each year its proclamations are ignored. We now watch with despair medium-sized and even small-sized Powers trying to follow the bad example of the great nuclear Powers.
21.	Since the Assembly last met in regular session the tempo of nuclear-weapon testing has been stepped up. Two super-Powers have told us that a decade must elapse before they will be able to disentangle themselves from the spider's web of the arms race- a decade to strike what they choose to call "a strategic balance".
22.	In the same time-span we face the prospect, even the certainty, if the international community does not act with vigor to prevent it, that there will be further additions to the nuclear club. Given the example set by the super-Powers and I do not feel at all comfortable in lecturing others we have to say that we completely reject the notion that the possession of these dreadful and suicidal weapons can in some way enhance a nation's status or security. On the contrary, the greater the number of States that possess such a capacity the more unstable the relationships between States will become and the greater will be the danger to world peace. We are deeply concerned that recent events may undermine the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex]. Some find defects in this Treaty, but, despite, the defects, it does offer a path back to sanity and reason.
23.	For many years the nations of the South Pacific have been close to the testing of nuclear weapons. Interested parties may argue that the tests are harmless, but those of us who have been closest to them are keenly aware of the dangers that testing poses for the human environment. We know that these tests can create anxiety and apprehension in ordinary people everywhere. We urge that this Assembly again assert, clearly and without equivocation, that testing in every form must be ended, soon, urgently, through a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The Assembly should act to advance the principles of the non-proliferation Treaty.
24.	We believe that the Assembly should stand ready to encourage positive proposals from countries of a given region to increase regional stability and security. In recent years that search for international security and stability has been given new impetus through regional activities. New Zealand continues to see merit in this approach, and we urge outside States to co-operate fully in giving effect to these initiatives by smaller countries in various parts of the world.
25.	I come now to the law of the sea. The law of the sea occupies a crucial place among the issues upon which the international community should focus most urgently in the coming year. In a world where population and resources press heavily upon one another, it is of critical importance to agree upon a just use of the resources of the oceans.
26.	The session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea held at Caracas this year was especially important for the countries of the South Pacific. It gave New Zealand and its neighbors a most welcome chance to stress the special dependence of small island nations on the sea island States such as those in the South Pacific are at a disadvantage: they are geographically remote and they have very few agricultural and mineral resources. The development of their nearby maritime areas represents one of the few ways in which they can hope to supplement their slender land resources. New Zealand was encouraged that at Caracas these special needs were generally recognized.
27.	Much work remains to be done; but we were heartened by the progress made. For the first time we now have within reach the essentials of a new agreement on a 12-mile territorial sea and a 200-mile economic zone. Undoubtedly, there will be a great deal of hard negotiation to come before a fair and balanced agreement can be reached on all the major issues. New Zealand, as a coastal State, recognizes the just interests of others: of the land-locked States and of those with limited access to the resources of the sea. We recognize the just interests of all countries, but especially the developing countries, in preserving the "common heritage of mankind'' in the resources of the deep sea-bed. We hope that all countries will look to the next session of the Conference, in 1975, as the stage at which compromises must be made. And we believe that, if approached in that spirit, the session will lead quickly to the final treaty.
28.	I shall now speak of the South Pacific and Niue. In connexion with the South Pacific islands, but in a different context, we are pleased to note that in a referendum on 3 September the people of Niue chose to become fully self-governing, in free association with New Zealand: On 19 October New Zealand and Niue will end their relationship of administering Power and Non-Self-Governing Territory; we will enter a new period of partnership on a basis of equality. As a self-governing State, Niue will take its place as a full member of the South Pacific Forum along with other independent and self-governing States in the Pacific, including Papua New Guinea. Niue's new Constitution contains my Government's assurance that New Zealand's economic assistance to Niue will continue as before. During the process of self-determination it has been helpful for the people of Niue, as well as for New Zealand, to have the United Nations constantly and closely involved.
29.	New Zealand is conscious, as never before, of the importance of Africa on the world's stage. We see the need, not only for Africa but also in the wider interests of the international community, to find lasting and peaceful solutions to the problems of that continent.
30.	It is understandable that the situation in southern Africa should be of such continuing concern to this Assembly. New Zealand stands solidly with the world community in rejecting the policy of apartheid in South Africa. My Prime Minister welcomed a recent opportunity to assure the Chairman of the Special Committee on Apartheid, Ambassador Ogbu of Nigeria, that New Zealand would continue its stand on sporting contacts with South Africa: South African teams will not be allowed to enter New Zealand, unless they represent a sport in which apartheid is not practiced.
31.	New Zealand also continues to offer practical support to the victims of apartheid: it contributes to the United Nations Educational and Training Program for Southern Africa, the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund for Namibia.
32.	In addition, my Government has decided to contribute more than $200,000 over a two-year period to a joint project with UNICEF to provide humanitarian assistance through liberation movements for the tens of thousands of displaced persons from Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Angola who are at present living in -Zambia. This money is given to supply drugs, vaccines, high-protein food supplements, agricultural tools and educational aid.
33.	Before I conclude, may I express my Government's pleasure at the admission of Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United Nations. We welcome also the historic change which now allows us to look forward to the early admission of two other important African countries, Mozambique and Angola. Their accession to independence will mark a major step in the process of decolonization and a further major step in the liberation of Africa. It will bring us still closer to the full realization of the principle of universality, to which my Government attaches great importance.
34.	I have said that the primary concerns of this Organization today are people, food, energy, natural resources, the environment and the need for a new economic order. These are universal concerns; every nation has a duty to play its part in helping to solve them. New Zealand believes that all nations can best do this within the great family of the United Nations, accepting the obligations as well as the privileges of membership.
Mr. President, on behalf of the Soviet delegation, I should like to congratulate you upon your election to the important post of President of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly. I should like to wish you success in the fulfillment of this important task. The unanimity with which you were elected once again demonstrates the respect which is enjoyed internationally by your country, the Algerian People's Democratic Republic.
120.	No session of the General Assembly is the same as the previous one, nor is the world situation against the background of which they convene the same. This is particularly noticeable against the swiftly changing background of events in recent years. What does remain unchanged, however, is the criterion that the United Nations and each of its Members must be guided by at all times and in all things -namely, concern for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is against this fundamental criterion that the activities of the United Nations and the practical actions of States in the international arena should be measured.
121.	With regard to the Soviet Union, we throw onto the scales of peace the entire influence of our State, the whole authority of our policy. This has always been the case and it will continue to be. Those who are earnestly seeking for ways to establish and consolidate peaceful relations and to settle disputed problems around the negotiating table can definitely count on the reliable co-operation of the Soviet Union.
122.	For more than half a century our country has consistently pursued a policy of peace, a policy of rebuffing aggression and safeguarding the rights of peoples, as that policy was formulated by Vladimir ilyich Lenin. In present-day conditions too the struggle for peace means for us not just an abstract category but a matter of concrete efforts to give practical effect to the foreign policy guidelines laid down by the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. It is the expression of the Soviet people's will for peace and uncompromising determination to make it stronger.
123.	Implementation of the Congress's decisions the program of Peace and Co-operation has already yielded tangible results in the improvement of the international situation. This is clear to any impartial observer. It is equally clear that the current positive changes are to everyone's benefit. Indeed, if there is an area where the fundamental interests of all nations, without exception, do converge, that is the maintenance of peace.
124.	The Soviet Union pursues its policies in close co-ordination with its allies and friends. The socialist community of States unites its participants in a common creative effort the building of an advanced society which by its very nature rejects war. It is no accident that many major peace initiatives have been sponsored by the socialist countries. The session of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty last April reaffirmed their joint determination to fight for the triumph of the ideals of peace and the economic and social progress of the peoples.
125.	The general state of world affairs is being molded by a tremendous number of factors, ranging from political and military to national or even psychological factors. And it therefore hardly lends itself to one-dimensional assessment. But the main trend of international development arouses no doubts: it is detente and the desire for detente which are today the predominant features.
126.	For the first time, international detente has gone beyond good wishes and verbal assurances. It is a term that has now found a place for itself in the political vocabulary precisely because it is backed by some very real content the positive changes in reality itself. From the vantage point of recent years one can distinctly see how much has been done in this respect.
127.	Through joint efforts by many States it has become possible to reduce the risk of armed conflict between the two social systems. But of special significance are the well-known agreements of 1972-1974 between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. This applies above all to the Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. The two major Powers undertook to make efforts to preclude entirely the risk of military conflict, including that involving nuclear weapons, between the Soviet Union and the United States, or between either of the parties and other States. At the same time, they agreed to refrain from the use of force against each other and against other countries in circumstances which may endanger international peace and security.
128.	Not long ago there was bitter fighting in IndoChina, in the Middle East, and in South Asia. And these were not the only areas where events took a dangerous turn. Now several international conflicts have, to a certain extent, been channeled in the direction of political settlement.
129.	It is well known that on more than one occasion tensions in Europe have risen to an alarming level. There were no military clashes, but if the total damage inflicted by the "cold war" and its tensions is estimated, it will prove enormous from all standpoints. Nowadays the political development of the European continent is ever more steadily taking a different course. Not only have acute problems of the territorial and political arrangements arising out of the Second World War been solved there, but also prospects for a safer, peaceful future for Europe have been opened up.
130.	Alongside this there is another major asset of detente the development of bilateral relations between States with different social systems. In the past too there were periods when it was impossible to organize business-like co-operation between them. But the experience of decades has shown us that that was rather the exception than the rule. Now peaceful co-existence is increasingly becoming the law of contemporary life. And the very nature of these relations is changing in many ways as they become steeped in the spirit of peaceful co-operation.
131.	Finally, it was precisely detente that put on the agenda the question of restructuring economic relations in the world. The point of this was to eliminate inequality arid discrimination, and to ensure in practice the sovereign right of States to dispose of their natural resources. The sixth special session of the General Assembly called severely to task those who for centuries have been exploiting the labor and resources of others, and indicated ways of eliminating economic oppression. The Soviet Union supports the just demands of the developing countries.
132.	On the whole, it can be stated with confidence that international events are now taking a course closer to peace. However, one should also see one other thing clearly: the movement towards peace does not always follow a straight line, and difficulties along this road will not necessarily decrease with each passing year. In a certain sense the problems which have to be dealt with today are not simpler but perhaps even more complicated than those of yesterday. And there is more to it than just objective causes.
133.	In the final analysis, the solution of the accumulated problems is hampered by the deliberate opposition of those forces whose interests are associated with policies contrary to the policy of detente. A closer look will reveal behind each instance of aggravation whether caused by encroachments on the freedom and independence of nations, by the stepping-up of the arms race, or by attempts to test the durability of existing international treaties the overt or covert activities of those forces. And when at times you hear people say that detente is a purely temporary phenomenon or allege that it has exhausted itself, you can recognize without fail from what quarter these statements come.
134.	The Soviet Union counters them with its own motto, which is not to slacken efforts to ensure that the healthy processes which have now been embarked upon should become irreversible and consolidated. As the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid I. Brezhnev, stressed recently, "If you want peace, pursue a policy of peace and struggle for that policy". We are convinced that in our time the complete elimination of the threat of war is feasible albeit not close at hand provided active and persistent efforts are made to that end.
135.	The fact that the world is still far from what the peoples would like it to be is demonstrated by the tragedy which has afflicted the Republic of Cyprus. Some may have the impression that this is an event of local significance. The Soviet Union takes a different view.
136.	Before the eyes of the world the force of arms is being used ruthlessly to trample on the independence and territorial integrity of a sovereign Member State of the United Nations, a participant in the non-aligned movement. The fact that this is a small country presents developments in a special light. Another hotbed of tension has appeared in the eastern Mediterranean, and unless urgent measures are taken no one can guarantee that the situation will not deteriorate even further.
137.	From the very beginning the Soviet Union came out in defense of the inalienable rights of the State of Cyprus. It has been resolutely calling for an end to outside interference in the affairs of Cyprus, for the withdrawal of foreign troops from its soil, for the restoration of constitutional order, and for the Cypriots to be given a chance to decide their destiny for themselves. That is the only way radically to remove the tension. The demand that , the Charter of the United Nations be observed should not be an empty phrase as those responsible for events in Cyprus would like to see it. It must be complied with in the case of the Cyprus tragedy too.
138.	The Cyprus problem must be brought out of the impasse resulting from attempts of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] to solve it in camera, in political darkness, and in the narrow interests of militarist circles. This purpose that is, a just solution to the Cyprus problem is promoted by the Soviet Union's proposal to convene an international conference on Cyprus within the framework of the United Nations.7 The decisions of such a conference, adopted with the direct participation of representatives of the Republic of Cyprus and aimed at ensuring the country's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, could be effectively guaranteed by the States permanent members of the Security Council, for, under the Charter of the United Nations, it is precisely they who are entrusted with special responsibility for maintaining international peace and security.
139.	IndoChina is situated on the other side of the planet, and the situation there is different. But the underlying reasons why the guns are still firing and blood is still flowing in some parts of the region are the same as in Cyprus. It is all due to the stubborn reluctance of foreign-backed reactionary forces to respect the legitimate rights of the peoples.
140.	To bring to a conclusion the political settlement in Viet Nam it is necessary, in the first place, to make the Saigon regime give up its military provocations and attempts to undermine the Paris agreements on Viet Nam. Strict observance of these agreements by all parties is an indispensable condition for the normalization of the situation. As for Cambodia, its problems must be solved by the Cambodians themselves, in accordance with their national interests and without any outside interference. The positive results of agreements reached in Laos should also be consolidated.
141.	The comprehensive assistance and support given by the Soviet Union and other States of the Socialist community to the Vietnamese people have helped them to achieve victory in the long and heroic struggle against aggression. The Soviet Union will continue to support the Vietnamese people in peacetime too. The aspirations of the patriotic forces of IndoChina to freedom and independence will always be met with our understanding and solidarity. 
142.	For almost 30 years now the Middle East has been in a state of fever. Over this period wars have broken out there time and time again. In fact, the last one was only a year ago. This should be enough to convince anyone that the Middle East problem must be solved and solved justly, with the interests of all the peoples of the region being taken into account.
143.	What does that imply? First of all, the withdrawal of Israeli forces from allI stress, from all the Arab lands seized by them in 1967 and the assurance of the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of Palestine. Otherwise there can be no stable peace in the Middle East. It does not need a prophet to foresee a new flare-up of hostilities if the Middle East settlement is reduced to half-measures, no matter how-well advertised they may be.
144.	There are increasing signs that Israel regards the disengagement of forces on Sinai and the Golan Heights not as the first step towards a general settlement which is what it should be but as a maneuver intended to freeze the situation. The clear unwillingness to leave the occupied Arab territories and, moreover, a desire to consolidate Israel's hold on them are quite evident. What other explanation can there be for the militarist intoxication which has again overcome Israel and for the attempts to exert military pressure on the Arab States? Unless this stops, the disengagement of troops may prove to be a mere regrouping of forces prior to a new clash.
145.	The Soviet Union believes that there must be no delay in implementing measures leading to a political settlement in the Middle East, and this means prompt resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, the most appropriate forum for considering the Middle East problem in all its complex totality and for finding solutions satisfactory to the parties involved in the conflict. Naturally, this fully applies also to the Arab people of Palestine, whose representatives must take their rightful place at the conference.	;
146.	We believe that the time has surely come to address ourselves earnestly to the problem of Palestine. A wider approach is required here, which would open the way to ensuring not only in words but in deeds the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of Palestine, and that is why we favoured including the question of Palestine on the agenda of this session of the General Assembly as a separate item.
147.	There are some who try to represent the Soviet Union's position as one-sided and only serving the interests of the Arab States. Yes, indeed, we do support and will continue to support the legitimate demands of the Arabs. But it would be wrong to see only this particular aspect in our position. When we insist that territories acquired by force should not become a prize for aggression, the implications of our demand go well beyond the limits of the Middle East. It reflects intolerance of aggression in general. What this involves, therefore, is a major international principle and the question of consistency in policy.
148.	Furthermore, the Soviet Union is in favor of Israel's existence and development as an independent sovereign State. We have said so many times
in
and we affirm it once again. Real, not illusory, progress towards a Middle East settlement will create prerequisites for the development of relations between the Soviet Union and all the States of the Middle East, including Israel.
149.	The scope of the policy of peace and detente is broad. It is important not to lose momentum in any field and, above all, wherever serious work has already begun to build more stable relations between States on the basis of the observance of the principles of peaceful coexistence.
150.	In this context, the Soviet Union attaches primary importance to the successful conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. This is question number one in European political life today. An objective assessment of what has already been done at the Conference prompts the conclusion that, on the whole, the results are impressive.
151.	Has anyone ever before succeeded in jointly elaborating practical standards of peaceful relations among States in Europe, in particular, on questions which have hitherto seemed insoluble? Until now nothing of this kind has been seen, at least on such a scale. Today, this work is proceeding successfully. Several important principles have been formulated in detail as specifically applicable to Europe. The arrival at generally acceptable decisions on them, on the basis of a reasonable balance of interests of the parties, is not a routine phenomenon. Not all the participants in the Conference rely, even in their bilateral relations, on such a solid foundation as the one which is now being laid for an all-European agreement.
152.	It has also proved possible to reach agreement on a wide range of questions relating to cooperation among States in the most varied fields: from trade and economics to culture; from the protection of the environment to the extension of human contacts and exchanges of information. Experience has shown that such questions can be settled if they are viewed in direct proportion to the main problem of ensuring peace in Europe, and if the principle of non-interference in internal affairs is strictly adhered to.
153.	The Soviet Union is convinced that there is an opportunity to conclude the Conference at an early date by adopting weighty decisions in the interests of security in Europe. In saying this we not only properly appreciate the collective work that has already been done; we also proceed from the premise that solutions to the still outstanding problems can be found, if all the participants display the necessary political will and realism.
154.	Naturally, it would not be right to expect the Conference to settle at one fell swoop all the questions accumulated over the long years of tension and mistrust. But it is equal to the task of achieving agreements. on crucial problems which can determine a stable peaceful development in Europe for the foreseeable future. It will also be easier to tackle other outstanding issues in the atmosphere of detente. 
155.	The Soviet Union will continue to do everything to ensure the complete success of the Conference. We trust that our Western partners will also take a constructive approach to this task. It is in the interests of the peoples of Europe, and not just of Europe alone, to work to bring nearer the day when agreements designed to legitimize peace and co-operation on the scale of an entire continent can be signed at the highest level.
156.	It is also important to achieve results at the Vienna Talks on the Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. The key to this is strict observance by all of the rule of undiminished security for each side. Agreement on the questions under discussion would in practice supplement political detente in Europe with military detente.
157.	The conversion into a practical proposition of the idea of consolidating peace in Asia through the joint efforts of States should not, in our opinion, be a matter for the distant future. No doubt, the situation there remains complex. There is no small number of trouble spots, conflicts and international disputes on the continent of Asia.
158.	Political thought in Asia, too, is switching more and more to the search for ways of securing peace and stability. And surely this is demonstrated by the efforts of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh to normalize relations on the Hindustan Peninsula, or by the idea of converting the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace.
159.	We note with satisfaction the growing interest in the Soviet Union's initiative concerning the establishment of a collective security system in Asia. More and more States in Asia are supporting it. The Soviet-Indian Declaration signed as a result of the visit of Leonid Uyich Brezhnev to India in November 1973 contains important principles which can serve as a basis for the development of an effective system of relations between States in Asia.
160.	The establishment of peace and co-operation in Asia meets the fundamental interests of all the Asian people. The achievement of this goal is a matter which concerns every country of that continent.
161.	The agenda of this session includes an item which has a direct bearing on the improvement of the situation in Asia. This is the proposal by 34 States, including the Soviet Union, on the withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations [AI9703 and Add. 1-3}. The presence of those troops, which have now been there for more than two decades, represents a source of constant military and political tension in the Korean Peninsula. Their presence is still more inappropriate under present conditions when, on the initiative of the Korean People's Democratic Republic, efforts are being made to bring about the peaceful reunification of Korea.
162.	If we analyze the reasons which have so often caused acute tensions in the world, and which even now frequently lead to dangerous situations, we shall easily see that in many cases this was the result of the armaments race. It is indeed a fact that immediately after the Second World War some States embarked upon a course of building up armaments and setting up military bases on foreign territories, thus making the creation of tensions and saber- rattling their policy. It is a secret to no one that it was precisely that policy of theirs which at times brought the world to a very dangerous brink.
163.	How many speeches have been made on disarmament and the cessation of the arms race in the last 25 years? Probably no other problem has absorbed the attention of statesmen and public figures to such an extent in the post-war period. And this is understandable. Stable and lasting peace is incompatible with the arms race. They are antipodes. One cannot seriously think of eliminating the threat of war while at the same time increasing military budgets and endlessly building up armaments.
164.	Facts must be faced. So far it has not proved possible to stop the arms race. Furthermore, today the arms race absorbs more money than ten or twenty years ago. It has been estimated that the world annually burns in the furnace of armaments over $250,000 million. This is more than the entire national income of the developing States of Asia and Africa. One can only imagine what benefits these resources could yield if they were used for peaceful purposes, for development, to combat hunger, poverty and disease.
165.	No Government -at least openly- declares that it favors the arms race. Nevertheless, arms are accumulating. For three months every year appeals to end the arms race are heard at the session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. But the arms race continues. Ever more and newer papers and resolutions on disarmament are filling the archives of the United Nations. But disarmament still does not manage to overcome its inertia. Conveyor belts keep on moving inexorably, turning out new consignments of destructive weapons.
166.	And so a paradoxical situation develops. The peace movement has never had such momentum as it enjoys today, and never has the world produced such quantities of arms as it does today. On the one hand, there is the longing for peace on the part of hundreds of millions of people who realize the grim danger of the arms race, but, on the other hand, there is the increasing avalanche of armaments.
167.	What is the matter? Maybe some forces which have got out of human control are at work? Certainly not. The reason is policy. And if it is policy, well, one may ask, whose policy?
168.	If it all depended on the socialist countries, the arms race would have been eliminated long ago. No one has tabled more concrete proposals on disarmament than they. Ever since the non-aligned countries moved into the forefront of international affairs they too have been actively working in favor of disarmament. Voices of reason are to be heard in other countries too, and they resound with ever greater confidence both in parliaments and in broad public circles,
169.	Military-industrial circles that profit from the arms race oppose its cessation. Those politicians who are linked with these circles have long since placed their narrow interests above the aspirations of the peoples. The influence of these circles has had a telling effect on all disarmament negotiations, including those in the General Assembly and the Security Council. 
170.	The arms race affects all States, even those not directly involved in it. All the peoples of the world live under one and the same roof. The risks posed by the unrestrained build-up of armaments are a danger to all. On the other hand, is there any country in the world whose economy is not affected, one way or another, by the burden of armaments? Everyone here could adduce numerous examples in confirmation of the correctness of this argument.
171.	Furthermore, recently economic upheavals, which have been affecting many States, have increased in intensity and increasingly affect the material situation of people. Statesmen and economists are racking their brains over the causes underlying all this. But there is one undeniable conclusion that is borne out every day and every hour: the aggravation of economic problems is largely connected with the rising scale of the arms race and with soaring military expenditures.
172.	But if the disarmament problem affects everyone, then the solution to the problem should be sought jointly by all States.
173.	The main thing here is not just to mark time, hiding behind arguments about the complexity of the problem. If right now it cannot be solved at one stroke, solutions should be sought for individual aspects so that this should lead at least step by step to the ultimate goal of disarmament, and in effect, such an approach has already been tried out in recent years and has justified itself.
174.	As positive changes make their way in the world, so objective prerequisites for finding real agreements in the sphere of disarmament improve. It is noteworthy that the largest number of agreements of this kind have been reached in the last few years. Although they do not reverse the arms race, they do curb it in a whole series of ways.
175.	In one case, this takes the form of limiting further perfection of nuclear weapons and the creation of their new destructive models. The Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963, has been serving this end well for over a decade now.
176.	The same objective is served by the Treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States of 3 July 1974, whereby both countries have undertaken to stop, as of 31 March 1976, underground testing of nuclear weapons with the most powerful nuclear charges and also to limit underground nuclear test explosions in general. The Soviet Union will strive to see to it that the prohibition of nuclear weapon tests eventually becomes comprehensive and universal.
177.	In another case, it takes the form of a limit on the territorial spread of armaments. Such is the purport of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which has proved its effectiveness. We are in favor of making full use of the possibilities inherent in that Treaty and of increasing the number of States parties to it. The objective is to make this Treaty universal.
178.	A number of agreements exclude the sea-bed and the ocean floor, outer space and celestial bodies from the sphere of possible emplacement of nuclear weapons. In accordance with an international agreement bacteriological weapons have been prohibited and eliminated from military arsenals, and prospects are emerging for the outlawing of another deadly means of warfare, namely, chemical weapons.
179.	And what about the agreements on the limitation of strategic arms between the Soviet Union and the United States? I feel that there is no need to explain their unprecedented significance since they are designed to narrow the actual material basis of the nuclear-missile arms race. Quite recently these agreements have been supplemented by new important agreements. Last July, the Soviet Union and the United States decided further to limit their anti-ballistic missile systems and mapped out ways of achieving further limitation of strategic offensive arms in terms of both quality and quantity. The Soviet delegation in Geneva, where talks on these questions were resumed the other day, has firm instructions to seek their solution,
180.	The supreme interests not only of the peoples of the Soviet Union and the United States but also of the peoples of the whole world require that the Soviet Union and the United States, possessing the colossal might of nuclear weapons, should make every effort to achieve appropriate understandings and agreements. We should like to express our gratification at the fact that this idea was clearly stated too from the rostrum of the General Assembly by President Ford of the United States [2234th meeting].
181.	When two Powers voluntarily limit their military preparations, when they establish a ceiling above which they will not increase nuclear missile armaments, their actions, apart from anything else, must set a good example for others.
182.	The Soviet Union will continue to work tirelessly to further the cause of disarmament in areas where this is possible; it will look for new fields where concrete results can be achieved through the joint efforts of States.
183.	The Soviet Union took the initiative by proposing the inclusion in the agenda of the twenty- ninth session of the General Assembly, as an important and urgent question, of item 103, entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate for military and other purposes incompatible with the maintenance of international security, human well- being and health" [4/9702].
184.	What is the motive for this? The achievements of scientific and technological progress have expanded the possibilities of influencing nature and the climate of the globe and, in a certain sense, of controlling the complex and powerful processes involved. Unfortunately, the latest discoveries can be used not only for creative, but also for military, purposes with extremely destructive consequences for mankind. These are not the conjectures of science fiction writers, but an actual threat that is assuming an ever more realistic shape. It is in the interests of all peoples to nip this threat in the bud.
185.	The Soviet Union proposes that an international convention should be concluded which will outlaw the military use of the environment. Compliance with the provisions of such a convention, a draft of which we will submit [see AlC.JIL.675], could be secured through the adoption by each State, in accordance with its constitutional processes, of appropriate measures to prohibit activities contrary to the convention and through consultations and co-operation among States, notably within the framework of the United Nations.
186.	The conclusion of such a convention would prevent the emergence of new means of warfare and, at the same time, would facilitate the solution of a problem common to all mankind the protection of the environment. We trust that all the participants in the Assembly will fully appreciate the universal significance of this important initiative and treat this proposal accordingly. The Soviet Union and the socialist countries as a whole seek to gain .nothing from this. We have made this proposal because it is in the interests of all States, all peoples and the whole world.
187.	In its attitude in the United Nations, the Soviet Union proceeds on the assumption that the Organization can and must play an important part in developing and consolidating the positive processes characteristic of the present-day world situation. We have quite a number of useful resolutions to our credit aimed at strengthening international peace. Now, everything depends on their being consistently implemented.
188.	In this regard, I should like to refer especially to some resolutions adopted by the United Nations over the last two or three years by a large majority of votes. In the first place, I have in mind the one on the prohibition of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. This is an Assembly decision of fundamental importance. It must acquire binding force for all States and, in this regard, the Security Council has an important role.
189.	One cannot say that the General Assembly resolution on the convening of a world disarmament conference [resolution 2833 (XXVI)] has not been followed up. An Ad Hoc Committee on the World Disarmament Conference [resolution 3183 (XXVIII)] has even been set up, in which, among other States, three nuclear Powers are participating. However, in fact, the question is not really being dealt with. It is time for the Committee to proceed, in close co-operation with the nuclear Powers, to prepare concrete recommendations on the practical aspects of the convocation of that conference. The boycotting of this important measure by several States is contrary to the clearly expressed desire of the overwhelming majority of States Members of the United Nations. We regard it as a challenge to the world Organization.
190.	Through no fault of the Soviet Union, there is delay in the implementation of such a commonly useful enterprise as that of the reduction of the military budgets of the States permanent members of the Security Council by 10 per cent and the utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries. This example belongs in the same category. This action would have a double effect: it would promote the limitation of the arms race and, at the same time, provide additional assistance to States that need it most. The attitudes towards this proposal act as a kind of litmus paper revealing the intentions of States regarding acute present-day problems.
191.	The further development of bilateral relations between States based on the principles of peaceful coexistence is a vast and far from exhausted reserve for deepening detente. On this basis our country is prepared to establish and expand not just normal but, where possible, friendly relations with all States sharing this approach. This has been and remains one of the most important lines of the Soviet Union's foreign policy.
192.	It is our desire to see the consolidation of all the positive results that have been achieved so far in our relations with leading capitalist States on the basis of fruitful efforts on both sides. We' want to move ahead and make these relations stable. In this context, the statements by the new leaders of the United States, France and the Federal Republic of Germany about their intentions to continue to move towards detente and co-operation have been met in the Soviet Union with satisfaction.
193.	Today economic, scientific and technological links assume an increasingly large role in relations between States with different social systems. If co-operation in these fields is built on respect for the principles of equality and non-interference, it will not only be mutually advantageous but will also promote the establishment of a material basis of sorts for durable peace and good neighborliness.
194.	We value highly the good and, in some instances, close relations which have been established between the Soviet Union and many developing countries. The countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America which have embarked upon the road of national independence and the consolidation of economic independence can continue to rely firmly on our support. We were in at the source of their struggle against colonialism, and at each and every stage of it we have supported and will continue to support the developing States in word and in deed. That is our line of principle, and we shall not deviate from it.
195.	The solution of such complex and urgent problems as those of energy and food, which are attracting much attention, particularly in the United Nations, should also be sought on the path of peace and co-operation, of strict observance of the principles of equality and sovereignty, and of the right of States to dispose of their natural resources.
196.	The number of young States Members of the United Nations has increased at this session of the General Assembly. We should like to express our particular satisfaction at the fact that the People's Republic of Bangladesh has become a full Member of the United Nations and that thus an end has been put to an injustice with regard to that major Asian State.
197.	The Soviet Union, which was one of the first countries to establish diplomatic relations with the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, welcomes that State's admission to the United Nations with great satisfaction. The Soviet Union also welcomes the admission to the United Nations of the newly independent State of Grenada. Soon to come is the proclamation of the national independence of Mozambique. The current attempts to frustrate the process of decolonization that has begun in that country must be most resolutely rebuffed. That of course applies equally and fully to Angola. That will, indeed, be the crowning moment of the armed phase of the struggle for national liberation of the former Portuguese colonies, and will provide even further evidence of the irresistible march of social progress.
198.	The year that has passed since the Fascist coup in Chile has revealed the great depth of the tragedy that has befallen the Chilean people. But it has also demonstrated that endless terror and the suppression of elementary human rights cannot break the will of the people of Chile for a free and independent life. The bloody deeds of the junta are in glaring contradiction with the lofty human principles and purposes of the United Nations, and are a challenge to human honor and decency. It is no accident that the junta in fact remains in a state of international isolation.
199.	The struggle for national independence and economic liberation and for the elimination of the vestiges of the colonial system has been scoring impressive victories in recent years. But that struggle is by no means ended. The manifestations of economic oppression and inequality and the fact that there are still dark blemishes of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination on earth cannot be tolerated. Until they disappear, the peace-loving States and the United Nations as a whole cannot slacken their efforts to eradicate them.
200.	It is always necessary to identify the most topical issues among the great variety of problems posed by the course of world developments. At any given moment, the efforts of States striving to achieve the strengthening of peace should be concentrated precisely upon them. It is the opinion of the Soviet Union that some of the high-priority tasks of today are the following:
-to proceed in practical terms to a Cyprus settlement; stop the violence against that country and its people; secure respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of that State and, for those purposes, convene a representative international conference on Cyprus within the framework of the United Nations;
-to resume as a matter of urgency the work of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East to solve questions concerning the establishment of a just and durable peace in that area;
-to complete the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe at an early date by adopting, at the highest level, decisions ensuring a peaceful future for Europe;
-to achieve specific agreements in the Soviet- American Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, in the multilateral negotiations on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe, and in the Committee on Disarmament;
-to take measures to implement the decisions of the sixth special session of the General Assembly on strengthening the economic independence of developing States.
201.	No one would venture to claim that the solution of all those problems, and of others to which we have drawn the attention of this Assembly, is an easy task. But their solution is necessary and feasible, and all States really interested in developing peaceful and reasonable forms of international inter-course should work towards that end. The Soviet Union will be unstinting in its efforts to promote the establishment of durable and lasting peace on earth.
Last year, at the previous session [.2124th meeting], in my first address as Secretary of State, I spoke to this Assembly about American purposes. I said that the United States seeks a comprehensive, institutionalized peace, not an armistice. I asked other nations to join us in moving the world from detente to cooperation, from coexistence to community.
41.	In the year that has passed some progress has been made in dealing with particular crises. But many fundamental issues persist and new issues threaten the very structure of world stability.
42.	Our deepest problem going far beyond the items on the agenda is whether our vision can keep pace with our challenges. Will history recall the twentieth century as a time of mounting global conflict or as the beginning of a global conception? Will our age of interdependence spur joint progress or common disaster?
43.	The answer is not yet clear. New realities have not yet overcome old patterns of thought and action. Traditional concepts of national sovereignty, social struggle and the relation between the old and the new nations too often guide our course. And so we have managed but not advanced; we have endured but not prospered; and we have continued the luxury of political contention.
44.	This condition has been dramatized in the brief period since the twenty-eighth session. War has ravaged the Middle East and Cyprus. The technology of nuclear explosives has resumed its dangerous spread. Inflation and the threat of global decline hang over the economies of rich and poor alike.
45.	We cannot permit this trend to continue. Conflict between nations once devastated continents; the struggle between blocs may destroy humanity, ideologies and doctrines drawn from the last century do not even address, let alone solve, the unprecedented problems of today. As a result, events challenge habits; a gulf grows between rhetoric and reality.
46.	The world has dealt with local conflicts as if they were perpetually manageable. We have permitted too many of the underlying causes to fester unattended, until the parties believed that their only recourse was war. And because each crisis ultimately has been contained we have remained complacent. But tolerance of local conflict tempts world holocaust. We have no guarantee that some local crisis perhaps the next will not explode beyond control.
47.	The world has dealt with nuclear weapons as if restraint were automatic. Their very awesomeness has chained those weapons for almost three decades; their sophistication and expense have helped to keep constant for a decade the number of States which possess them. Now, as was quite foreseeable, political inhibitions are in danger of crumbling. Nuclear catastrophe looms more plausible, whether through design or miscalculation, accident, theft or blackmail.
48.	The world has dealt with the economy as if its constant advance were inexorable. While postwar growth has been uneven and some parts of the world have lagged, our attention has been focused on how to increase participation in a general advance. We continue to deal with economic issues on a national, regional or bloc basis at the precise moment that our interdependence is multiplying. Strains on the fabric and institutions of the world economy threaten to engulf us all in a general depression.
49.	The delicate structure of international cooperation, so laboriously constructed over the last quarter century, can hardly survive, and certainly cannot be strengthened, if it is continually subjected to the shocks of political conflict, war and economic crisis.
50.	The time has come, then, for the nations assembled here to act together in the recognition that continued reliance on old slogans and traditional rivalries will lead us towards a world ever more torn between rich and poor. East and West, producer and consumer; a world where local crises threaten global confrontation and where the spreading atom threatens global peril; a world of rising costs and dwindling supplies, of growing populations and declining production.
51.	There is another course. Last week before this Assembly [2234th meeting] President Ford dedicated our country to a cooperative,, open approach to build a more secure and more prosperous world. The United States will assume the obligations that our values and strength impose upon us. But the building of a cooperative world is beyond the grasp of any one nation. An interdependent world requires not merely the resources but the vision and creativity of us all. Nations cannot simultaneously confront and cooperate with one another.
52.	We must recognize that the common interest is the only valid test of the national interest. It is in the common interest, and thus in the interest of each nation, that local conflicts be resolved short of force and 'heir root causes be removed by political means; that the spread of nuclear technology be achieved without the spread of nuclear weapons; that growing economic interdependence lift all nations and not drag them down together.
53.	We will not solve these problems during this session, or during any one session, of the General Assembly, but we must at least begin to remedy problems, not just manage them; to shape events, rather that endure them; to confront our challenges instead of one another.
54.	The urgent political responsibility of our era is to resolve conflicts without war. History is replete with examples of the tragedy that sweeps nations when ancient enmities and the inertia of habit freeze the scope for decision. Equally, history is marked by brief moments when an old order is giving way to a pattern new and unforeseen. Those are times of potential disorder and danger but also of opportunity for fresh creation.
55.	We face such a moment today. Together let us face its realities. First, a certain momentum towards peace has been created, in EastWest relations and in certain regional conflicts. It must be maintained. But we are only at the beginning of the process. If we do not continue to advance, we will slip back. Second, progress in the negotiation of difficult issues comes only through patience, perseverance and a recognition of the tolerable limits of the other side. Peace is a process, not a condition. It can be reached only in steps. Third, the failure to recognize and grasp the attainable will prevent the achievement of the ideal. Attempts to resolve all issues at one time are a certain prescription for stagnation. Progress towards peace can be thwarted by asking too much as surely as by asking too little. Fourth, the world community can help resolve chronic conflicts, but exaggerated expectations will prevent essential accommodation among the parties. This Assembly can help or hinder the negotiating process. It can seek a scapegoat or a solution. It can offer the parties an excuse to escape reality or sturdy support in search of a compromise. It can decide on propaganda or contribute to realistic approaches responsive to man's yearning for peace.
56.	The Middle East starkly demonstrates those considerations. In the past year we have witnessed both the fourth ArabIsraeli war in a generation and the hopeful beginnings of a political process towards a lasting and just peace. We have achieved the respite of a ceasefire and two disengagement agreements, but the shadow of war remains. The legacy of hatred and suffering, the sense of irreconcilability have begun to yield however haltingly to the process of negotiation. But we still have a long road ahead.
57.	One side seeks the recovery of territory and justice for a displaced people. The other side seeks security and recognition by its neighbors of its legitimacy as a nation. In the end, the common goal of peace surely is broad enough to embrace all these aspirations.
58.	Let us be realistic about what must be done. The art of negotiation is to set goals that can be achieved at a given time and to reach them with determination. Each step forward modifies old perceptions and brings about a new situation that improves the chances of a comprehensive settlement.
59.	Because these principles were followed in the Middle East, agreements have been reached in the past year which many thought impossible. They were achieved, above all, because of the wisdom of the leaders of the Middle East who decided that there had been enough stalemate and war, that more might be gained by testing each other in negotiation than by testing each other on the battlefield.
60.	The Members of this body, both collectively and individually, have a solemn responsibility to encourage and support the parties in the Middle East on their present course. We have as well an obligation to give our support to the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East and elsewhere. The United States applauds their indispensable role, as well as the outstanding contribution of SecretaryGeneral Waldheim in the cause of peace.
61.	During the past year my country has made a major effort to promote peace in the Middle East. President Ford has asked me to reaffirm today that we are determined to press forward with these efforts. We will work closely with the parties and we will cooperate with all interested countries within the framework of the Geneve Conference.
62.	The tormented island of Cyprus is another area where peace requires a spirit of compromise, accommodation and justice. The United States is convinced that the sovereignty, political independence, and territorial integrity of Cyprus must be maintained. It will be up to the parties to decide on the form of government they believe best suited to the particular conditions of Cyprus. They must reach accommodation on the areas to be administered by the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities as well as on the conditions under which refugees can return to their homes and reside in safety. Finally, no lasting peace is possible unless provisions are agreed upon which will lead to the timely and phased reduction of armed forces and armaments and other war material.
63.	The United States is prepared to play an even more active role now than in the past in helping the parties find a solution to the centuries old problem of Cyprus. We will do all we can, but it is those most directly concerned whose effort is most crucial. Third parties should not be asked to produce miraculous outcomes not anchored in reality. Third parties can encourage those directly involved to perceive their broader interests; they can assist in the search for elements of agreement by interpreting each side's views and motives to the other. But no mediator can succeed unless the parties genuinely want mediation and are ready to make the difficult decisions needed for a settlement.
64.	The United States is already making a major contribution to help relieve the human suffering of the people of Cyprus. We urge the international community to continue and, if possible, to increase its own humanitarian relief effort.
65.	The United States notes with particular satisfaction the continuing process of change in Africa. We welcome the positive demonstration of cooperation between old rulers and the new free. The United States shares and pledges its support for the aspiration of Africans to participate in the fruits of freedom and human dignity.
66.	The second new dimension on our agenda concerns the problem of nuclear proliferation.
67.	The world has grown so accustomed to the existence of nuclear weapons that it assumes they will never be used. But today technology is rapidly expanding the number of nuclear weapons in the hands of major Powers and threatens to put nuclear explosive technology at the disposal of. an increasing number of other countries.
68.	In a world where many nations possess nuclear weapons, dangers would be vastly compounded. It would be infinitely more difficult, if not impossible, to maintain stability among a large number of nuclear Powers. Local wars would take on a new dimension. Nuclear weapons would be introduced into regions where political conflict remains intense and the parties consider their vital interests overwhelmingly involved. There would, as well, be a vastly heightened risk of direct involvement by the major nuclear Powers.
69.	This problem does not concern one country, one region, or one bloc alone. No nation can be indifferent to the spread of nuclear technology; every nation's security is directly affected.
70.	The challenge before the world is to realize the peaceful benefits of nuclear technology without contributing to the growth of nuclear weapons or to the number of States possessing them.
71.	As a major nuclear Power, the United States recognizes its special responsibility. We realize that we cannot expect others to show restraint if we do not ourselves practice restraint. Together with the Soviet Union we are seeking to negotiate new quantitative and qualitative limitations on strategic arms. Last week our delegations reconvened in Geneva, and we intend to pursue these negotiations with the seriousness of purpose they deserve. The United States has no higher priority than controlling and reducing the levels of nuclear arms.
72.	Beyond the relations of the nuclear Powers to each other lies the need to curb the spread of nuclear explosives. We must take into account that plutonium is an essential ingredient of nuclear explosives and that in the immediate future the amount of plutonium generated by peaceful nuclear reactors will be multiplied many times. Heretofore the United States and a number of other countries have widely supplied nuclear fuels and other nuclear materials in order to promote the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. This policy cannot continue if it leads to the proliferation of nuclear explosives. Sales of these materials can no longer be treated by anyone as a purely commercial competitive enterprise.
73.	The world community, therefore, must work urgently towards a system of effective international safeguards against the diversion of plutonium or its byproducts. The United States is prepared to join with others in a comprehensive effort.
74.	Let us together agree on the practical steps which must be taken to assure the benefits of nuclear energy free of its terrors. The United States will shortly offer specific proposals to strengthen safeguards to the other principal supplier countries. We shall intensify our efforts to gain the broadest possible acceptance of IAEA safeguards, to establish practical controls on the transfer of nuclear materials, and to ensure the effectiveness of these procedures. The United States will urge IAEA to draft an international convention for enhancing physical security against theft or diversion of nuclear material. Such a convention should set forth specific standards and techniques for protecting materials while in use, storage arid transfer. The Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex], which this Assembly has endorsed, warrants continuing support. The Treaty contains not only a broad commitment to limit the spread of nuclear explosives but specific obligations to accept and implement IAEA safeguards and to control the transfer of nuclear materials.
75.	Whatever advantages seem to accrue from the acquisition of nuclear explosive technology will prove to be ephemeral. When Pandora's box has been opened, no country will be the beneficiary and all mankind will have lost. This is not inevitable.
If we act decisively now, we can still control the future.
76.	Let me now turn to our economic problems.
77.	Lord Keynes wrote:
"The power to become habituated to his surroundings is a marked characteristic of mankind. Very few of us realize with conviction the intensely unusual, unstable, complicated, unreliable, temporary nature of the economic organization."
78.	The economic history of the postwar period has been one of sustained growth, for developing as well as developed nations. The universal expectation of our peoples, the foundation of our political institutions and the assumption underlying the evolving structure of peace are all based on the belief that this growth will continue.
79.	But will it? The increasingly open and cooperation global economic system that we have come to take tor granted is now under unprecedented attack. The world is poised on the brink of a return to the unrestrained economic nationalism which accompanied the collapse of economic order in the 1930s. And, should that occur, all would suffer: poor as well as rich, producer as well as consumer.
80.	So let us so longer fear to confront in public the facts which have come to dominate bur private discussions and concerns.
81.	The early warning signs of a major economic crisis are evident. Rates of inflation unprecedented in the past quarter century are sweeping developing and developed nations alike. The world's financial institutions are staggering under the most massive and rapid movements of reserves in history. And profound questions have arisen about meeting man's most fundamental needs for energy and food.
82.	While the present situation threatens every individual and nation, it is the poor who suffer the most. While the wealthier adjust their living standards, the poor see the hopes of a lifetime collapse around them. While others tighten their belts, the poor starve. While others can hope for a better future, the poor see only despair ahead.
83.	It can be in the interest of no country or group of countries to base policies on a test of strength, for a policy of confrontation would end in disaster for ail. Meeting man's basic needs for energy and food and assuring economic growth while mastering inflation require international cooperation to an unprecedented degree.
84.	Let us apply these principles first to the energy situation. Oil producers seek a better life for their peoples and a just return for their diminishing resources. The developing nations less well endowed by nature face the disintegration of the results of decades of striving for development as the result of a price policy over which they have no control. The developed nations find the industrial civilization built over centuries in jeopardy.
85.	Both producers and consumers have legitimate claims. The problem is to reconcile them for the common good. 
86.	The United States is working closely with several oil producers to help diversify their economies. We have established commissions to facilitate the transfer of technology and to assist with industrialization. We are prepared to accept substantial investments in the United States and we welcome a greater role for the oil producers in the management of international economic institutions.
87.	The investment of surplus oil revenues presents a great challenge. The countries which most need these revenues are generally the least likely to receive them. The world's financial institutions have coped thus far, but ways must be found to assure assistance for those countries most in need of it. And the full brunt of the surplus revenues is yet to come.
88.	Despite our best efforts to meet the oil producers' legitimate needs and to channel their resources into constructive uses, the world cannot sustain even the present level of prices, much less continuing increases. The prices of other commodities will inevitably rise in a never-ending inflationary spiral. Nobody will benefit. The oil producers will be forced to spend more for their own imports. Many nations will not be able to withstand the pace, and the poorer could be overwhelmed. The complex, fragile structure of global economic cooperation required to sustain national economic growth stands in danger of being shattered.
89.	The United States will work with other consumer nations on means of conservation and on ways to cushion the impact of massive investments from abroad. The preliminary agreement on a program of solidarity and cooperation signed a few days ago in Brussels by the major consumer countries is an encouraging first step.
90.	But the long range solution requires a new understanding between consumers and producers. Unlike food prices, the high cost of oil is not the result of economic factors, of an actual shortage of capacity or of the free play of supply and demand. Rather it is caused by deliberate decisions to restrict production and maintain an artificial price level. We recognize that the producers should have a fair share; the fact remains that the present price level even threatens the economic wellbeing of producers. Ultimately they depend upon the vitality of the world economy for the security of their markets and their investments. And it cannot be in the interest of any nation to magnify the despair of the least developed, which are uniquely vulnerable to exorbitant prices and have no recourse .but to pay.
91.	What has gone up by political decision can be reduced by political decision.
92.	Last week President Ford called upon the oil producers to join with consumers in defining a strategy which will meet the world's longterm need for both energy and food at reasonable prices; he set forth the principles which should guide such a policy; and he announced to this Assembly America's determination to meet our responsibilities to help alleviate another grim reality world hunger. At a time of universal concern for justice and in an age of advanced technology, it is intolerable that millions are starving and hundreds of millions remain undernourished.
93.	The magnitude of the longterm problem is clear. At present rates of population growth, world food production must double by the end of this century to maintain even the present inadequate dietary level and an adequate diet for all would require that we triple world production. If we are true to our principles, we have an obligation to strive for an adequate supply of food to every man, woman and child in the world. This is a technical possibility, a political necessity and a moral imperative.
94.	The United States is prepared to join with all nations at the World Food Conference in Rome to launch the truly massive effort which is required. We will present a number of specific proposals: to help developing nations, which have the lowest yields and the largest amounts of unused land and water and whose potential in food production must be made to match their growing need; to increase substantially global fertilizer production, for we must end once and for all the world's chronic fertilizer shortage; to expand international, regional and national research programs because scientific and technical resources mus? hi mobilized now to meet the demands of the year 2030 and beyond; to rebuild the world's food reserves, as our capacity for dealing with famine must be freed from the vagaries of weather; and to provide a substantial level of concessionary food aid. The United States will in the coming year increase the value of our own food aid shipments to countries in need. We make this commitment despite great pressures on our economy and at a time when we are seeking to cut our own Government's budget, because we realize the dimensions of the tragedy with which we are faced. All of us here have a common obligation to prevent the poorest nations from being overwhelmed and to enable them to build the social, economic and political base for self-sufficiency.
95.	The hopes of every nation for a life of peace and plenty rest on an effective international resolution of the crises of inflation, fuel and food. We must act now and we must act together.
96.	Let us never forget that all of our political endeavors are ultimately judged by one standard to translate our actions into human concerns.
97.	The United States will never be satisfied with a world where man's fears overshadow his hopes. We support the United Nations efforts in the fields of international law and human rights. We approve of the activities of the United Nations .in social, economic and humanitarian realms around the world. The United States considers the World Population Conference, held last month, the World Food Conference to be held a month from now and the continuing Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea of fundamental importance to our common future.
98.	In the coming months the United States will make specific proposals for the United Nations to initiate a major international effort to prohibit torture; a concerted campaign to control the disease which afflicts and debilitates over 200 million people in 70 countries schistosomiasis; and a substantial strengthening of the world's capacity to deal with natural disaster, especially the improvement of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator.
99.	We have long lived in a world where the consequences of our failures were manageable a world where local conflicts were contained, nuclear weapons threatened primarily those nations which possessed them, and the cycle of economic growth and decline seemed principally a national concern. But that is no longer the case. It is no longer possible to imagine that conflicts, weapons and recession will not spread.
100.	We must now decide. The problems we face will be with .us the greater part of the century. But will they be with us as challenges to be overcome or as adversaries that have vanquished us?
101.	It is easy to agree to yet another set of principles or to actions other nations should take. But the needs of the poor will not be met by slogans; the needs of an expanding global economy will not be met by new restrictions; the search for peace cannot be conducted on the basis of confrontation. So each nation must ask what it can do, what contribution it is finally prepared to make to the common good.
102.	Beyond peace, beyond prosperity, lie man's deepest aspirations to a life of dignity and justice. And beyond our pride, beyond our concern for the national purpose we are called upon to serve, there must be a concern for the betterment of the human condition. White we cannot, in the brief span allowed to each of us, undo the accumulated problems of centuries, we dare not do less than try. So let us now get on with our tasks.
103.	Let us act in the spirit of Thucydides that "the bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding go out to meet it".
Mr. President, first of all, I should like to congratulate you on your election as President of the current session of the General Assembly and I am confident that you will preside well and make positive contributions to the current session.
86.	New and important victories have been won by the people of all countries in their struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism since the start of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly last year. The numerous third world countries have become the main force in the revolutionary struggle against the two hegemonic Powers. More and more people have seen through the so called detente played up by the superPowers. All the basic contradictions in the world are further sharpening, particularly the contradiction between the two superPowers on the one hand and the people of all countries on the other and the contradiction between, the two superPowers themselves. It is now evident to all that the world today is amidst more intense turbulence and unrest.
87.	What should be noted here first is the great October war in the Middle East. The heroic people of Egypt, Syria, Palestine and other Arab countries, in defiance of superPower obstruction and disruption, boldly took up arms and successfully rebuffed Israeli Zionist aggression. This fight exploded the myth of Israeli "invincibility", upset the state of "no war, no peace" imposed by the superPowers and demonstrated the might of the united struggle of the Arab people.
88.	In this Middle East war, the Arab countries used oil as a weapon to deal a heavy blow at Zionism and hegemonism. This was a historic, pioneering action. Its impact far exceeds the scope of the Arab people's anti-imperialist struggle. It has opened up a new dimension for the third world's struggle in defense of national resources against imperialist plunder and exploitation.
89.	The African people's struggle for national liberation has made great progress. Portugal is one of the oldest colonial empires. The downfall of the former Fascist regime in Portugal is a victory for the African people, who have persevered in a long armed struggle, as well as for the Portuguese people, who have persistently opposed the reactionary colonial war.
90.	The peoples of IndoChina have steadily achieved new successes in their struggle against United States aggression and for national liberation. The VietNamese people have carried on an unremitting struggle for the strict implementation of the Paris Agreement of 27 January 1973 and against the Nguyen Van Thieu clique's violations of the Agreement. In Laos, the Provisional Government of National Union has been formed. The Cambodian people have grown ever stronger in their fight against the traitorous Lon Nol clique. The struggle of the Korean people for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland has won ever wider support. There is a growing tendency among the SouthEast Asian countries to free themselves from superPower interference and contention.
91.	The struggle of the Latin American peoples against hegemonism and in defense of their State sovereignty, independence and national economic rights and interests has continued to surge forward. Those peoples initiated the struggle fair the zone of exercise of their maritime rights of 200 nautical miles, which has become the common demand of the great majority of nations.
92.	The Asian, African and Latin American peoples have supported each other in struggle, and they have become ever more keenly aware that unity is strength. At various conferences, they have strongly denounced colonialism, racism, Zionism, imperialism and hegemonism. Their just struggles and those of the people of other countries, supporting and complementing each other, are pounding away at the old international order, which the superPowers vainly attempt to maintain.
93.	In the past year, the contention between the two superPowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, for spheres of influence and world hegemony has become more intense. This is a fact which no agree menu between them can cover up. The Soviet leadership has lauded these agreements to the skies, as if the mere conclusion of agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union would bring detente to the whole world and usher in a "new stage of history", namely, a "world without war". "Detente" has become a kind of quack medicine hawked by the Soviet leadership everywhere. But none of us will forget that it was after the reaching of a stack of agreements at the second United StatesSoviet talks that the Middle East war broke out, and that it was after the reaching of more agreements at the third United StatesSoviet talks that the Cyprus events occurred.
So then, where is the "detente"? Has not there been ample manifestation of the contention between the two superPowers during the Middle East war and the Cyprus events?
94.	To keep a "balance of power" the United States and the Soviet Union reached certain agreements on "strategic arms limitation". But is has become more evident since their third summit talks that, at bottom, these agreements serve the purpose of bigger and more intensified contention. As far as balance is concerned, it has always been relative and temporary whether in nature or in human society, while imbalance is absolute and constant. In the real life of today, there is in fact no "balance of power" between the two superPowers. Instead, each side is desperately trying to outstrip and overwhelm the other, and the wildest arms race is on. No wonder the superPower with the label of "socialism" has, of late, arrogantly boasted that it is "on a historic offensive along the entire front of the global confrontation", and that the pace of its advance is "rapid".
95.	Lenin pointed out: "The content of imperialist politics is 'world domination' and the continuation of this politics is imperialist war." So long as imperialism and social imperialism exist, there will be the danger of war, and genuine detente or "lasting peace" will be impossible. Today, the danger of war comes from the superPowers. One superPower is trying by hook or by crook to carry out infiltration and expansion abroad and squeeze into the other superPower's spheres of influence in Europe and other parts of the world in order to supersede that superPower and realize its own wild ambition of world domination. With this fierce contention between the superPowers going on as it is, eventually either the superPowers will go to war against each other or the people will rise in revolution; either the war will give rise to revolution, or revolution will prevent the war. As Chairman Mao Tsetung has said: "The danger of a new world war still exists, and the people of all countries must get prepared. But revolution is the main trend in the world today."
96.	By stepping up their contention for world hegemony, the two superPowers are bound to hasten the process of their turning into their own opposites. Nowadays, not only have the third world countries risen one after another in revolt against them, but the second world countries in between the superPowers and the third world have also stood up to resist in various ways control and bullying by the superPowers. Beset by troubles at home and abroad, both superPowers are having a very tough' time. One superPower has already overstretched itself and is in a dilemma, unable to attend to all its troubles at the same time. The other superPower is in an even worse predicament. It has wild ambitions but lacks strength, and its difficulties abound. They are both in the plight described by the Chinese verse: "Flowers fall off, do what one may." Overestimation of the strength of the superPowers does not square with the facts. In the final analysis, it is not the one or two superPowers but the people of the world in their thousands of millions who determine the destiny of the world.
97.	The Chinese delegation would now like to state its views on a number of questions confronting the General Assembly at its current session. First, we
would like to state our views on Africa's fight against colonialism.
98.	China consistently supports the liberation struggles of all oppressed nations and peoples and considers this to be her bounden internationalist duty. In Africa, we firmly support the peoples of Mozambique, Angola, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Azania and other regions in their just struggle against colonialism and racism. We hail the birth of the Republic of GuineaBissau and warmly welcome its admission to the United Nations. We firmly demand that Spain terminate its colonial domination in Spanish Sahara and sincerely hope that the Arab countries concerned will work together with the people of Spanish Sahara to seek a reasonable solution to the existing questions of this region through friendly consultations on the basis of unity against colonialism.
99.	We hold that the colonial peoples can win national liberation only by relying mainly on their own efforts to wage a tit for tat struggle against colonialism. Moribund colonialism relies on armed force to carry on its deathbed struggle, and it will never step down from the stage of history unless it is defeated by the armed struggle of the colonial peoples. Both the birth of the Republic of GuineaBissau and the more recent agreement on the independence of Mozambique are in essence the result of the long and persistent armed struggle of the people of GuineaBissau and Mozambique, and are by no means favors bestowed by colonialism.
100.	The downfall of the former Fascist regime in Portugal, which persisted in the colonial war, is, of course, an important event. But this development in no way implies that Portugal will bring independence to the colonial peoples on a silver platter. Recently, under the pressure of the people, the new Portuguese Government had to recognize the right to independence of the peoples in the Portuguese colonies. This is a manifestation of the general trend. But it is yet to be seen whether the new Portuguese Government will suit its actions to its words. Even when that Government has reached an agreement with a colony, it remains to be seen whether the agreement will truly by implemented. The declaration of the Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] adopted at the eleventh ordinary session points out that, if Portugal does not take a clear position on the right to total independence of its colonies in Africa, there will be no other way but pursuit and intensification of the struggle for national liberation.
101.	We warmly endorse this correct stand. According to our experience in China, all reactionaries habitually use counterrevolutionary dual tactics, and we must use revolutionary dual tactics to deal with them. Armed struggle is fundamental, but negotiations are not excluded. Sometimes negotiating is tit for tat; and sometimes not negotiating is also tit for tat. Even in negotiations one must base oneself on fighting. In the course of negotiations, the fundamental interests of the people must be protected. The armed forces of the people must be strengthened, and not weakened.
102.	Moreover, it must be pointed out that while old line colonialisms have not died out, neo colonial isms of various descriptions, including the neo colonialism flaunting the banner of socialism are stepping up their infiltration. These neocolonialisms are sowing discord among African countries and within the national liberation movements to split and demoralize them in a vain attempt to supplant old line colonialisms and control the regions concerned. Sharp vigilance should be maintained against this. The future of the African liberation struggle is bright, but the road ahead remains tortuous. We believe that the great and increasingly awakening African people, strengthening their unity and persevering in a long struggle, will certainly surmount all difficulties and triumph in the end.
103.	Second, on the Mi 'die East question, we wish to say the following.
104.	The Arab people brought about an excellent situation through fighting the October war. This war has strengthened the confidence of the Arab people in victory over the Israeli aggressor and broken the stalemate that was deliberately created by the superPowers. Now, a disengagement has been effected between Egypt and Israel and between Syria and Israel, but the Middle East question is still far from being settled.
105.	The essence of the Middle East question lies in Israeli Zionist aggression and the contention between the two superPowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, for hegemony in the Middle East versus the struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples against aggression and hegemony.
106.	The Chinese Government and people always support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. From the very beginning, we have refused to have any contact with the Israeli Zionists, who persist in aggression. We have firmly opposed the contention between the two superPowers in the Middle East and opposed their support of and connivance with Israel, and we have constantly exposed the truth that social imperialism is giving sham support while actually attempting to control the Palestinian and other Arab peoples.
107.	It is well known that the United Nations has held innumerable discussions on the Palestine question and adopted countless resolutions thereon, of which the one referred to most often is Security Council resolution 242 (1967). All these resolutions have the common feature of twisting the question of the restoration of the Palestinian.people's national rights into a so called "question of refugees". This is a gross injustice. We have always opposed it and will continue to oppose it.
108.	Now, the Arab countries have proposed the discussion of the question of Palestinian national rights at the General Assembly session, so that all countries may hear directly the voices of the millions of Palestinian people and the 100 million Arab people and so that more countries may understand and support their just position. This is entirely necessary.
109.	The restoration of Palestinian national rights and the recovery of the lost Arab territories form a struggle that is an integral whole. There can be no settlement of the Middle East question so long as the lost Arab territories are not recovered and Palestinian national rights are not restored. Whatever maneuvers they may engage in, the two superPowers will never succeed in their attempt to sacrifice the Palestinian national rights and undermine the militant unity of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples.
110.	We hope that the United Nations will rectify its longstanding unjust attitude on the Palestine question, recognize the Palestinian people's national rights and support their restoration. But historical experience merits attention. No unrealistic hopes should be pinned on United Nations resolutions. In the final analysis, the Arab countries can recover their lost territories and the Palestinian people can regain their national rights only by relying on their own close unity and unremitting struggle, with the support of the peoples of the whole world.
111.	Third, our views on the question of Cyprus are as follows.
112.	The question of Cyprus is a legacy of imperialist colonial rule. The internal cause of the recent eruption in Cyprus is the lack of a satisfactory solution to the question between the two communities on the island; and its external cause is the attempt of each of the two superPowers to put this island of strategic importance under its own influence and control.
113.	One superPower stirred up trouble by pulling wires behind the scenes. The other superPower, pretending to "uphold" the independence of Cyprus and feeling anxious, like an ant on a hot pan, issued one government statement after another, supporting one side one day and the other side the other, sowing discord and fanning the flames of trouble. Racking its brains for ingenious devices, it turned up with proposals, first for the sending of a "United Nations special mission" and then for the convening of an international conference with the participation of the five permanent members of the Security Council. Anyone with a discerning eye will see that its "mischievous" actions serve neither the interests of the independence of Cyprus nor the interests of the Greek and Turkish communities or the countries directly related to these communities, but are aimed at meddling in the Cyprus question and further squeezing into the eastern Mediterranean. In quest of hegemony in the Mediterranean, it has redoubled its efforts to threaten, cajole, subvert and undermine the Balkan countries, causing their grave uneasiness and aggravating tension in this region.
114.	We hold that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus must be respected. We hope that a reasonable solution will be found so that the Greek and Turkish communities can live together in equality and harmony. Cyprus, Turkey and Greece are all friends of China. We have all suffered from imperialist tactics of sowing discord and divide and rule. As for the questions left over from history, we believe that they will not be difficult to resolve so long as the Greek and Turkish communities in Cyprus and the countries concerned seek to do so by peaceful means and through patient consultations. We should be constantly on guard against superPower meddling and intervention.
115.	Fourth, on the questions of the South Asian subcontinent and nuclear free zones, we hold the following views.
116.	The dismemberment of Pakistan by India with the backing of the Soviet Union gave rise to turbulence and unrest on the South Asian subcontinent. Great efforts have been made by the Government of Pakistan to promote a normalization of relations between India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. By April this year, the Indian Government had finally implemented in full the resolutions of the General Assembly and Security Council of 1971 on the ceasefire between India and Pakistan, the withdrawal of troops and the repatriation of prisoners. This ought to have created favorable conditions for the relaxation of the situation on the South Asian subcontinent. But a new wave arose when the previous one had barely subsided. In May, India exploded a nuclear device allegedly for peaceful purposes. In June, the Indian Government imposed on the people of Sikkim the so called "Government of Sikkim Bill", which it had concocted singlehandedly. And, more recently, the Indian Parliament adopted a constitutional amendment, making Sikkim a so called "associate state" of India. To put it bluntly, this is the annexation of Sikkim. It is another naked act of expansionism perpetrated by the Indian Government after dismembering Pakistan by armed force.
117.	The Indian Government's annexation of Sikkim has aroused the opposition of the Sikkimese people as well as the Indian people and met with condemnation by India's neighbors and world public opinion. The Soviet propaganda organs, alone, sing the praises of India. This shows that Soviet revisionist social imperialism is the boss behind the scenes of Indian expansionism.
118.	The Soviet Union is unscrupulous in its efforts to interfere in, subvert, divide and control the South Asian countries. It is conspiring to engineer another dismemberment of Pakistan. It dreams of opening a corridor to the Indian Ocean to serve its interests in its contention with the other superPower for hegemony in the South Asian subcontinent and the Indian Ocean. The two superPowers are competing with each other in setting up military bases in the Indian Ocean, some of which are overt bases while others are covert ones, nominally for civilian, but actually for military, use. The turbulent situation in South Asia and the Indian Ocean calls for vigilance.
119.	The turbulence and unrest in South Asia totally contradict the desire for peace of the peoples of all countries in this region. The proposal put forward by Pakistan for the establishment of a nuclear free zone in South Asia [AI9706] is entirely, reasonable. China gives it her firm support. We also firmly support the proposal of Iran and Egypt for the establishment of a nuclear weapon free zone in the Middle East [AI9693 and Add./J]. China is a nuclear country, although her nuclear weapons are still in the experimental stage. We are developing nuclear weapons for defense and for breaking the nuclear monopoly and ultimately destroying the .nuclear weapons. The Chinese Government has solemnly declared on many occasions that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons. It consistently holds that the nuclear countries should undertake not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear countries or nuclear free zones. We are ready to make such an undertaking in regard to the proposed nuclear free zones in South Asia and the Middle East. We hope that all the other nuclear countries will do the same.
120.	Fifth, I turn to the questions of Cambodia and IndoChina.
121.	In the past year, the Cambodian people have continued to win new victories in their war against United States aggression and for national salvation. The People's Armed Forces of National Liberation of Cambodia launched sustained offensives on all fronts and kept annihilating the effective strength of the enemy. The liberated zone is expanding and becoming ever more consolidated. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, head of State of Cambodia, is the Cambodian people's sole lawful Government. It has been recognized by more than 60 countries, and its friendly relations with third world countries are developing steadily. It enjoys a high international prestige. After the tour of Prince Sihanouk, Deputy Prime Minister Khieu Samphan visited many countries in Asia, Africa and Europe this year. They were both accorded a warm welcome in the countries they visited. The just struggle of the Cambodian people has won support on an ever wider scale from people all over the world.
122.	The traitorous Lon Nol clique is a handful of national scum repudiated by the people of Cambodia. This clique is rent by disunity and beset with numerous contradictions. In the areas under its rule, the economic situation is deteriorating and mass movements are raging like a storm. It is in a dire plight. Of late, it has advanced a proposal for socalled "peace negotiations", attempting to achieve a demagogic effect. We all know that the key to restoring peace in Cambodia lies :n the cessation of United States aggression and interference in Cambodia. So, the purpose of that socalled proposal is simply to cover up the fact of United States aggression and interference in Cambodia and prolong the moribund life of the Lon Nol clique. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia has already opposed and rejected that proposal. The Chinese Government resolutely supports the solemn and just stand of the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia.
123.	It is utterly illegal for the Lon Nol clique to usurp Cambodia's seat in the United Nations. Last year, some people used procedural tactics to postpone for a year the discussion on the question of restoring the lawful rights of the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia. That was wholly unjustifiable. The Chinese Government firmly maintains that this session of the General Assembly should adopt a resolution to immediately expel the representatives of the traitorous Lon Nol clique and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia its rightful seat.
124.	More than one year has elapsed since the signing of the Agreement on ending the war in Viet Nam, but peace has not yet been restored in South Viet Nam. The Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam has worked tirelessly for the strict implementation of the Paris Agreement. But its efforts have met with obstruction and sabotage from the Saigon administration. Relying on massive United States military aid, the Saigon administration refuses to implement important provisions of the Paris Agreement, with the result that the situation in South Viet Nam has thus far remained tense. We demand that the United States Government strictly comply with the Paris Agreement and stop its involvement and interference in South Viet Nam, so that peace can really be restored in Viet Nam.
125.	The Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam is the authentic representative of the South Viet-Namese people. The Paris Agreement recognizes the fact that there exist two administrations in South Viet Nam, namely, the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Saigon administration. It is unreasonable that the United Nations should accept only the observer of one side, that is, the Saigon administration. To rectify this irrationality, we hold that the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam should be invited to send its observer to the United Nations.
126.	Sixth, with regard to the Korean question, our views are as follows.
127.	The General Assembly at its last session reached a consensus on the Korean question, confirmed the three principles of Korea's independence, peaceful reunification and great national unity and decided to dissolve the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.1 This was a welcome development.
128.	The facts over the past year show that the United Nations should not rest content with the progress made but should continue to go forward. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has made many efforts to push ahead the north south dialog and promote the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. But all these efforts have been unreasonably rejected by the South Korean authorities. The proposals on minor issues advanced by the South Korean authorities are wholly aimed at covering up their unwillingness to conduct negotiations on the fundamental question of reunifying the north and the south. What they really want is division, not reunification. On the pretext of a so called threat from the north, the South Korean authorities have taken a series of "emergency measures", depriving the South Korean people of all basic democratic rights. They have arrested, tried, imprisoned or murdered large numbers of people of various strata who call for democracy, freedom and peaceful reunification, ranging from young students and professors to political figures. Even people like former President Yoon Bo Sun and Catholic Bishop Chi Hak Soun have not escaped such persecution. Before the case of kidnapping Kim Dae Jung is closed, the South Korean authorities have already gone ahead with more sinister actions. Today, South Korea is in fact under the reign of terror of a Fascist dictator. It is mainly because they have the backing of United States troops that the South Korean authorities dare so feverishly to repress the people and sabotage the north south dialog. In order to eliminate outside interference in Korea and promote the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, the withdrawal of foreign forces from South Korea is entirely necessary.
129.	In paragraph 2 (c) of the explanatory memorandum attached to the request for the inclusion in the agenda of the twenty ninth session of an additional item on the question of Korea, which was submitted by the United States and other countries [see A/9741 and Add. 15], it is asserted that the United States troops under the United Nations flag have not interfered in the internal affairs of the host country. This makes a mockery of common sense. Does not the presence of tens of thousands of United States troops serve to embolden the South Korean rulers, to say the least? The consensus of the last session of the General Assembly affirmed that the reunification of North and South Korea should be achieved by peaceful means without interference by outside force. As a logical consequence of affirming this principle, the foreign troops under the United Nations flag should be withdrawn from South Korea. As for the statement contained in the draft resolution annexed to the explanatory memorandum that "tension in Korea has not been totally eliminated", well, to put it bluntly, this is another way of referring to the so called threat from the north, which is a myth that has long been exploded. By now even that neighboring country which has all along supported South Korea no longer believes in this myth. The assertion that the "United Nations Command" cannot be withdrawn because of the existence of this "threat" is sheer deception.
130.	The Chinese delegation is firmly against that draft resolution. It strongly maintains that the current session of the General Assembly should discuss and adopt the draft resolution submitted by Algeria and other countries for the withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations [see Al9703/Add.3].
131.	Seventh, the Chinese delegation's views on the question of disarmament are the following.
132.	It is quite understandable that disarmament is a matter of concern to people when the arms race, and especially the nuclear arms race, between the two superPowers has become more intense and glaring. But hopes are one thing, reality another. For instance, we all talked about disarmament here a year ago. Now, after a year has passed, have the armaments accumulated by the two superPowers decreased, or have they increased? In our view, they have increased. Is the danger of war greater or less than last year? In our view, at least one cannot say it is less.
133.	Why is this so? First, because the two superPowers are fiercely contending with each other on a global scale. And their arms expansion and war preparations serve their policy of hegemonism. Secondly, because the superPowers, when faced with increasingly acute economic troubles, inevitably turn to the further militarization of the national economy as the way out. In this regard, the present situation resembles that of the 1930s in many ways.
134.	Disarmament is an old issue, and China's views on it are well known. We are in favor of disarmament. But we favor genuine and not sham disarmament, still less empty talk about disarmament coupled with actual arms expansion year after year. Some say that to hold a disarmament conference is better than none. We understand this well intentioned desire. But we consider that, when the arms race between the two superPowers, which directly threatens the people of the world, is being stepped up, and when the superPower with the label of "socialism" is actually bent on using empty talk at a disarmament conference as a cover for its arms expansion and war preparations, the convening of a nominal disarmament conference or its preparatory meeting will only pro* duce the effect of lulling the people of the world.
135.	The Chinese Government is in favor of holding a genuine world disarmament conference. But the conference must have a clear aim and the necessary preconditions. The clear aim is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and absolutely not the so called limitation of strategic arms. The necessary preconditions are: all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear superPowers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against nonnuclear countries and nuclear free zones for example, the Soviet Union should, first of all, undertake obligations in respect of the nuclear free zone in Latin America and they must withdraw from abroad alt their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible for all countries, big and small, on an equal footing, to discuss with equanimity and resolve the question of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and other questions, free from any threat of force.
136.	In the absence of a reduction of the armaments of the two superPowers, what should the numerous small and medium countries do in the face of their threat? In our opinion, the small and medium countries should strive to strengthen their necessary and independent defense capabilities in the light of specific conditions. This is a fundamental and reliable abroad.
13>. As expected, the Soviet Government, which comes up with some novelties each year, has put forward this year an item entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate for military and other purposes incompatible with the maintenance of international security, human well being and health" [item 103J. The letter requesting the inclusion of this item as an important and urgent matter in the agenda of this session [A 19702] is so obscurely worded that one cannot make out its real meaning. We would rather wait till the Soviet representative explains the matter in clear and simple language before acting whether it deserves some comment,
138. Eighth, the Chinese delegation would like to state the following views on the question of defending State sovereignty and national economic rights and interests.
139* Inspired by the victorious struggle which the Arab countries and people waged with oil as a weapon, the third world countries have started an immense tide of struggle to defend their State sovereignty, control their national resources, develop their national economy and oppose exploitation and plunder by imperialism, and particularly that of the superPowers. Through the efforts of numerous small and medium steed countries from all parts of the world, the General Assembly at its sixth special session finally adopted the Declaration and the Program of Action on the Establishment of a Hew International Economic
Order. This was a significant victory for the united struggle of the third world countries. It marks a new trend in the struggle of the people of the world against imperialism, and particularly against hegemonism, a trend of deepening this struggle by carrying it into the economic field.
140.	Since the sixth special session, the developing countries have strongly demanded the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration and the Program of Action and the continued transformation of the old international economic relations based on exploitation and plunder. More and mote developing countries are taking bold action to control their national resources and the production and pricing of their raw materials. They have further united themselves in various raw material producers' organizations to strive to break superPower manipulation and monopoly. An important part of this struggle of the third world is the work of formulating the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, initiated by the President of Mexico.
141.	But the superPowers have done their utmost to belittle or deny the great significance of the Declaration and the Program of Action and tried by all means to obstruct the realization of the just demands of the third world. One superPower openly declared its disagreement with certain principal paragraphs in the two documents and obstinately refused to implement their provisions. The other superPower has set in motion its propaganda machine to vilify the Declaration and the Program of Action as showing "regionalism" and "economism", "reflecting group interests", and so on and so forth. This fully shows that both superPowers want to preserve the old order of exploitation and plunder.
142.	Some people say that the current economic difficulties are caused by the increase in oil price. This is a specious statement. In the final analysis, the present economic difficulties are the inevitable outcome of the imperialist system; they are not due to increase in the prices of raw materials, still less to any alleged misdeeds on the part of the oil producing countries. Those people are daily spreading the idea that Arab and other oil producing countries have reaped a windfall of tens of billions of United States dollars through the oil price rise. But they forget that the international monopoly capital has reaped an immeasurably greater amount of super profits through long years of plunder and exploitation and through the forcing down of the prices of oil and other raw materials. Ever since the emergence of colonialism and then imperialism, the parity between the prices of raw materials and industrial goods on the world market has always been unfair. Particularly in times of economic crises, the colonialists and imperialists invariably use every possible means, including the forcing down of the prices of raw materials, to shift the grave consequences of economic crises on to the broad masses in the colonies and semi colons, i.e., the developing countries of today. The imperialists regard this state of affair* **s normal and reasonable, and even as sacred and inviolable. Now, this sacred and inviolable state of affairs is being violated. To fly into a rage is futile. To bluff is also f 'tile. The profound significance of the oil battle lieu in the fact that the developing countries have united themselves and independently exercised control over their national resources and fought against plunder, exploitation and the shifting of crises on to them. Of course, higher oil prices have caused non oil producing countries of the third world some temporary difficulties. Ways should be sought to resolve these difficulties, but this struggle and its great historic significance must not be negated on this account.
143.	Combating maritime hegemonism and formulating a new law of the sea is an important aspect of the struggle of the developing countries to safeguard state sovereignty and develop their national economy. At the recent Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea held in Caracas, the great majority of the developing countries were for the establishment of an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles. Driven by circumstances, the two superPowers ostensibly gave up their opposition an attitude in which they had persisted all along. But, as if by agreement, they both raised a number of preconditions and restrictions under the name of a "package deal". The substance of these preconditions and restrictions is insistence on "freedom of passage" through straits within territorial seas and on "freedom of fishing" and "freedom of scientific research" in the exclusive economic zones. Nominally they have accepted a 200 nautical mile economic zone, but actually they want to emasculate the exclusive economic zone so that it will be devoid of any concrete substance and the developing countries will be left with nothing whatsoever. To put it bluntly, the "freedoms" demanded by the superPowers are their freedom to plunder the developing countries and their freedom to pursue hegemonism.
144.	In particular, the super Power which claims to be "the natural ally of the developing countries" has put on an even more wonderful show. Assuming a compassionate tone, it exclaimed that international trade and security would be impaired if freedom of passage through straits within territorial seas should be denied, and that if it was not allowed to go fishing iii the exclusive economic zone, the fish there would die uselessly. You see, how kindhearted it is. In fact, these are but crocodile tears, which cannot disguise its vicious super features.
145.	It is a serious struggle to defend State sovereignty, control national resources, develop national economy and combat superPower plunder and exploitation. The super Powers have bound to put up a desperate fight, but it will be of no avail. At the sixth special session of the General Assembly and the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea at Caracas, numerous developing countries came forward to expose and condemn the superPowers and resolutely called for smashing the old international order and taking their destiny into their own hands. This is a thing that has never happened before. The superPowers have never been so isolated. The situation is excellent. We are confident that the numerous developing countries, closing their ranks, allying with all forces that can be allied with and persevering in struggle, will surely continue to win new victories.
146.	International developments show that the world has changed enormously and profoundly. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution this torrential tide is sweeping into every corner of the earth. Storms have broken out even in places that have been rather quiet for decades. The world situation at present is indeed aptly described by the verse, "The wind sweeping through the tower heralds a rising storm in the mountains." And this wind is gathering momentum. At such a juncture , it is our hope that this session of the General Assembly will do some useful things to advance the cause of human progress. The Chinese delegation is ready to work with all of you toward this end.
Mr. President, let me begin by congratulating you warmly on your election to this high and responsible office. Your unanimous election is proof of the confidence placed in you and in your country and of the certainty that you will make this particularly important General Assembly session a success. To these congratulations I should like to add our sincere thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Benites. We were very happy to be able to begin our co-operation in the United Nations under his wise and experienced leadership.
36.	I also wish to welcome most warmly the three new Members: Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea- Bissau. We are looking forward to co-operating closely and trustfully with these countries in the framework of our Organization.
37.	The twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly is being held against a background of international events and developments which must be regarded as a challenge to political reason. We share the deep concern that permeates the introduction to the Secretary-General's report on the work of the Organization despite intensive efforts to achieve detente, the number of conflicts involving the use of force is not on the decline; the global network of economic relations is in many places damaged, in some already torn: there is a shortage of raw materials, a struggle over prices; inflation and monetary fluctuations are driving us towards a crisis; the economic situation in some parts of the world has continued to deteriorate dramatically; hunger is still spreading. There are still people who are denied their elementary rights; the gap between the proclamation and the realization of human rights continues to be unbearably wide. Many people no longer believe that their problems can be settled by mutual agreement. This feeling of desperation not only breeds resignation and fatalism; it also generates action that is unjustifiable from any point of view, acts of individual terrorism in the shadow of which no country can feel safe - a terrorism that also leaves its mark on countries not involved.
38.	But our chief concern must be to prevent any further breaking up of international solidarity and to reverse the process of disintegration.
39.	The Federal Republic of Germany has gone through certain experiences which distinguish it from many other countries represented, here and which determine the nature of our participation in the work of this great world Organization. With your permission I will mention those experiences, in order to illustrate that what we need today is not less but more international solidarity.
40.	The Federal Republic of Germany emerged from a separation into states of the indivisible German nation. We are therefore more deeply conscious than others of the fact that States, however great may be their need for existence, are imperfect entities. Our citizens are less inclined to think in terms of nation-States, to regard their Government and their political institutions as the source of all wisdom and to believe that those institutions alone can cope with the massive problems inherent in the pursuit of peace, freedom, human dignity and welfare. We therefore view with concern the re-emerging tendency in some parts of the world to overrate oneself as a nation and the attempts of some countries to increase their prosperity at the expense of their neighbors' procedure that has always resulted in the weakening of all. The Federal Republic of Germany therefore trains its policy on the objective of European unity. We are convinced that only a united Europe can effectively solve the existing political, economic and social problems confronting the member States of our Community. That Community is also willing to share responsibility for solving problems beyond its frontiers; the more closely it is knit together, the more it will be able to do in this respect. This morning [2238th meeting] my French colleague mentioned the request for the granting to the European Community of observer status in the United Nations. This request is further proof of a determination of the European Community to co-operate actively in the solution of world-wide tasks.
41.	The other experience of the Germans has been that force, rather than solving problems, in fact makes them all that much more difficult to settle. Once reconciliation had been achieved with the neighbors in western Europe, especially with the French people, the Federal Government under the then Chancellor, Willy Brandt, and under my predecessor and now Federal President, Walter Scheel, concluded agreements on the renunciation of force with those countries from which we have been separated by a sorrowful past characterized by force and conflict. The Federal Government and I can say this also on behalf of all responsible political forces in the Federal Republic of Germany bases itself on the principle of the renunciation of force. As the United Nations Charter expressly lays down, peoples may and should, in the exercise of their free self-determination, manage their own affairs. This also implies, in our view, that divided countries may reunite if that is their own free decision and that nations may join supranational communities. But if force enters into the conduct of international relations, then it will be the seed from which ever more conflict and violence will spring, and consequently will be the source of distress, want and disaster.
42.	Both these experiences, the imperfection of our States and the senselessness of force, have led the Federal Republic of Germany of necessity on to the road taken by this world Organization. Only by means of a well-structured international order can the people in our State systems find the framework within which they feel confident they can live in security.
43.	On behalf of my country I speak up for the form of co-operation embracing all mankind, the most important model of which is the United Nations, a form of co-operation which, though it is certainly a laborious and tedious way, is the only worthy one and promises to be more successful in the end. Peace, freedom, human dignity, welfare and a reliable system of international relations are indivisible.
44.	Today more than at any other time in the past it is the political will for co-operation that counts. The international institutions cannot be stronger than that political will. This is a question not merely of being willing to play a constructive part in bringing about international treaties, but also of being resolved to comply with them.
45.	This is the prerequisite for the working of that new form of international relations the development of which has governed the period since the Second world war which, we may hope, will also have been the last world war. It is a precondition which will have to be established in all countries, but not only on the part of governments.
46.	I am deeply convinced that it is also the individual citizen in our countries who will have to develop a willingness to act in a way which I have tried to describe as international solidarity. The problems that have been the subject of United Nations conferences in past months and will be the subject of other conferences in the months ahead for instance those on commodity and developing problems, population trends, the use of the high seas, and the world food problems are matters which concern every individual. A government's sense of the common responsibility and its willingness to play a constructive part in resolving these problems depend on the degree of understanding of their peoples.
47.	International co-operation in its multifarious forms has created a framework within which it has been possible to bring about extraordinary changes in the world in the past two and a half decades. Let me mention only two of those changes: the process of liberating the former colonial nations which is reflected most strikingly in this very Assembly where the original 51 members have now become 138; and the development by the United Nations of a peace-creating and peace-preserving policy, which has helped prevent the spread of local and regional conflicts.
48.	Increasingly, doubts are being voiced today about those same international rules and organizations whose often quiet work in the background has made such developments at all possible.
49.	On behalf of the Federal Government I would like to state the following.
50.	We want to strengthen the United Nations and enhance its possibilities of action. Whatever its imperfections, there is no alternative to the United Nations. Those who have the peaceful development of mankind at heart must support it.
51.	The tasks of the many regional groupings are complementary to the universal tasks of the United Nations. For us, the standing of the United Nations is not in any way lowered because of the fact that we are a member of a defense alliance, and that, together with others, we seek political and economic union in Europe. This diversity of international groupings is commensurate with the diversity of international relations. This pattern is useful as long as no organization turns against others and as long as all respect the rules we have all agreed upon within this widest framework. My country will abide by both these principles.
52.	Organizations are the work of men and, as such, imperfect; moreover, times and problems change. For the Federal Republic of Germany there is no reason to question the foundations of the existing international order. Rather, we have to develop its rules and institutions and adapt them to the new requirements, Let us join in studying all aspects of the United Nations system and considering where the Organization itself or the rules upon which it is based can be improved and its problems thus resolved. The Federal Republic of Germany will assist in such a review in the same spirit in which it is seeking within other organizations, especially GATT and IMF, to bring about an organic reform of the international system.
53.	We shall have to examine very closely the forms of international co-operation we have developed to see whether they are suited to removing the causes of the crises that have arisen in many parts of the world. In the United Nations Charter the solution of world-wide economic, social and humanitarian problems receives the same priority as the aim of safeguarding peace. Both realms are indivisible. We know that peace is more than a state in which fighting may have stopped for a while. An international economic order embracing the principle of equality and partnership in trade relations also will in itself help to safeguard peace.
54.	Those who still doubt the need for rapid action will have had their eyes opened by developments in the past 12 months. The prices of many major primary commodities have escalated in hitherto unknown proportions; energy prices have risen vertically. You all know the consequences: alarming balance-of-payments deficits on the one hand; vast surpluses on the other. This has piled plenty of additional fuel on the fire of world-wide inflation. Data which had served as a valid basis for economic planning were called into question overnight. In many countries there is a growing feeling of uncertainty in the face of an economic trend which appears less calculable than ever in the past. The consequences affect all. The difficulties facing the industrial countries are considerable, but they are not to be compared with those of the least developed countries, which are lacking in natural resources and whose very existence is threatened. We have to tighten our belts, but for them it is a question of survival.
55.	This is a challenge which does not distinguish between different systems: it affects all nations, rich and poor, developing and industrialized.
56.	I place very much weight on this point. An exacerbation of the conflict of interests between commodity-producing and industrialized countries not only creates problems between those directly concerned, but also strikes first and most tellingly at third countries. This kind of situation results in new tensions, and many countries would be sorely tempted to try to save their own skins without consideration for others. Let us guard against such a temptation.
Terrible experiences of the past have taught us that seeking refuge in economic isolationism does not remove the difficulty. On the contrary, world economic relations are so intertwined that action which is felt to be egotistical is bound to produce counter-measures. Consequently, the "every man for himself' approach leads straight to economic chaos and creates tensions between States and their peoples. What we want is just the opposite: we want to remove existing disparities, especially the gulf between developing and industrialized countries; we want to quell further conflicts; and we want to avoid the situation of some being entirely dependent on others. To achieve this aim we shall have to bring about a world-wide improvement of our economic and social structures; we shall have to boost productivity and encourage sensible growth without neglecting the task of protecting the environment a task which has lost none of its urgency since the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm in 1972. When the commodity-producing countries seek to obtain higher market prices for their raw materials, they must be assured that there will be no excessive price fluctuations in the commodity markets. At the same time, we must seek to ensure long-term supplies of those commodities. But in the interest of all we must make sure that the bigger proceeds from energy and raw materials are reasonably used and thus fed back into the international economy. The money should be used where it is most urgently needed.
57.	We are prepared to help find solutions, both regional and world-wide, that will prevent any threats to the international monetary system.
58.	At the sixth special session of the General Assembly last April the important dialog on world-wide economic problems was begun. We shall have to continue that dialog with much patience and resolution and with a good sense of judgment. No one will benefit from decisions that are not supported by all the world's major trading partners; no one will benefit from resolutions that question the world economic order based on division of labor and freedom of trade or that represent an attempt to replace such an order by a system of global dirigisme.
59.	True, the present world economic system is not without defects and weaknesses. We must therefore develop it still further, improve it and adapt it to the needs of all nations. The Federal Republic of Germany has made specific contributions towards this end and is willing to carry on along this road.
60.	We appreciate the need for the industrial countries to make their markets more accessible to products from the less-developed countries. The European Community, of which my country is a member, has been catering to this need for a good number of years by granting general tariff preferences. It is currently negotiating a comprehensive system of mutual economic relations with 44 African Caribbean and Pacific countries.
61.	The Federal Government supports co-operative projects also by private companies in developing countries. It is trying by appropriate measures to steer investment activities towards the least-developed countries.
62.	In recent years the Federal Government has constantly increased the share of its development aid that goes to those countries that are in special need of international solidarity, and it will continue to do so.
63.	The Federal Republic of Germany has declared its readiness to provide, as a member of the European Community, a substantial contribution towards the emergency operation of the United Nations for the benefit of the most seriously affected countries, as soon as, the other countries involved have agreed to play a corresponding part.
64.	The Federal Republic of Germany is taking part in the fight against hunger in the world and in efforts to solve the world food crisis. Within the European Community, too, our contributions are sizable. We help supply fertilizers. The President of the United States of America [2234th meeting] and his Secretary of State [2238th meeting] have rightly re-emphasized before this Assembly the importance of this problem.
65.	Higher commodity prices and the problems they entail confront us with tremendous economic difficulties. Nevertheless, the Federal Government will make special efforts to continue to ^increase its development aid. In the years ahead it intends to increase that aid at a higher percentage rate than the national budget as a whole. For 1975 this has already been decided. Multilateral aid will continue to feature prominently in our development-assistance program.
66.	We are making efforts to increase and intensify exchanges in the field of science and technology. All countries should have access to the scientific and technological resources of this world, so as to become more and more able to solve their problems on their own. This, too, is the aim of our projects in the sphere of educational aid. We welcome the idea of a United Nations conference on science and technology, and we shall do our best to encourage the promotion of that project.
67.	Last year's events have once again thrown into relief the interdependence of the world economy and have made clear to us how sensitive the complex economic mechanisms of highly developed countries are. Even their capacity has its limits. Their economies can function only under their own laws, and domestic stability plays a great role in this. Only countries with a well-functioning economy can be good trading partners to developing countries; only they can help and, over the long term, attend to the problems of others beyond their own frontiers. Industrial countries with economies shaken by inflation are bound to lose in efficiency.
68.	Hence, the results of the Federal Republic of Germany's consistent policy of domestic stability benefit others as well.
69.	We are aware that the solution of economic and social problems is possible only When the political prerequisites are there, the most important being an ail-out effort to ensure peace. This task remains^ the prime mission of the United Nations. We can note with satisfaction that in many parts of the world hard work is being done to eliminate conflicts and tensions. To encourage and support those efforts is important.	
70.	With regard to peace and security, the obvious cases today are two areas whose conflicts have a direct bearing on us Europeans particularly; they are the Middle East and Cyprus. The conclusion of the disengagement agreements in the Middle East has generated new hopes for a comprehensive peaceful settlement of the conflict.
71.	Such initial steps must be followed by others, in order to establish an equitable and lasting peace ensuring the existence of all States and peoples in that region while taking into consideration the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The progress; made so far is an indication that even among the parties to the conflict the conviction has grown that a genuine solution can be attained by peaceful means only. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes this development, in which the efforts made by the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger, played a decisive part.
72.	Peace in the Middle East will set free powerful forces that can be harnessed to the reconstruction and development of the whole eastern and southern Mediterranean areas. The Federal Republic of Germany and its European partners will not fail to co-operate. By initiating a European-Arab dialog, the nine members of the Community have already laid the first foundations for that great task.
73.	The Federal Government most deeply deplores the recent events in Cyprus with its tragic consequences for the country and its people. We hope that those involved in the conflict will succeed soon in finding a negotiated settlement securing the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus and restoring to that country external and internal peace.
74. Both in the Middle East and in Cyprus the United Nations used its instruments to help in the efforts to bring about a cease-fire and make negotiations possible. I wish in this connexion to emphasize the valuable work done by Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim, to whom we owe appreciation and gratitude.
75.	We thank the soldiers of the peace-keeping forces for their dedication in the service of the United Nations, and we pay a tribute to those who gave their lives in that service.
76.	The Federal Republic of Germany recognizes the important functions of the peace-keeping forces and has therefore been supporting the actions in the Middle East and Cyprus by voluntary additional contributions. The efficiency and possibilities of action of the United Nations forces could be further enhanced if we succeeded in agreeing on general guidelines for peace-keeping operations. We should increase our efforts to bring about such an agreement.
77.	What concrete contribution can we make to an active peace policy? The foreign policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is geared to furthering detente. Detente in itself will not remove existing differences, nor automatically provide more security. But the policy of detente is an effective instrument in the efforts to eliminate old conflicts and prevent the emergence of new ones and it is only.
in an atmosphere of detente that efforts at arms limitation and arms control with due regard to security interests will make any sense at all.
78.	The Federal Government includes in its policy of detente the most difficult and burning problem prevailing in Germany itself the division of our country with all its painful consequences for the people. I wish to repeat what the Federal Government made clear at the twenty-eighth session [2119th meeting] from this rostrum. We cannot and will not accept the division as history's final dictum on the German nation. That dictum will be spoken by the German people themselves. The Federal Government sticks to its policy of working for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people will regain its unity in free self-determination.
79.	This does not prevent us, however, from exhausting the full measure of co-operation attainable in the, circumstances. This, our policy, has paved the way for contractually, settled relations with the other German State, the German Democratic Republic. It has since been seen that co-operation between the States of a divided country in the United Nations is possible despite fundamental differences of political views, that it is beneficial for all, andI should think for the world Organization too.
80.	Detente in Europe had to begin Where differences clashed their hardest., that is, in Berlin. The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin of 3 September 1971 opened the way. Hence, one of the criteria by which to measure detente is the manner in which that Agreement works in all its parts. Berlin's secure future is an indispensable element of detente in Europe, and it remains a vital interest of our policy.
81.	The Federal Republic of Germany wants to see the policy of detente effectively continued. It is in this spirit that the Federal Government cooperates actively and constructively in the Geneva Conference on Security arid Co-operation in Europe and in the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. We do not seek advantages benefiting just one side; we seek a way that will facilitate the coexistence of nations on the crowded European continent, and it is our hope that these conferences will bring us nearer the time when, in Europe, a highly armed East and West will no longer confront each other.
82.	We cannot and will not reconcile ourselves to the thought that the arms race in which not only the great Powers participate is being carried on and on. The economic resources of mankind must increasingly be used to put an end to hunger and misery in the world, but they should be concentrated on that task now, not after there has been a winner in the arms race.
83.	That is why I feet that, even more that hitherto, we must seek practical, controlled measures of disarmament and arms control. As before, the Federal Republic of Germany is determined to contribute actively to this. Disarmament and arms control are an integral part of our policy. We are prepared to assume additional responsibility also in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament and are certain that we will have an opportunity to do so in the near future.
84.	In this connexion I wish to underline the great importance which we attach to the policy of the non- proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Federal Republic of Germany intends to participate in the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons scheduled for 1975. It hopes that this will provide it with another opportunity to help oppose anything that might jeopardize the policy of non-proliferation.
85.	In this General Assembly the Federal Republic of Germany focuses its special attention on three sets of problems of world-wide co-operation, namely, the strengthening of the international order and its institutions; the improvement of international economic relations in the spirit of partnership and solidarity; and concrete contributions to detente and disarmament with a view to ensuring a lasting peace. It does so in the awareness of, and with respect for, the expectations, the wishes, the hopes and longings of the people of the German nation and all other nations. All our endeavors are ultimately aimed at enhancing the welfare of each individual human being.
86.	This idea leads us to a central aspect of the United Nations work to which this General Assembly should also devote its full attention. I mean the question of individual human rights, of the protection of the individual within the community, and I should like to warn against the illusion that it would suffice to guard the outward order by outward means against war and destruction. What we need is not just the formal recognition of human rights but also their universal acceptance and application so as to endow the outward measures for the preservation of peace with inner firmness and the power of conviction.
87.	These are elementary rights which must be respected and applied all over the world: in Europe and I mean all parts of Europe less than on other continents.
88.	We expect that the entry into force of the two International Covenants on Human Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI)] which the Federal Republic of Germany ratified in December 1973 will spark off fresh impulses.
89.	As a new member of the Commission on Human Rights, we want to co-operate responsibly in that body's efforts to give effect to human rights. We want to help and do our best to ensure that the individual shall be protected both from arbitrary treatment by the State and from want, and that population groups shall be protected from discrimination on racial, religious, political and other grounds.
90.	We welcome the decision of the Commission on Human Rights and its bodies to prepare studies on the subject of self-determination. The rights of self-determination is a regulative principle to be applied not only in the sphere of decolonization or to one particular continent but in all parts of the world.
91.	Self-determination and human rights are the central issues at stake also in southern Africa. The problems of decolonization and the elimination of racial discrimination in that region will again be occupying the attention of this General Assembly. We have left no doubt about our attitude; we demand that any remaining colonialism be eliminated. We condemn all forms of racial discrimination. We can note today with satisfaction that since the last session of the General Assembly fundamental changes have begun.
92.	We welcome Portugal's historic decision to recognize the independence of Guinea-Bissau and to open the road to independence for Mozambique and Angola. We see in this a confirmation of our view that courage, energy and wisdom can solve these problems too.
93.	The guarantee of individual human rights, the total ban on racism in any form or place, and the achievement of the self-determination of nations are tasks which my people, prompted not the least by its own historic experience, would like to help to accomplish sincerely and energetically.
94.	In his treatise Of Eternal Peace, written in 1795, the German philosopher Immanuel Kant, whose two hundred and fiftieth birthday we celebrate this year, drew up principles for international co-operation. These universal aims are also pursued by the United Nations. The principles which this Organization established for international coexistence almost three decades ago are today sure of world-wide recognition. However, white solemn declarations and resolutions are a good thing, we must do more. It will be the task of the General Assembly at the present session to give practical impetus, to point the way for our future work, so that by concrete measure seven if they are only small steps ahead we come nearer to achieving the aims of the United Nations. At the end of this session of the General Assembly we shall be judged by the progress we have made along this path.
Sir, my first words will be to offer you my personal congratulations and those of my country on your election to the distinguished office of President of the General Assembly and to tell you of the hopes this gives us for the success and the efficacy of our work.
105.	A few months ago, in this very Hall, you participated actively in the special session on raw materials and development. Your election to the presidency of this twenty-ninth session rightly confirms the importance of the role you have played, and since virtually all international relations now fall within the realm of our debates, it provides you with an arena commensurate with your abilities and experience as a statesman. In honoring you, the community of nations is also honoring your country, Algeria. Everyone can understand why France has special reasons to welcome this.
106.	I should also like to pay a special tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Benites, who had the rare privilege during the past 12 months of presiding over two sessions of the Assembly, during which he displayed outstanding qualities as a statesman and jurist and was thus able to crown most prestigiously a career that had been so closely linked to the work of our Organization for so many years.
107.	Lastly, I should like to greet Mr. Kurt Wald heim, with whom I have enjoyed a longstanding friendship. I should like to tell him of the trust and high esteem in which he is held by the French Government for his tireless efforts and for the competence and effectiveness he has shown in carrying out his extremely important and difficult tasks.
108.	This is the first time that I have had the honor of speaking on behalf of France before this Assembly, a privileged forum in which to recognize that there is a basic truth which characterizes the modern world and will dominate our common destiny with increasing severity, regardless of the degree of development or the political philosophies of the societies to which we belong.
109.	In this "little corner of the universe" -to quote Pascal- on this earth which the human eye has been able to contemplate in its entirety for the first time in its history a blue ball, an oasis of life in the blackness of space, a planet which scientific and technological progress has shrunk and at the same time unified by subjecting it to accelerated and profound change men, peoples and States arc dependent on each other and are becoming increasingly interdependent. The death knell will sound for everyone it we fail to appreciate this interdependence, if selfishness, fanaticism, the lust for power and domination threaten the possibilities for a sincere effort to seek together gradual and well-balanced solutions to the difficulties of our times, difficulties which our very progress only serves to accentuate.
110.	The fine name of the United Nations thus takes on renewed significance. The enemy that we must confront together is underdevelopment; it is the tragedy of poverty and hunger which the past year, alas, has shown to be distressingly present; it is the turmoil that inflation is causing in international economic relations; it is disorder, inequality and injustice in all their forms; it is the remnants of racial discrimination; it is everything that still exists to hinder the full recognition of and respect for the rights of the individual and the rights of peoples.
111.	Need 1 stress before this Assembly of nearly 140 nations-and I doubt that anyone can remain indifferent to a reminder of the great universalis! traditions of my country and the message it brought to the world almost two centuries ago that France, with the legacy of the French Revolution, is determined to strengthen the liberal nature of its diplomacy, to be in the vanguard of the peaceful struggle to give the world greater liberty, greater equality and greater fraternity?
112.	I should like to recall here the words spoken by the President of the French Republic last June when the Paris diplomatic corps was presented to him:
"This change signifies, lastly, that France, reaffirming and emphasizing her liberal mission, will do everything in her power to contribute to the dawning of a new era in international relations based on mutual esteem and respect and on a spirit of understanding and liberty, and, Under pressure from the peoples of the world, to ensure that the bastions of constraint and intolerance are toppled. She thus hopes to introduce into relations among States a greater measure of simplicity, trust and, may I venture to say, optimism."
113.	The essence of the "liberal" philosophy which France advocates and which must, in our opinion, be applied by everyone to international relations is this: that order and justice are in no way contradictory but, rather, are complementary; that only progress towards political and economic order, coupled with consideration for the interests of each State, is likely to guarantee our international society the minimum of stability without which there can be no lasting progress for anyone.
114.	This joint effort and the transformation it entails must, of course, be made without losing sight of the ultimate goal of our Organization. The intention to ensure peace and security by gradually eliminating the causes of conflict, whether political or economic in nature, must be matched by the constant concern to eliminate any desire for, or any possibility of, not only conflict but even confrontation.
115.	The two basic principles which my country long ago initiated and advocated -namely, detente and cooperation - must therefore be implemented more and more at the international level.
116.	In the midst of the alarming turmoil of today's world, it is sometimes difficult to perceive practical ways of implementing these principles. However, a closer look reveals a few breaches in the wall, a few rays of light of unmistakable brightness. We are living in a world of light and shadow. Perhaps it might be useful for me to state how France and the French Government currently view the causes for concern and the reasons for hope.
117.	You will not be surprised if first, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, I turn my eyes to Europe. As current President of the Council of the European Economic Community, I can testify to the aspiration of our peoples gradually to organize themselves so that from their age old civilization there can emerge little by little a new political organization based on pluralism but capable also of unifying what must be unified.
118.	This organization of Europe involves, first and foremost, for my country and for its partners in the Community, the creation in the western part of our continent of a coherent entity that will be capable of confronting the problems of our time; one that will be able to make a genuine contribution to detente and cooperation which are so necessary for our world if it is to survive; and, I might say, one that will serve as a model. The task begun nearly 25 years ago, right after a war which we decided would be the last, is not a simple one. But the leaders of our countries are determined not to miss the rendezvous with destiny which history has scheduled for our generation.
119.	That is why you will hear the voice of the European Economic Community becoming more and more distinct. It will speak the language of peace, justice and reconciliation. For, although this Community must of necessity actively pursue its own development, it cannot and it never would wish to turn in upon itself. By virtue of its mission and by necessity as well, the Community is open to the world, alive to the hopes and needs of the underprivileged, aware of its responsibilities in international balance and progress. That is why it intends, through concrete and innovative action, to make its contribution to the necessary effort to restore order to economic, financial and, hence, political relations among the countries of the globe.
120.	The Community is faithful to its traditional friendships, first among which is its friendship with the United States of America and Canada, a friendship which is even stronger now that it is yet better balanced and which is constant and indispensable to peace. And yet it does not forget the role that geography and history have allocated to it in the Mediterranean and in Africa, nor the close ties it has maintained with the Soviet Union and all the countries of Eastern Europe, whose contribution to our civilization is so important and with which we hope to foster genuine detente in the Old World. In this spirit we are taking part, as you know, in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, well aware of the scope of the undertaking and thus of the need to work towards the desired goal with great patience and wisdom.
121.	Another source of comfort and confidence in the future stems from a new and important step our Organization has taken towards its goal of universal representation, which we are now close to achieving. We are happy to welcome in our midst during this twenty-ninth session the representatives of Bangladesh, Grenada and GuineaBissau.
122.	After the trials that marked its birth, Bangladesh, despite serious economic difficulties, courageously is embarking on the path that should lead to reconciliation and cooperation on the subcontinent. May the efforts made by the States concerned achieve the results that we all are hoping for.
123.	There are two reasons why we can be pleased with the decolonization that is under way in the Portuguese Territories of Africa: first of all, because it has come about in connexion with a return to democracy in a country that is a friend of France, and secondly, because it is being done for the benefit of a whole group of courageous peoples that have long had many reasons to ask themselves why they were deprived of the independence which their neighbors enjoyed.
124.	I should like to hail the delegation of the Republic of GuineaBissau and convey to it our best wishes and congratulations. I should also like to pay a tribute to its members and to the representatives of the new Portuguese Government, a tribute that the political wisdom evidenced during the recent fruitful negotiations in Algiers rightly deserves. The European Economic Community, deeply committed to the values of the democracy on which it is founded, can only welcome any agreements which result in the practical application of the principles of selfdetermination on the continent of Africa. It feels that recognition of these principles will soon be extended to Mozambique and then to Angola. It welcomes in particular the agreement that was just concluded at Lusaka.
125.	Allow me to add at this point that France, which was one of the first Powers to foster self determination for many countries that are now influential Members of our Organization, is currently completing its own endeavors in this domain by preparing, with the agreement of the freely elected leaders of the Comoros, the accession to independence of these islands. The French delegation will in a few weeks be pleased to give further information which will emerge from the bill providing for an early referendum in the Comoro Archipelago.
126.	Other aspects of the world situation are, however, more disturbing.
127.	The situation in Africa is still troubled by tensions and the injustices which persist in the southern part. I would like to record once again here France's complete disapproval of the policy of apartheid. Furthermore, France regrets that the efforts made by our Organization to begin a dialog with the Government in Pretoria with a view to leading Namibia to self-determination and independence have remained fruitless.
128.	The situation in the Middle East is still marked by dangerous uncertainty. Following upon the tragic events which have taken place since our last session, disengagement agreements have been concluded thanks to the wisdom of the parties to the conflict and to the tireless diplomacy of the Secretary of State of the United States. These agreements and the stabilized situation on the battlefield, thanks to the control of the United Nations, are the first encouraging steps. However, we must not permit the momentum of peace to grind to a halt. The basic problems have not been settled. The situation is still precarious and it is therefore imperative that the negotiations should be resumed so that an equitable settlement can be reached as soon as possible, one that can be endorsed by the international community, that is to say, the Security Council.
129.	France for its part is still in favor of a settlement based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967), confirmed by its resolution 338 (1973), which provide for Israel's withdrawal from the occupied territories, as well as for commitments to peace giving each State the right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries.
130.	France believes it is high time for the international community to recognize the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, which this settlement should take into account. It is ready to contribute to the quest for a settlement based exclusively on the genuine interests of the peoples of the region and acceptable to the parties concerned -each and every one of them- among which my country is far from forgetting Israel.
131.	Although the crisis which broke out in Cyprus on 15 July and which was singularly exacerbated on 14 August had the highly positive effect of promoting a return to democracy in Greece -and I would like in passing to pay a tribute to the courageous efforts of Mr. Caramanlis- it is yet one more example of the serious difficulties we face this year.
132.	In the first place, the crisis concerns the United Nations which, after trying to promote a settlement to the conflict by sending an international force to Cyprus in 1964 and more recently by sponsoring enlarged talks between the communities, must now do everything in its power to prevent the crisis from deteriorating and to facilitate a speedy settlement.
133.	It is for the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in this matter, which it did as the tragic events unfolded by adopting resolutions that my country helped to draft, as was its duty. We remain convinced that respect for these resolutions by the parties concerned is still the indispensable basis for an equitable settlement.
134.	Troubled by this dispute and anxious to restore harmony in Cyprus and between two countries linked to the European Economic Community by the same tie, the nine members of the Community have felt it to be their duty, during the course of several meetings, to add their efforts to those of the Security Council.
135.	The most serious problem in Cyprus today is, without question, that of the refugees. We feel that permitting these people to return to their homes freely is consistent with both justice and public international law. We therefore believe that we should make an urgent appeal on this point in the hope of preventing the inception of another tragic refugee problem such as those which, unfortunately, we have already had, which are poisoning the international atmosphere. The problem in Cyprus can be resolved only by negotiation, without recourse to force. In this respect, we consider the talks now under way between the leaders of the island's two communities to be encouraging. I hope that these talks will pave the way, if the necessary gestures are forthcoming, for the negotiations that we should like to see started among Greece, Turkey and Cyprus, countries to which we are bound by longstanding ties of friendship.
136.	There is another region where war continues to wreak havoc in various but no less cruel ways, and that is SouthEast Asia. We welcomed the Paris agreements on VietNam and the hope that they engendered. Can it be said today that those agreements are really being respected? I am fully aware of the difficulties encountered by each of the parties; but how can one fail to hope that they will have the strength to overcome the legacy of the past and ultimately to achieve peace with understanding and reconciliation?
137.	Faced with these highly contrasting pictures, we can probably say that at least the danger of world confrontations involving the fate of all mankind seems to be less threatening than it was a few years ago.
138.	Detente is still fragile. The protective net that it could cast still hangs too slack. Detente obviously remains -and will long remain - linked to a sustained defense effort.
139.	France, for its part has, over the past 15 years, halved the proportion of its gross national product destined for military expenditure. But France has not neglected the need to ensure its security and independence by the means that others have already adopted. As a country that was the battlefield of two world wars, France is profoundly aware of the duty incumbent upon it to be capable of defending its independence. Having noted the refusal, and perhaps even the inability, of the greatest Powers to renounce their nuclear weapons, France has resolved, to its regret, to acquire them itself.
140.	We too have had to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere, which, in terms of number and size, can in no way be compared with the tests previously carried out by others in the same field. We went ahead with our tests only when we were sure that they would cause no harm; and this was verified by our own controls and by those of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. We have now reached a stage in our nuclear technology that makes it possible for us to continue our program by underground testing, and we have taken steps to do so as early as next year.
141.	If, given the present state of the world, no country can renounce the means of ensuring its defense, it is obviously in the general interest gradually to lighten the burden necessarily imposed by the arms race on our economies and, by the same token, on the opportunities for development. Therefore the French Government wishes solemnly to reaffirm that it is prepared to participate immediately in any undertaking designed to lead to genuine disarmament, that is to say, to the effective, gradual and controlled destruction of all existing arsenals. It was in this spirit that France gave its support to the idea of convening a world conference which, if it were to include the five nuclear Powers, might create the conditions under which real progress could be made and might strengthen the foundations for the lasting peace that is the highest aspiration of all peoples.
142.	After this brief review of the world picture as it is today, I should like now to come to what is doubtless the basic issue. I refer to the present state of international economic relations and the outlook for those relations. This vital problem does not appear on our agenda, but is should be, quite clearly, the focal point of our concerns, all the more so since the situation which prompted the convening of a special session of the General Assembly this spring has deteriorated markedly in the last four months.
143.	Insecurity is spreading far and wide. The most striking example of this is inflation, which is becoming rampant and to varying degrees affects every country with its attendant woes. All the elements of a world crisis are already present.
144.	The developing countries, those which are not producers of oil or of important raw materials, are obviously those most affected by the rising prices of the products necessary to economic activity. But the majority of the industrialized countries have also been seriously affected, at least for the time being, There are only two or three major countries among us that are sure of having the resources indispensable to the survival of their economies and their populations, come what may, because those resources exist in their own territories. But although such States, unlike the others, do not have to fear strangulation, none, I repeat, none of the Members of our Organization can remain blind to the serious threats to the mechanisms of the world economy, to the flow of production and trade, and therefore, ultimately, to world peace.
145.	The events we are witnessing are, of course, not lacking in positive features. The general redistribution of trump cards held by the highly industrialized nations and the developing nations begun by still disorganized courses of action will be described in history books as a decisive turning point of the era in which we live. This will be true if this redistribution proves itself eventually to be a transition to a new world order, better balanced and more just, and the prelude to an original and fruitful common effort.
146.	Such a redistribution was both necessary and inevitable. My country, which in the past has constantly warned against the dangers inherent in the progressive deterioration of the terms of trade and in the growing gap between the industrial societies and the less favored countries, is the first to recognize that it would have been unhealthy and, ultimately, detrimental to everyone to cling to a system of inadequate remuneration for basic commodities. The prolongation of this system was doubtless one of the causes of the recent price rises.
147.	This puts me in an even better position to say frankly to this Assembly that none of us can allow himself to ignore the urgency and gravity of the problem which the somewhat random nature of those increases presents not only to my country but, I believe, to all of us. Our world community can withstand the severe disruption of equilibrium that has just occurred only if we make a combined effort, on the one hand, to halt the trends towards a breakdown that are beginning to emerge, and, on the other, to achieve a new world order based on mutual consultation and cooperation.
148.	In the spirit of the Charter, which for 30 years has encouraged us to cooperate in order to ensure economic and social progress for our peoples, appreciable efforts have already been made along such lines. The texts adopted on 1 May by the General Assembly during the sixth special session [resolutions 3201 (SVI) and 3202 fSF/j] are in keeping with this tradition of the Organization. Their significance and importance, I feel, lie not so much in the Program of Action that was outlined as in the clear and precise affirmation of the interdependence of all the elements of the world economy.
149.	That the growth of the world economy is currently being compromised and with it the opportunities for development is so obvious as to make it superfluous to stress the need to open up new vistas in cooperation among our States. Together we must define the main lines along which the world economy must operate. In this connexion, the right of the third world countries not only to receive a fairer share of the fruits of economic and world progress but also to influence the choices on which this activity depends cannot be contested. I would add to this the hope that international aid, which is still indispensable, will gradually give way to structural reforms in which the less favored countries should have a voice.
150.	Although the very great majority of the States that we represent have no intention of withdrawing into themselves, they reject the mechanisms of laissez faire, which are erratic and merciless to the weak, and my country, which has championed international cooperation for many long years now, cannot but give them our complete approval on this point. The march towards a better order is, however, incompatible with disregard for economic realities and laws, the solidarity which unites consumer and producer, and, especially, the basic consideration that no one, no matter how powerful he may be, can be sure of gaining lasting advantages by means of unilateral decisions.
151.	Within a country, when one group in society tries to increase its share of the national income and when, on the other hand, other groups try to prevent their share from being reduced, inflation becomes rampant and restores, after a fashion, an often unjust and precarious balance between the claims of each group. Today this is also what is happening in the world's economy. The free rein given to market trends, the exploitation of strong positions, and the setting up of a sliding scale mechanism or of automatic indexing can lead only to a speeding up of the inflationary spiral. Among nations, as within each nation, nothing can take the place of dialog and negotiation among all the parties concerned. The natural framework for this dialog is, of course, the United Nations, and one can only regret that six months after the sixth special session no serious discussion on setting the world's economy in order has been initiated.
152.	The United Nations, and not only its specialized bodies, has a general competence in this matter and is particularly qualified since it both anticipates and reflects the world community of the future to arrive at a truly "integrated" concept of our planet's economy. But this is a tremendous task and the adjustments to be made are numerous and difficult. The "global" approach within the United Nations must be supplemented by efforts at cooperation and consultation on a regional scale which should, of course, take place within an international framework.
153.	It is in this spirit that the member countries of the European Economic Community have, as representatives know, just embarked on what we both call the EuropeanArab dialog with the 20 countries of the League of Arab States. Of course the undertaking is still in its early stages and it would be premature to specify its goals, but I think it is quite natural for me to mention it today in this forum, especially since you, Mr. President, have played and are continuing to play an important and even decisive role in the conception and application of this undertaking.
154.	The new type of cooperation that we are trying to establish between the two groups of countries does set an example and is promising. It is a question of working together, with all the participants on an equal footing, towards social and economic progress, towards entente and rapprochement between the member countries of the European Economic Community and the member countries of the League of Arab States. It is also understood that the undertaking must not interfere with the interests of any country. On the contrary it must, when the time comes, extend its benefits beyond the European Arab group, especially to the regions close to Africa and the Mediterranean.
155.	My hope is that it will be possible to present some results of this undertaking at the forthcoming session of the General Assembly. However, it might be useful, if our partners in the League of Arab States would agree, to inform the United Nations before that time of what developments may have emerged.
156.	It is in the same spirit of cooperation that the European Economic Community participated in the ministerial conference which took place at Kingston, during which a fruitful dialog emerged between the countries of the Community and the Caribbean, African and Pacific States on the major political trends of their future association. The conference also set an example. Innovative formula were introduced which, I have no doubt, will help to create a new style in relations between industrialized and developing nations, and even in the drafting of a new strategy for development.
157.	The European Economic Community and the United Nations are quite clearly called upon to cooperate more and more often. This is why my delegation, speaking on behalf of the Community [A 19701], has asked for an item to be included on the agenda for this session relating to the granting to the Community of observer status within the Organization.
158.	Another example of this cooperation is quite obviously the Community's offer to participate, together with other States, in the urgent measures advocated by the General Assembly at its sixth special session.
159.	Let me say a word about the Organization to conclude my statement. The Charter assigns it the mission of maintaining peace and contributing to the emergence of a world that is more stable and more equitable. Let us not be complacent; the distance we must still travel before this ideal becomes a reality is great. But let us learn to apply to ourselves the severe judgments we sometimes bring to bear on the shortcomings and plodding of the United Nations. The Charter in itself possesses no magic formula, and no change could give it one. The work of the Organization depends primarily on the determination of the Governments represented here.
160.	One cannot reproach the United Nations for having failed to discern the great issues at stake in today's world or for failing with respect to the great questions of the day because of a lack of imagination or indifference. The problems of development, hunger, the sea and population have been dealt with in four world conferences held under the auspices of the United Nations this year. Let us note, however, that the conclusions drawn from these major international meetings sometimes leave us dissatisfied. This is not only because it is difficult to reconcile so many interests and differing viewpoints, even when goodwill is present. It is, perhaps, also because our methods and our procedures could be improved by concentrating on the most important issues and on the search for effective action.
161.	While these international meetings have the advantage of exposing all points of view, the size and number of the meetings pose problems of organization, method and procedure that are quite different from those the smaller, earlier conferences had & solve. There is a great temptation to use certain stratagems in order to finish more quickly, and it is noticeable that States are in no hurry to put into practice recommendations that have not evolved through the conventional process. Let us then try to act in concert genuinely, in the sole interest of the common good. We can do so within the context of the present Charter, whose potential could be more fully realized.
162.	We are living in an age of transition. All around us we find hope, efforts being expended, and the first stages of entente and union, but at the same time we see opposition, and conflict. Which trend will finally prevail? The one that will inevitably lead to our organizing ourselves and unifying ourselves or the one that will lead, albeit temporarily I hope, to hostility, violence and division? Which will prevail?
163.	The future of this world never before so conscious of its potential unity, never before so torn by real divisions is still uncertain. The task of our Organization is to guide it in the right direction, but that is also and primarily the task of each of the States represented here. The choice is either organization and reason, or passion, violence, rivalry and confrontation, and eventually, chaos and misfortune for us all. The simple statement of this choice is sufficient to explain our determination and our faith in the emergence of universal reconciliation.
Mr. President, I thank you for calling upon me at this late hour when the prospect of lunch must be so much more alluring than the thought of another indigestible speech. I can only undertake that I shall not be over-long or take too much of your time.
203.	I must, however, begin by offering the congratulations of the United Kingdom to you, Mr. President, on your election to the presidency of the Assembly, especially as your country has played such a large and important role in the work of the Organization, and we are all looking forward to a period of constructive work under your guidance.
204.	Like others who have spoken, we also welcome two new Members from the Commonwealth Bangladesh and Grenada as well as Guinea- Bissau, the latest country to achieve its independence.
205.	This is the first time I have had the honor of addressing the Assembly and I regret it will not be possible for me to stay after lunchtime. I must invoke the newcomer's privilege of making some remarks, with your permission, about our hopes and aspirations for this Organization.
206.	I start by giving an assurance that it is the firm policy of my Government to give all possible support to the United Nations. We do so because we believe that this body is the best forum in which to come to grips with many of the daunting problems that face mankind.
207.	It should not need an energy crisis, a population crisis, a raw-material crisis, to tell us that the world is shrinking and making us more interdependent. These are by now the cliches of our perorations; we no longer need to prove the point. Yet when action is needed we still do not behave as though we believe it. To say this implies no criticism of this Organization itself.
208.	Too often we use the United Nations as a whipping-boy for our own inability to act in concert in response to a common problem. The weaknesses in international co-operation which exist today are not United Nations weaknesses. The responsibility rests with us, the Member nations, that have willed that the United Nations should work on the basis of the lowest common denominator of agreement between the Member States. This negative consensus for that is what it is sometimes means little more than a wafer-thin formula to paper over our differences without any real meeting of minds. Such a consensus cannot be construed as universal approval. Indeed, because it happens in this way, there are occasions when the words in which we express this negative consensus have no chance of being translated into action because the action proposed does not correspond with realities. 
209.	What we need in order to be able to act together is positive consensus: a determined effort to reach common ground and an equal determination to work together to overcome the political and economic threats to our peoples.
210.	I do not underestimate the difficulties. Our interests are as varied as the nations we represent. But in the past, diverse nations have successfully sunk their differences and combined to face a common enemy. We face common enemies today: inflation, recession and poverty. Let us unite to defeat them.
211.	But if we are to achieve this positive consensus for which I ask, we need not only sound policies; we need the attitude of mind expressed by the then Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Willy Brandt, when he spoke to this Assembly at the twenty-eighth session and said:
".. .we have not come here to use the United Nations as a wailing-wall ... or to make claims we know cannot be met here in any case, Rather have we come to assume our share in the responsibility for world affairs on the basis of our convictions and within the framework of our possibilities" [2128th meeting, para. 6],
It is in that spirit that the United Kingdom Government is determined to bring to this Assembly the political will to make a responsible contribution to solving the problems before us. This will be the evidence of our pledge of support.
212.	Before I came here I took the precaution of reading the deliberations of the preceding session of the General Assembly. In many speeches then as indeed is the case of speeches on this occasion the recurring theme was the progress of detente. Mr. Kissinger referred then [2124th meeting] to a commonality of interests between the United States and the Soviet Union in establishing a broad, web of constructive relationships. Mr. Gromyko said [2126th meeting] and he referred to it again today that we had achieved a shift from an extended period of tension in the world to business-like co-operation. He knows and the Soviet Union knows that since I assumed my present office it has been my firm desire that the United Kingdom should play a full and positive part in fostering such "business-like co-operation" in our bilateral contacts.
213.	On the level of multilateral negotiations, the talks in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and about mutual and balanced force reductions have been moving, to put it politely, at a very slow pace. I hope we can shift both sets of talks into a higher gear so that we can report some positive results before this Assembly meets next.
214.	The talks in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in particular are given sufficient good will and understanding for the concerns and interests of all the participants ripe for an early conclusion. We have always recognized that the talks on mutual and balanced force reductions would be much more complex and long-term. But our aim in both sets of negotiations should be the same, to achieve in Europe an order which would allow our people to live in security and co-operation and at the same time reduce the crippling burden of arms spending.
215.	It would be a triumph indeed if Europe, which too often in this century has been the center of inhumanity and senseless conflict, could set the pattern for a new order of international relations free of war and the threat of war. Fortunately, it is some years since the threat of war between East and West was a major preoccupation of the United Nations; but the complex of new and interrelated problems are in their different ways as serious a threat to us all.
216.	This transfer of our attention has, of course, been brought about by massive and unprecedented increases in the price of oil. On the surface but only on the surface it might appear that there is a. natural difference of interest between those countries which would like to see oil prices reduced and those which wish to keep them at their present levels or indeed to increase them. That is not so. It is in the interests of both producer and consumer alike that the prices of commodities and of manufactured goods should not chase each other upwards in a never ending spiral.
217.	In the meantime, even if, as we hope, prices will not remain at their present peak, we have to face the problem of how to adapt the world's monetary and economic systems to accommodate the vast oil revenues now accruing to certain countries some of which cannot immediately absorb them.
218.	The objective is clear and quite straightforward. It is to marry the revenue of the oil-producing countries with the' technology of the developed countries, so that the increased production and world trade which would result from such a marriage would be used primarily to benefit the developing countries of the world which need them most. Our knowledge of international monetary mechanisms is sufficiently advanced to enable us to do this and to do it in a way that would be fair both to the oil-producing countries themselves and to those that need the resources. New techniques will be required, but it is by no means impossible to create them if there is the political will and an understanding of the problem.
219.	The unprecedented world-wide economic boom of recent years led to higher commodity prices prior to the recent increases in world oil prices. In turn these higher prices for raw materials found their way into the price of manufactured goods, and the resulting inflation coincided with a period in which the Bretton Woods system for controlling international monetary relationships fell into disarray. Collective action is now urgent if we are to ensure that the large surplus oil funds are used constructively to maintain demand and the level of world trade, because inevitably the surpluses of the oil producers are matched by deficits on the part of the consumers.
220.	In our view it will be an error which will have global consequences if the oil consumers try individually to eliminate their oil-induced deficits in advance of international agreement on the disposal and investment of the oil producers. That way lies general recession, increasing poverty and social unrest The surplus must be taken into account. 
Mr. President, I have already had occasion to congratulate you on your unanimous election, and also to welcome the three new Members to our Organization. On the present occasion I am happy to convey to the Secretary- General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, our appreciation of his ceaseless endeavors in the cause of peace and in the fulfillment of the principles and purposes of the Charter. We are fortunate indeed in having him as our Secretary-General today, when his views are needed on collective and co-operative action to tackle the diverse and urgent problems facing mankind at present.
73.	In the 29 years of its existence the United Nations has come to represent the overwhelming majority of the peoples and nations of the world. While this is indeed a matter for satisfaction, it is the few remaining areas of darkness that command our attention. I refer to the flagrant violation of the human rights of the majority of its people by the Government of South Africa, to the blatant refusal of South Africa to vacate Namibia, and to the continuance of the illegal racist regime in Zimbabwe. These continued affronts to the conscience of mankind are nagging reminders that, as long as some members of the human race are in bondage, the others are not wholly free. In our view, this Assembly should therefore consider more effective means of compelling these regimes practicing racism to respond positively to the collective will of the world represented by the United Nations.
74.	It is a matter of particular satisfaction to us to welcome the new wind of change in Portugal. Guinea-Bissau has attained independence and world recognition by admission to our Organization. We welcome the installation of an interim Government in Mozambique representing the will and aspirations of its people, and we look forward to welcoming Mozambique soon in our Organization as an independent and sovereign member. This is an irreversible trend and we are confident that the people of Angola will also win their freedom soon in conditions of peace and honor. India is appreciative of the decision of the present Government of Portugal to liquidate its colonial empire. This decision will enable Portugal to assume its proper place in the world of today, a place befitting its distinct history and rich culture. I am glad to say that Portugal and India have decided to re-establish diplomatic relations and to develop cultural relations between the two countries.
75.	Now I should like to turn my attention to the areas of conflict. Recent events in Cyprus remind us of the fatal danger of neglecting, until too late,, the potential causes of conflict. In 1960 we saw the freeing of Cyprus from colonial rule and its birth as a sovereign, independent and non-aligned State, whose bi national character was guaranteed by some external Powers. In retrospect, this curious system of external guarantees has proved to be unwise in principle and self-defeating in practice. Recently, one external intervention led to another and a threat to world peace and security was thus created. It is the people of Cyprus who suffered greatly as a consequence and all our sympathies are with them in this moment of crisis and uncertainty in their lives. But the fact that all States without exception have declared their respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of non-aligned Cyprus is a good augury, for it provides the essential elements for a durable structure of peace and a return to constitutionality. We welcome the negotiations taking place directly between the leaders of the two communities in Cyprus which have been arranged with the assistance of the Secretary-General. We hope that their talks will also encompass future internal constitutional arrangements, and that agreement can be reached at an early date so that the withdrawal of foreign forces now in Cyprus becomes possible. The non-aligned countries have already declared their willingness to be available for any assistance that they can render.
76.	The situation in the Middle East may freeze into another period of neglect, if the momentum towards a solution of the basic problems slows down. Only the rapid and full implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) can lead to a just and enduring peace. The restoration of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people is another cornerstone in the structure of a lasting peace. Israel's refusal to vacate Arab territories captured as a result of aggression is a continuing provocation to the Arab States and negates the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. If the catastrophe of another war in the Middle East is to be avoided, Israel should end its aggression and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people should be restored to them.
77.	The war in Cambodia shows no signs of ending, which is a matter of deep concern and anguish for us. In South Viet Nam, violations of the Paris Agreement continue to take place, with the legacies of external interference persisting and jeopardizing the prospects of early implementation of the provisions of the Agreement. How much longer are the peoples of IndoChina destined to suffer the ravages of war with all its frightful weapons? In South Viet Nam international efforts should be directed to the fulfillment of the constitutional provisions of the Paris Agreement. The people of Cambodia should be allowed to determine their future free from external interference and in conditions of peace and security. In Laos we welcome the formation of the Provisional Government of National Union, which is a testimony to the wisdom and statesmanship of the Laotian- leaders. We hope that this development, which has terminated several years of hostilities, will create conditions of peace and progress for the Laotian people.
78.	In our part of the world, I am happy to report that tangible progress has been made in creating an atmosphere of good neighborliness. The Simla Agreement of 3 July 1972 provides a good and common basis for India and Pakistan to turn away from a period of confrontation and conflict to one of peace and co-operation. We have made special efforts to implement the Simla Agreement and, in spite of unfortunate delays, the two countries have concluded some agreements designed to normalize relations. The latest agreement signed at Islamabad on 14 September 1974 provides for the restoration of communications and travel facilities, and we hope that the progress achieved so far will lead to more agreements in other fields and to an era of peace and prosperity for the peoples of India and Pakistan.
79.	We are actively engaged with our other neighbors to develop and extend bilateral and mutually beneficial co-operation in newer fields. The maritime boundary agreement with Sri Lanka is a significant example. Similarly, mutually satisfactory agreements on borders and other long-pending matters have been concluded with Indonesia, Burma and Bangladesh. Our relations with our other neighbors, Afghanistan, Bhutan and Nepal, are characterized by the spirit of mutual understanding and the desire to co-operate for our mutual benefit.
80.	Our underground peaceful nuclear explosive experiment of 18 May 1974 must be seen in the context of our endeavor, at the national level, to develop our natural resources and capacities to the fullest extent for the benefit of our people. The international community has long recognized that nuclear explosive technology can be of great value in the development process. The non-aligned countries had also stressed this in the Declaration adopted by the Third Conference of Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Countries, held at Lusaka from 8 to 10 September 1970. We have no intention of making nuclear weapons. I wish to reiterate once again in this forum our firm and consistent policy to use nuclear energy and technology solely for peaceful purposes.
81.	I should now like to say a few words about the areas of challenge that face the world community. Since the end of the last world war, the principal challenge to mankind has been the discovery of the basis for lasting world peace and security. In recent years, we have seen the evolution of a period of detente and a general relaxation of tensions among the great Powers. We welcome this development as a positive contribution to removing dangers of global conflict. However, the process of detente between the great Powers will have more meaning for the rest of the world if it takes into account the interests of all countries and if the benefits of detente are used to meet the challenges that face mankind, especially disarmament and development.
82.	Disarmament has been the subject of continuous discussion in multilateral forums since the days of the League of Nations. But progress was slow, and the arms race entered a qualitatively new phase with the stockpiling of nuclear weapons to such an alarming extent that they are capable, if used, of destroying their targets five times over and obliterating all signs of modern civilization. India feels that nuclear dis-armament should receive the highest priority in our deliberations, for it provides the key not only to the prevention of wars of mass destruction but also to the release of resources for tackling what the Secretary-General has called the other "ancient enemies of mankind poverty, disease, natural disaster" [A/9601/Add.I]. Progress towards disarmament is possible only if nuclear-weapon States abjure all nuclear weapons and accept equal obligations with the rest of the world community. We support the early convening of a world disarmament conference after adequate preparation and with the participation of all States.
83.	The holding of the Caracas session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea was an event of outstanding importance. Significant progress was made, as nearly 150 countries worked to reconcile their interests, which were sometimes widely divergent. As a developing country with a long coast-line, India attaches special importance to this .Conference. With several years of preparatory work behind us, it. is our hope that further progress will be made towards an equitable and universally acceptable treaty on the law of the sea during the third session of the Conference to be held in Geneva next year.
84.	During this year there have been major changes in the international economic scene. This world body dealt with the problems of development not only in the sixth special session held earlier this year but also in the World Population Conference which has just concluded in Bucharest, and it will deal with them further in the World Food Conference which is to be held in November. We are particularly appreciative of the fact that for the first time population questions have been accepted as an integral part of the developmental process. We hope that the World Food Conference will be a first step in tackling, at the international level, an important problem which so far has been neglected by the international community.
85.	The problems of development will acquire ever greater urgency and importance with the rapid depletion of natural resources and the increasing population of the world. They are already assuming global proportions, and their effects will be felt everywhere. They cannot, be solved nationally or regionally, because there is already a growing and irreversible trend of interdependence among nations. Only global solutions can cope with global problems. Every problem today is virtually a world problem and calls for a world response.
86.	The earth's resources are finite, and so is its capacity to absorb wastes. The world is in the grip of economic forces that appear to be uncontrollable. There is rampant inflation as well as stagnation in production. These phenomena have aggravated an already iniquitous situation with extremes of poverty and wealth in the world. In some parts of the world there seem to be no limits to the appetite for consumption, while in other countries millions of people are short of even the essentials of simple and plain living^ such as food, clothing, housing and medicine. The future growth of the developing countries is at the mercy of the high world prices of fertilizers, fuel and industrial goods. What are the global options available in this grave economic situation? It is not enough for the affluent countries to confine their concern to monetary fluctuations. There is an imperative need to help the countries most seriously affected by the current economic crisis. Any long-term global balance between demand and supply and natural resources must take into account, first and foremost, the requirements of those countries.
87.	We welcome the statement of the Secretary- General in the thought-provoking introduction to his report that "it is an underlying assumption of the United Nations that no problem of human relations is insoluble [ibid.]. It is in that spirit that we view the decisions of the sixth special session which are designed to pave the way to a new international economic order. While we appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-General in trying to maintain the momentum generated by the special session, we note that he has himself pointed out that "failure to sustain international action and collective responsibility may easily put in question the actual survival of millions of people" [ibid.].
88.	An emergency operation has been entrusted to the Secretary-General to provide immediate practical assistance to the most seriously affected countries, which have been rendered unable to meet the mounting costs of their essential imports [resolution 3202 (S-VI), chap. X], The responsibility for their present predicament is clearly not their own; they have been reduced to this precarious situation by economic events outside their control. In recognition of this fact, the sixth special session decided that emergency measures were necessary for assisting these countries, and it also envisaged the necessity for medium-term assistance to them. However, we are disappointed at the offers received so far of help for these countries. If tragic consequences to many countries and general disillusionment as to the effectiveness of international co-operation are to be averted, assistance must be forthcoming quickly and in adequate measure.
89.	Perhaps at no time before in human history has mankind been confronted with problems of the present scope and scale. And at no time before has man been so conscious of the unity and common destiny of his own kind. Nor has he ever been in a better position than now to regulate his resources, his consumption and his environment in such a manner as to meet his material and spiritual needs. There is no forum more appropriate than the United Nations for meeting to the full extent the challenges facing us. There is no better time than the present, and the lead can only come from those who are blessed with the means to do so.
At the outset of my remarks, I wish to associate myself with all those who have expressed sorrow and sympathy at the disaster which has befallen Honduras.
213.	Next, a special word of congratulations to the new Members of the United NationsBangladesh, Guinea-Bissau and Grenada. The Jewish people, which was deprived of its independence for hundreds of years, is, perhaps more than any other, in a position to value the significance of national sovereignty and spiritual freedom. In the name of Israel and its people I wish them prosperity and progress.
214.	Likewise, I cannot refrain from extending my warm greetings to Portugal, which has chosen the path of decolonization and of its own liberation from the burdens of empire.
215.	And now, turning from those who have gained their freedom to those who have not, I am in duty bound, both from a human and a Jewish point of view, it draw the attention of this Assembly, and, thereby, that of world opinion, to the suffering and distress of a small Jewish community numbering 4,500 souls, all that is left of the ancient Jewish community of Syria, which is subjected to unceasing oppression.
216.	Human rights are indivisible, and the freedom of the individual concerns us all. I am "my brother's keeper": it is in this spirit of international solidarity that I express the hope that the Jewish community of Syria will, as an act of humanity, be finally allowed to go.
217.	In turning now to the situation of another Jewish community -the Jews of the Soviet Union, numbering more than 3 millionI voice the hope that the Soviet Government will recognize and respect the national rights of this Jewish group and permit those who so wish to leave for Israel and be reunited with their families and their people. The Jewish people, divided a? it is between East and West, has always been the first and principal victim of wars, both hot and cold, and is second to none in its yearning for peace and detente. Conflict with Powers great and small is not our desire, but we can neither keep silent nor rest until the right of every Jew to go to Israel is recognized.
218.	The Soviet Union, as a multinational State, cannot indeed it has no right to ignore the aspirations of members of the Jewish national group to full national life in their historic homeland. It is not possible to solve the problem of the rights of the Jewish people in the Soviet Union, a problem anomalous from the national point of view, by means anomalous in human and moral terms. The granting of permission to go to Israel to those who want to go will not only solve an agonizing Jewish problem which is unique in human history, but, I believe, will also provide the solution for a Soviet problem with which the Soviet Government has struggled for many years.
219.	In expressing appreciation for what has already been done, I appeal to the Soviet Government to show greater generosity, to cease harassing those who have applied to emigrate, to release the prisoners of Zion, to open the gates, and they will earn the praises of civilized men everywhere for their humanity.
220.	Our world is at a crossroads: on the one hand, affluence, waste and indifference; on the other, starvation, short expectation of life and untold suffering. Each of the States Members of the United Nations, and the Organization as a whole, must, as soon as possible, base its economic, technological and political cooperation on the concept of one world, all of whose parts and policies are interconnected. If not, the most gloomy of prophecies on the fate of humankind will be realized, and this at a time when man has reached the heights of scientific and technological advance. Unlimited resources to eliminate starvation and sickness are at hand. What is lacking is the goodwill, human responsibility and governmental understanding to establish a new international system which will advance mankind to lives of greater dignity and happiness, lives without war, lives of plenty and spiritual satisfaction. To this end it would be well to examine anew the existing international in order to see whether it is able to cope with these great and urgent tasks.
221.	Social justice is a concept which is no longer confined to the boundaries of States. Our world is now faced with stark alternatives: to proceed along the false path, whose end cannot be seen, of a widening gap between rich and poor nations; or to embark on constructive international cooperation.
222.	As Jawaharlal Nehru so wisely put it: "The law of life should not be the competition of acquisitiveness but cooperation, the good of each contributing to the good of all."
223.	The alternatives faced by our generation are cooperation or decline. {Let us cooperate. Israel, though small in size and limited in resources, and itself still in the stage of development, is doing its best to cope with the manifold problems of a poor and semiarid land, and with the integration of hundreds of thousands of refugees. Nevertheless it has in the past provided such assistance as it could to other developing countries in all continents in the fields of science, education and economic and social development, and will gladly extend such aid in the future.
224.	One year has passed since the Yom Kippur War -a bloody encounter started by Egypt and Syria, reinforced by contingents from other Arab States, and enjoying the material and political support of the Soviet Union. More than 2,500 Israeli soldiers lost their lives in that war, more than 12,000 Egyptians and more than 3,000 Syrians and others. Most of them died in the bloom of youth and left bereaved parents, widows and orphans behind them. Israeli prisoners were savagely maltreated in Syrian and Egyptian prisons. More than 40,000 men were wounded, and many permanently disabled. The agony of bereavement of the widows, of the orphans and of the disabled is shared equally by the peoples on both sides of the lines.
225.	Following this war the Security Council adopted resolution 338 (1973), paragraph 3 of which reads:
"The Security Council
"Decides that, immediately and concurrently with the ceasefire, negotiations shall start between the parties concerned under appropriate auspices aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in the Middle East."
226.	It is not to the credit of the Security Council that it was only in October 1973 -24 years after the signature in 1949 of the General Armistice Agreements between Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria- that it specifically called for peace negotiations. That, at any rate, was progress and it is better late than never. But why did so important and essential a resolution have to wait until the end of the sanguinary war of October last?
227.	The disengagement agreements between Israel and Egypt, and between Israel and Syria, also represent a measure of progress. Since the 1967 Arab Summit Conference in Khartoum, with its triple negatives -no peace, no recognition, no negotiations- this was a first positive step. It was taken in the light of the experience of the war, and as a result of the constructive initiative of the United States and of the remarkable efforts of its Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger.
228.	But here, too, the same grave question presents itself: why did that come so late, and why only after bloodshed? After all, partial arrangements could have been reached without war, and before the war, both in the Suez Canal area and on the Golan Heights. In 1971 Israel responded affirmatively to the American proposal for proximity talks for a partial agreement with Egypt, and there was no reason why, as time went on, we should not have responded in the same way to proposals for similar talks with the other neighboring States. It was the other side that rejected the proposal and thus killed that constructive initiative for no good reason. In the event we did finally have face-to-face talks, that is to say, something more than proximity talks, at the first session of the Geneva Conference, at the negotiations between Israel and Egypt at kilometer 101 on the CairoSuez road, and on the occasion of the signature of the agreement with Syria in Geneva. Why then should this have been done at the cost of tens of thousands of casualties on both sides?
229.	If further proof were required, the October War showed clearly that there is not, there cannot be, and there never will be, a military solution of the ArabIsrael conflict, which persists beyond all reason and beyond all political realism: a conflict which saps the very marrow from the bones of all the peoples of the area and, despite the extensive resources of our area, debilitates their economies and their societies.
230.	Let us look at the facts. In this war the aggressors enjoyed three marked advantages which, under normal circumstances, should have been decisive: first, overwhelming strength in manpower and modern sophisticated weaponry; secondly, initiative; and, thirdly, surprise. Yet despite these great advantages the citizen army of Israel rapidly overcame the effect of the surprise, halted the forward movement of the attacking forces and passed over to a bold counteroffensive which brought Israel troops well beyond the former ceasefire lines in the Golan Heights and into large areas to the west of the Suez Canal, thus surrounding the Egyptian Third Army. I do not think that any particular military expertise is required to realize what would have happened to the aggressors' forces if, at that stage, the Security Council had not hurriedly called for a ceasefire, which, of course, it did not do earlier, before it became clear that the wheel had turned in Israel's favor.
231.	That is the essential difference between an Israeli victory and an Arab victory. If the Arab armies had triumphed, the world would have witnessed an act of genocide, whereas the Arab defeat was limited to the field of battle, and in fact opened the window to the beginnings of reason and to a small step, a very small step, in the political sphere.
232.	If, despite the advantages which the Arab armies had in manpower, armaments, initiative and surprise, these were the results of the October War, what could another war bring, besides more victims, and more suffering? Another war like that would only create new complex problems the solution of which will be infinitely more difficult.
233.	I do not mention these things with joy, but with sorrow. I do not wish to exult in the Israeli victory nor to embarrass Egypt and Syria. On the contrary, at this time when it is the duty of us all to make a special effort to advance towards a political settlement, it is incumbent that all refrain from provocative statements and disparaging slogans. I recall these things only because I want to repeat, and to emphasize, that there can be no military solution to this pernicious conflict. Reinforcement of the armaments of the Arab countries might encourage new aggression but it cannot decide the issue in a new war.
234.	After the October War, there can again be no doubt that not a single one of the problems encompassed in the ArabIsraeli dispute can be solved by war, and that, in the same way, there is no problem, including the question of the independent identity of the Palestinians, which cannot be solved by sincere negotiations between the parties. Let us therefore do our utmost to ensure that the unnecessary war of Yom Kippur 1973 will be the last war ever to be fought between Arab and Israeli.
235.	Israel has naturally drawn its conclusions from the last war. But we wish to continue to progress along the political road, which opened after the war. However, if a new war is forced on us, we shall be ready. I hope and pray that our neighbors have also drawn conclusions from October 1973, and that they agree with us that it is time to finally abandon the course of armed force so as to devote their efforts consistently, patiently and seriously to the political option.
236.	The disengagement agreements between Israel and Egypt on the one hand and between Israel and Syria on the other, in which the emergency forces of the United Nations under the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral are playing a praiseworthy part, may provide a suitable opening. These agreements are not only military in character; they also have their political aspects.
237.	First, the very fact of negotiations, sometimes indirect and sometimes direct, is a political and psychological step forward for all those who desire peace in our area and in the world.
238.	Secondly, an emended period of tranquility at the fronts has also made a contribution to the creation of the new climate and also possibly of a new dynamic for a political solution.
239.	Thirdly, the disengagement agreements include the following paragraph:
"This agreement is not regarded by Egypt and Israel as a final peace agreement. It constitutes a first step toward a final, just and durable peace according to the provisions of Security Council resolution 338 (1973) and within the framework of the Geneva Conference."5
There is a similar paragraph in the IsraelSyria agreement.6
240.	But the disengagement agreements and mutual observance of the ceasefire are not enough. We must go forward with negotiations, without prior conditions, keeping constantly in mind the idea of peace and mutual tolerance in order to plant the seeds of trust which are vital for the creation of an atmosphere of conciliation, compromise and understanding.
241.	This objective is at cross purposes with the continuation of a state of belligerency, which not only contains within itself the dangers of renewal of hostilities, with all their horror and suffering, but also diverts the major part of the human resources and the wealth of the area to the buildup and maintenance of huge armies at the cost of its social and economic development. This useless aberration has already held back an entire generation, and its persistence will cause further suffering to millions.
242.	There is a historical paradox here. The Middle East is one of the richest areas of the globe. It has natural wealth, fertile soil, abundant water for irrigation, international lines of communication, incomparable sites for pilgrimage and tourism and old, historic peoples possessed of ancient cultures and modern skills alike. But this bountifully endowed area is still, from the social and economic point of view, one of the most backward in the world.
243.	It would not be difficult to prove that the expenditure of vast treasure on weapons of war and on the maintenance of huge armies is one of the main factors in this backwardness. The Soviet Union is doing no service to the people of the area when it counts weapons of war among its main exports to some of the countries of the Middle East as if these, and not means of production and technological agreements, can raise these nations from their misery. This Soviet policy, which is inspired by a one-sided, antiIsrael attitude and by incitement to intransigence and inflexibility, is one of the principal causes of tension in the Middle East and is used deliberately as a major means of Soviet implantation in a number of the countries of the area at the expense of their sovereignty. It is a policy that stands in stark contradiction to the spirit and objectives of detente, on which the hopes of all of us rest.
244.	I am bound to state with emphasis that either detente will be global and apply to the Middle East as well, or there will be no detente at all. Detente which does not include the Middle East is without political or strategic meaning.
245.	Peace and cooperation between the peoples of our region are needed not only to strengthen our economies and develop our societies but, not less vitally, to ensure the true independence of all peoples of the Middle East. There is no validity in a peace which serves the interests of one side only; and there is no substance in a peace dictated by one side to another or by a third party extraneous to both. Such a peace will always be precarious and temporary. As Albert Einstein once said: "Peace cannot be kept by force; it can be achieved only by understanding". Only a peace founded on respect for the interests of both parties can be genuine, stable and durable. The geo-strategic conditions which have evolved in the Middle East make such a peace possible, that is to say, a peace which will provide on the one hand a satisfactory solution for the interests of all the Arab States and also for the needs of the Palestinians, and on the other a solution for Israel's vital need for defensible borders.
246.	Israel would be prepared to give favorable consideration to a significant territorial compromise, but it cannot compromise on its security. In short, I sincerely believe that it is possible to achieve peace agreements which will serve the reasonable interests of the parties to the dispute and will open a new chapter in the history of each of the States of the Middle East and of the whole region. But up to now the Arab States have, regrettably, pursued a sterile policy of "not an inch", while Israel has set her face towards peace, a peace of equitable compromise, even though it might be painful to both sides. In order to reach this lofty objective we would prefer negotiations for a full and integral peace agreement. But, if it transpires that the conditions are not yet ripe for this, the possibilities might be examined of reaching interim agreements, based on compromise, which will put an end to belligerency in its various components, that is to say, interim agreements providing for effective mutual security arrangements that in the course of time will lead to negotiations for a peace treaty which will determine, inter alia, the final borders.
247.. Israel is cognizant of the existence of the question of Palestinian identity. It holds that it can and should be resolved in the context of the settlement of the dispute with its neighbor to the east. It is there, on both sides of the Jordan, that the great majority of the Palestinian population is concentrated. Moreover, most of the citizens of Jordan are Palestinians and most of the Palestinians are Jordanian citizens. It is also a fact that the area east of the Jordan is an integral part of the historic land of Israel or Palestine and that it is already the national home of the Palestinians. If there is any ethnic significance in the Palestinian concept it applies equally to the peasant, the townsman and the Bedouin east of the Jordan and to the peasant, the townsman and the Bedouin to its west. It is in the light of these considerations that the Israel Government, on 21 July 1974, resolved that:
"The Government will work towards negotiations for a peace agreement with Jordan.
"The peace will be founded on the existence of two independent States onlyIsrael, with united Jerusalem as its capital, and a JordanianPalestinian Arab State, east of Israel, within borders to be determined in negotiations between Israel and Jordan. In this State, the independent identity of the Jordanian and Palestinian Arabs can find expression in peace and good neighborliness with Israel."
248.	However, the Palestinian community in general must in no way be equated with the terrorist organizations. From my own personal acquaintance with this community I refuse to identify it, or at least its great majority, with the terrorist group known as the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], which is not a national liberation movement but the roof organization of disunited and splintered terrorist groups whose pretensions are not supported by the broad masses of the Palestinian population. It is a fact that more Arabs than Israelis have been killed by these organizations. It is also a fact that more terrorists have been killed in the armed clashes between regular Arab forces and the terror gangs and between the rival terror gangs themselves than by Israeli security forces.
249.	These facts are obvious to anybody who cares to examine them. We refuse to recognize the PLO and we will not recognize it, because of its doctrines and of its deeds alike. The charter of Palestine, which embodies the political ideology of the PLO, stands in direct contradiction to the Charter of the United Nations. It denies absolutely the right of Israel to exist and postulates its destruction as a principal objective.
250.	This ideology is accompanied by the criminal methods of warfare used by the organizations which make up the PLO, methods such as indiscriminate terror, deliberate murder of women and children, pupils and teachers, athletes at the Olympic Games, passengers on a Sw.ss airliner, chance visitors and Jewish and Christian pilgrims at airports, and Arab women workers in Galilee. In reality the situation here is not that of a subject people trying to liberate itself with its own underground forces, but of gangs of desperadoes imposing themselves on a people and attempting to form and dominate it by means of the destruction of another people: this at a time when there is ample room for two States, Jewish and Arab, to coexist in peace in the historic land of Israel or Palestine on both sides of the Jordan, their common border to be determined by negotiations.
251.	It is of course no secret that with the* parliamentary situation existing in the General Assembly, the preconceived ideas held by a great number of those taking part here, and the irrelevant considerations which guide many delegations, a majority might concede the PLO demands. A resolution that would do so will be regarded by Israel as an arbitrary resolution, one impinging on its fundamental rights, illegal and not binding in any way. Every representative here would reject a resolution which strikes at the foundation of his country's being. One cannot ask of any nation to agree to its own elimination or to commit suicide.
252.	Understanding for the needs of the Palestinians -certainly; satisfaction of the demands of arch murderers who appoint themselves as saviors- decidedly not.
253.	I regret that many Members of the United Nations do not delve into this problem thoroughly, with the consequence that, either deliberately or through misunderstanding, they reward these murderers and in so doing stoke the fires in the Middle East. Israel will not submit to violence and terror. Terrorism is an infectious disease which knows no national frontiers. Many States have already paid the price of submission to terrorism, and I am afraid that the last word has not been said on the subject. Following the latest terrorist attacks in Paris and at the Hague, President Valery Giscard d'Estaing said: "Violence, which is sometimes presented and justified as an avant-garde act, is nothing but the rising to the surface of those depths of barbarism and primitive cruelty of which humanity has devoted all its efforts to rid itself." These are trenchant words, but there is need for action and for courageous cooperation in order to put an end to manifestations of terror before further disasters occur.
254.	The essence of the PLO is terror. It is no coincidence that whenever a concrete proposal for a political solution is put forward, the PLO leadership rises up against any such peace initiative. Its insistence on including the question of Palestine in the agenda of this General Assembly session is designed, above all, to destroy the prospects of the political efforts at the very beginning. A debate on this matter cannot fail to poison the international atmosphere. Acceptance of the PLO demands may well condemn the prospects of the negotiating process to failure, just when the first ray of light has been glimpsed on the horizon.
255.	Palestinians who wish to give constructive expression to their independent identity can be helped to do so in the context of the negotiations with Jordan. Moreover, I would not agree to a genera! settlement without including in it the satisfaction of the needs of the Palestinians. It is, after all, not Israel which has prevented the crystallization of what is known as "Palestinian identity". To the extent that such a desire existed among the Palestinians, it is the Arab States that have frustrated it during all these years. If not, how can one explain the fact that during 19 years of Arab rule in the Gaza Strip and on the West Bank, this identity never achieved any definite form or full expression?
256.	The joint communique by Egypt, Syria and the PLO in Cairo, on 21 September 1974, also deals a blow to the prospects of a constructive solution to the issue of Palestinian identity. In the same way that the PLO bends all ,ts efforts to prevent political progress in the area, certain Arab States are whittling down the hopes for a solution of the Palestine question by granting the terrorist organizations the monopoly of representation of the Palestinians, when they know perfectly well that these organizations are not able to be a party to negotiations because of what they are.
257.	There is no sadder example of the heartless attitude of the Arab Governments than the freeze they have imposed on the status of the 1948 refugees. It is true that many of them have been absorbed in the economies of the Arab States in which they now live, but there has been a deliberate policy to prevent a constructive solution to this sore problem in order to exploit human suffering for political and propaganda ends. If the problem in itself were not so sad I would say that there is nothing more ludicrous than the annual fundraising efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to make up the deficit in its budget, and this at a time when the Arab oil States command the biggest monetary reserves in the world.
258.	Israel did not adopt this course-not towards the 600,000 Jewish refugees who fled the Arab States stripped of all their possessions and not towards the survivors of the millions of Jews destroyed by the Nazis, with the blessing of the Mufti Haj Amin el Husseini, who found refuge among his own kind in Nazi Berlin and Fascist Rome. All of these were fully absorbed in Israel -economically, socially and culturally.
259.	In the light of the vast economic opportunities which now exist in the Middle East, the refugee problem must and can be solved. Far more difficult refugee situations in other parts of the world have been solved long ago. Given goodwill -without which no problem can be resolved- the question of compensation for both Arab and Jewish refugees can be settled. Israel is contributing and will continue to contribute its share in the solution of this painful human problem.
260.	There are those who foresee the approach of war on this or that front in the Middle East. As far as Israel is concerned, we shall faithfully observe the ceasefire and the separation of forces agreements, on a reciprocal basis, until they are replaced or supplemented by new agreements. But in the same way as we shall display the utmost goodwill in seeking to achieve balanced and constructive progress in the political sphere, we shall neither submit nor lend ourselves to the blackmail of threats of war or even of war itself.
261.	We want to see progress in the efforts to achieve a political solution, both as an end in itself and as a means of avoiding war. In the face of the rapid rearmament of the other side, we shall strengthen our forces in order to prevent war or to gain victory if, God forbid, it should break out anew. At the same time, we shall continue to seek a settlement of the conflict by peaceful means. In other words, we shall prepare for the worst and hope and work for the best.
262.	In one of his recent speeches, President El Sadat said that our generation must be satisfied with the end of belligerency and that the treaty of peace would be signed by the coming generation. I am astonished that so distinguished a statesman should renounce the great and historic opportunity to bring about peace and cooperation. I trust that this was not his last word. Peace should not be postponed to the next generation. It is the duty of the generations which have taken part in the war to overcome their differences and to assure peace for their descendants. Let us all do our best to secure peace speedily in our time. It is possible. In order to achieve it, one needs perhaps more courage than is needed for the decision to go to war. Let us all demonstrate both wisdom and courage for the benefit of all the peoples of our region.
Mr. President, I congratulate you most warmly on your election to the President's chair, for which your qualities and long experience as Foreign Minister of your country so admirably fit you. I wish you well in the direction of our business, which includes many important and some difficult issues. The year of your presidency will be an important year. We shall in fact be getting to grips with matters which are central to the future welfare, and even the existence, of human society.
4.	First of all, I must speak of the recent tragic death of our beloved Prime Minister, Mr. Norman Kirk, who last year spoke for New Zealand in this debate. He was a good and humane man -a champion of the poor and the weak. We were deeply touched and comforted by the sympathy shown to us by people from all over the world at the time of our loss. Such solidarity occurs only when we lose a leader who has risen above local concerns, as he did one who has worked to advance the cause of the whole human family. The response to his death suggests that multitudes hunger for new attitudes among the leaders of nations. New Zealand will miss him greatly. But my Government will still try to bring to reality his personal vision of a new world social and economic order. We shall continue to strive, as Mr. Kirk did, to translate into international terms the vision of a decent and humane society which motivates our policy at home. Our goal remains to help to harness the great resources and skills of the people of this planet, so that everyone, not just a few, will have a chance to live as human beings should. We shall continue to work to strengthen the United Nations as a center for harmonizing the actions of nations and for protecting the rights of the smaller nations.
5.	The last three years have witnessed a remarkable change in national attitudes. In 1972, the year of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm, the international community became aware of, and accepted the existence of certain physical limits to economic growth: limits to the availability of natural resources and of food; limits to the amount of pollution that can be discharged into the environment before inevitable and unwelcome consequences follow. In 1973 the world began to receive sharp, warnings of some of these physical limits, particularly in the supply of energy and of food. It became painfully apparent that our ability through existing institutions to make efficient and humane use of the world's talents and resources for the common good was more limited than we had thought and more limited than we could put up with.
6.	In 1974 it became obvious that the world had better make a more serious effort to understand the interdependence of all peoples and all States. At a number of historic conferences the nations at last started to study realistically the fundamental changes that will be needed if we are to bring about the new order that the world requires a new order that will ensure a more equitable use of the world's resources to meet the demands of the future. These conferences included the sixth special session of the General Assembly, on raw materials and development, the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, the World Population Conference, 1974, and, soon, the World Food Conference. The common theme of these conferences was, and will be, interdependence. Whatever subject is studied, the same lesson emerges: we are one people, we are all one of another; and if we ignore that truth all of us will suffer and none of us may have a future in any meaningful sense of the word at all. At one time only visionaries and preachers spoke in such terms. Now the message has spread to the so-called practical people.
7.	Governments, in their concern about the state of the planet, are having to look up from problems of local tension and conflict which are themselves hard enough to solve and to face fundamental issues affecting the very survival of humanity. The great issues of today are population, food, energy, natural resources, the environment and the embracing need for an economic order which will enable all people to realize their full potential as human beings. For the immediate and foreseeable future these constitute the agenda these will be the primary concerns of the international community and of the United Nations. Our success in dealing with them will largely determine the climate in which relations between States will develop in the next decade.
8.	Detente is not just a question of political relations between the great Powers. True, detente must be based on a general acceptance of the interdependence of the great Powers and the small, of developed and developing nations. It must be based on the willingness of all of us to work together to solve the problems about which I have spoken. What alternative is in fact open to us?
9.	To deal first with the subject of food, the shortage of food is growing worse. The international community has recognized the urgent need to act and to deal with the situation. Without food there can be no human energy. The World Food Conference will be a vitally important meeting. World food stocks have sunk to the lowest level in 50 years. We are now living literally on a hand-to-mouth basis. The assessment prepared for the World Food Conference has indicated that there will be a very significant food deficit in developing countries in the 1980s. Others have forecast the possibility of mass starvation by the end of the century. As a matter pf Immediate anxiety, a grave food shortage looms next winter. Weather conditions have reduced the harvests in the United States and Canada, and, therefore, the possibility of their being used, as they so often have been, as a backstop. The drought in the Sahel has brought famine to Africa. Further shortages seem likely to hit countries in Asia.
10.	Weather is one cause of these troubles but nations are also at fault. The institutions for producing and marketing and distributing food have failed us. Above all, they have failed those countries and those people on the lowest incomes. There is an enormous unused potential for food production, but the international community has not yet devised ways of sharing its resources and skills for the benefit of all. The World Food Conference must provide the framework for such co-operation. If a crisis situation is developing, there will be a tendency to concentrate on short-term food aid. A world food security arrangement, which has so far eluded our efforts, is more necessary than ever be-fore. We must ensure that arrangements are made for sufficient stores of food, so that people do not starve in the emergencies which past experience teaches us will unfortunately occur from time to time.
11.	The world, however, cannot just rely on the traditional food producers, There is a fundamental imbalance in food production. The answer is not to produce more and more food in the rich countries and ship it off as aid to distant parts. We must give top priority to increasing national production in developing countries. In many regions there are untapped resources of land and water. These can and must be utilized to expand food production. It is essential that the World Food Conference produce arrangements that will transfer agricultural technology to developing countries and increase the supply of the agricultural inputs they must have: money, energy, fertilizer, seeds, chemicals and equipment.
12.	Most of New Zealand's special expertise is in the varied field of agriculture. We have shaped our development assistance and technical co-operation according to programs to make it available to others who need and want it. In the last year over 30 per cent of our bilateral aid involved the transfer of agricultural technology, materials, equipment and training. In providing this aid we are making a strong effort to ensure that it is practical and literally down to earth. Our friends in the South Pacific tell us that in the past years their islands have been nearly buried by feasibility studies, surveys and reports by international experts. They have been studied and surveyed beyond all bearing. What they want now is action. So do we. We do not underestimate the value of research. Our own agricultural success has depended on it very much indeed. But we think that if production is to be increased, as it should be, this will be done by men prepared to dirty their hands in the field, and not by those who polish the seat of a chair in a distant office. We for our part try to avoid inflicting on other people chair polishers disguised as experts. And we hope that the students from other countries whom we train in New Zealand will get the message that countries are developed only by hard work and effort, and that workers are deserving of equal respect whether they wear collars and ties or just shirts.
13.	As a major agricultural exporter, New Zealand certainly shares the interest of developing countries and other States in the orderly marketing and distribution of food. We are constantly working for the elimination of barriers to trade and for the creation of stable markets at fair prices. Obviously in this area we are working in our own interest; but we believe also that we are working in the interests of others just as much as in our own. The World Food Conference should provide constructive guidance to the multilateral trade negotiations at present under way. We hope it will also give the incentive to remove the present stumbling blocks to progress in these negotiations. This is an area of activity in negotiations in agricultural trade that is usually dull and hard, and greatly complicated by national politics. But if food is to be produced in much greater quantity and it must be if the rapidly growing number of people are to be fed we must get an imaginative breakthrough in this vital field.
14.	I have spoken of our concern about the world food shortage. I have said that we wish to make available to developing countries the benefits of the technology and expertise that we have built up in our agriculturally-based economy. Together with our colleagues from Sri Lanka, we have promoted emergency arrangements to ensure that the countries most in need can obtain sufficient supplies of nitrogenous fertilizers at prices they can afford.
15.	We are convinced that real and lasting progress can be made by developing countries only if aid policies are closely co-ordinated with trade and monetary policies. The sixth special session of the General Assembly was an historic event, in some ways a revolutionary event. Its consequences will work themselves out over many years.
16.	But the most important revolutions, we believe, occur in men's minds, not in the streets. Colonialism collapsed in two decades because of a conviction that its day was over. As the cumulative result of years of effort in education, sometimes through oratory and pressure, the conscience dormant in most people was brought to life and even the colonial Powers came to share this conviction, some more slowly than others. But I believe that we are now on the brink of another and even more profound shift in attitudes. We are beginning to accept, not just in words, but through practical decisions, that all members of the world society in which we live have a just claim on the wealth and the more decent life that that society can make possible. To discuss a new economic order is now to discuss reality.
17.	A momentum has been established. Much more discussion will no doubt be required before consensus is reached on specific actions and before the change in attitudes is complete. But to achieve this we have to keep up the momentum and concentrate the energies of the international community on a manageable, realistic field of action. For our part we would like to suggest that the Assembly at this session identify as priority tasks for the coming year the four main issues for priority action: food, trade access, reform of the monetary system and emergency assistance. We think it would be useful if at this session the Assembly directed the subsidiary organs of the United Nations to bear this in mind in drawing up their own agenda and work programs.
18.	At the sixth special session, the General Assembly established an emergency program of measures to help the countries hardest hit by the economic situation [resolution 3202 (S-VI)]. My country has allocated $10 million for this program. At the meeting to be held on 27 September on this subject I shall give more details of this contribution. However, we believe that a firmer basis should be established within the international community for providing large-scale emergency assistance whenever the need arises. We must have the means to avert the risk of the energy crisis or any other similar catastrophe creating a "fourth world" of countries so hopelessly placed that they are without any prospect of economic and social development for decades to come. My Government accepts that developing countries must increase their share of international trade, principally through improved access to the markets of the developed countries of the world. We support the generalized system of preferences and we are at present reviewing the New Zealand scheme with a view to introducing improvements into it.
19.	New Zealand does not play a major role in the world financial institutions. But we have supported, and will continue to support, the principle that the developing countries should be full participants in discussions leading to major decisions on the international monetary order.
20.	L turn now to disarmament. Against this back-ground of human need, which all the speakers this morning touched on, it is surely tragic folly, to squander resources at an ever-increasing rate to perfect weapons of destruction. We already have enough nuclear weaponry to obliterate all life from this earth several times over. Almost everyone says he wants to stop the arms race and to use the scarce resources that would be saved for constructive purposes: for aid and human welfare. Each year this Organization solemnly proclaims how essential it is that additional resources be devoted to economic and social development. Each year it proclaims the need for disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament. Yet each year its proclamations are ignored. We now watch with despair medium-sized and even small-sized Powers trying to follow the bad example of the great nuclear Powers.
21.	Since the Assembly last met in regular session the tempo of nuclear-weapon testing has been stepped up. Two super-Powers have told us that a decade must elapse before they will be able to disentangle themselves from the spider's web of the arms race- a decade to strike what they choose to call "a strategic balance".
22.	In the same time-span we face the prospect, even the certainty, if the international community does not act with vigor to prevent it, that there will be further additions to the nuclear club. Given the example set by the super-Powers and I do not feel at all comfortable in lecturing others we have to say that we completely reject the notion that the possession of these dreadful and suicidal weapons can in some way enhance a nation's status or security. On the contrary, the greater the number of States that possess such a capacity the more unstable the relationships between States will become and the greater will be the danger to world peace. We are deeply concerned that recent events may undermine the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex]. Some find defects in this Treaty, but, despite, the defects, it does offer a path back to sanity and reason.
23.	For many years the nations of the South Pacific have been close to the testing of nuclear weapons. Interested parties may argue that the tests are harmless, but those of us who have been closest to them are keenly aware of the dangers that testing poses for the human environment. We know that these tests can create anxiety and apprehension in ordinary people everywhere. We urge that this Assembly again assert, clearly and without equivocation, that testing in every form must be ended, soon, urgently, through a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The Assembly should act to advance the principles of the non-proliferation Treaty.
24.	We believe that the Assembly should stand ready to encourage positive proposals from countries of a given region to increase regional stability and security. In recent years that search for international security and stability has been given new impetus through regional activities. New Zealand continues to see merit in this approach, and we urge outside States to co-operate fully in giving effect to these initiatives by smaller countries in various parts of the world.
25.	I come now to the law of the sea. The law of the sea occupies a crucial place among the issues upon which the international community should focus most urgently in the coming year. In a world where population and resources press heavily upon one another, it is of critical importance to agree upon a just use of the resources of the oceans.
26.	The session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea held at Caracas this year was especially important for the countries of the South Pacific. It gave New Zealand and its neighbors a most welcome chance to stress the special dependence of small island nations on the sea island States such as those in the South Pacific are at a disadvantage: they are geographically remote and they have very few agricultural and mineral resources. The development of their nearby maritime areas represents one of the few ways in which they can hope to supplement their slender land resources. New Zealand was encouraged that at Caracas these special needs were generally recognized.
27.	Much work remains to be done; but we were heartened by the progress made. For the first time we now have within reach the essentials of a new agreement on a 12-mile territorial sea and a 200-mile economic zone. Undoubtedly, there will be a great deal of hard negotiation to come before a fair and balanced agreement can be reached on all the major issues. New Zealand, as a coastal State, recognizes the just interests of others: of the land-locked States and of those with limited access to the resources of the sea. We recognize the just interests of all countries, but especially the developing countries, in preserving the "common heritage of mankind'' in the resources of the deep sea-bed. We hope that all countries will look to the next session of the Conference, in 1975, as the stage at which compromises must be made. And we believe that, if approached in that spirit, the session will lead quickly to the final treaty.
28.	I shall now speak of the South Pacific and Niue. In connexion with the South Pacific islands, but in a different context, we are pleased to note that in a referendum on 3 September the people of Niue chose to become fully self-governing, in free association with New Zealand: On 19 October New Zealand and Niue will end their relationship of administering Power and Non-Self-Governing Territory; we will enter a new period of partnership on a basis of equality. As a self-governing State, Niue will take its place as a full member of the South Pacific Forum along with other independent and self-governing States in the Pacific, including Papua New Guinea. Niue's new Constitution contains my Government's assurance that New Zealand's economic assistance to Niue will continue as before. During the process of self-determination it has been helpful for the people of Niue, as well as for New Zealand, to have the United Nations constantly and closely involved.
29.	New Zealand is conscious, as never before, of the importance of Africa on the world's stage. We see the need, not only for Africa but also in the wider interests of the international community, to find lasting and peaceful solutions to the problems of that continent.
30.	It is understandable that the situation in southern Africa should be of such continuing concern to this Assembly. New Zealand stands solidly with the world community in rejecting the policy of apartheid in South Africa. My Prime Minister welcomed a recent opportunity to assure the Chairman of the Special Committee on Apartheid, Ambassador Ogbu of Nigeria, that New Zealand would continue its stand on sporting contacts with South Africa: South African teams will not be allowed to enter New Zealand, unless they represent a sport in which apartheid is not practiced.
31.	New Zealand also continues to offer practical support to the victims of apartheid: it contributes to the United Nations Educational and Training Program for Southern Africa, the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund for Namibia.
32.	In addition, my Government has decided to contribute more than $200,000 over a two-year period to a joint project with UNICEF to provide humanitarian assistance through liberation movements for the tens of thousands of displaced persons from Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Angola who are at present living in -Zambia. This money is given to supply drugs, vaccines, high-protein food supplements, agricultural tools and educational aid.
33.	Before I conclude, may I express my Government's pleasure at the admission of Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United Nations. We welcome also the historic change which now allows us to look forward to the early admission of two other important African countries, Mozambique and Angola. Their accession to independence will mark a major step in the process of decolonization and a further major step in the liberation of Africa. It will bring us still closer to the full realization of the principle of universality, to which my Government attaches great importance.
34.	I have said that the primary concerns of this Organization today are people, food, energy, natural resources, the environment and the need for a new economic order. These are universal concerns; every nation has a duty to play its part in helping to solve them. New Zealand believes that all nations can best do this within the great family of the United Nations, accepting the obligations as well as the privileges of membership.
Mr. President, on behalf of the Soviet delegation, I should like to congratulate you upon your election to the important post of President of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly. I should like to wish you success in the fulfillment of this important task. The unanimity with which you were elected once again demonstrates the respect which is enjoyed internationally by your country, the Algerian People's Democratic Republic.
120.	No session of the General Assembly is the same as the previous one, nor is the world situation against the background of which they convene the same. This is particularly noticeable against the swiftly changing background of events in recent years. What does remain unchanged, however, is the criterion that the United Nations and each of its Members must be guided by at all times and in all things -namely, concern for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is against this fundamental criterion that the activities of the United Nations and the practical actions of States in the international arena should be measured.
121.	With regard to the Soviet Union, we throw onto the scales of peace the entire influence of our State, the whole authority of our policy. This has always been the case and it will continue to be. Those who are earnestly seeking for ways to establish and consolidate peaceful relations and to settle disputed problems around the negotiating table can definitely count on the reliable co-operation of the Soviet Union.
122.	For more than half a century our country has consistently pursued a policy of peace, a policy of rebuffing aggression and safeguarding the rights of peoples, as that policy was formulated by Vladimir ilyich Lenin. In present-day conditions too the struggle for peace means for us not just an abstract category but a matter of concrete efforts to give practical effect to the foreign policy guidelines laid down by the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. It is the expression of the Soviet people's will for peace and uncompromising determination to make it stronger.
123.	Implementation of the Congress's decisions the program of Peace and Co-operation has already yielded tangible results in the improvement of the international situation. This is clear to any impartial observer. It is equally clear that the current positive changes are to everyone's benefit. Indeed, if there is an area where the fundamental interests of all nations, without exception, do converge, that is the maintenance of peace.
124.	The Soviet Union pursues its policies in close co-ordination with its allies and friends. The socialist community of States unites its participants in a common creative effort the building of an advanced society which by its very nature rejects war. It is no accident that many major peace initiatives have been sponsored by the socialist countries. The session of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty last April reaffirmed their joint determination to fight for the triumph of the ideals of peace and the economic and social progress of the peoples.
125.	The general state of world affairs is being molded by a tremendous number of factors, ranging from political and military to national or even psychological factors. And it therefore hardly lends itself to one-dimensional assessment. But the main trend of international development arouses no doubts: it is detente and the desire for detente which are today the predominant features.
126.	For the first time, international detente has gone beyond good wishes and verbal assurances. It is a term that has now found a place for itself in the political vocabulary precisely because it is backed by some very real content the positive changes in reality itself. From the vantage point of recent years one can distinctly see how much has been done in this respect.
127.	Through joint efforts by many States it has become possible to reduce the risk of armed conflict between the two social systems. But of special significance are the well-known agreements of 1972-1974 between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. This applies above all to the Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. The two major Powers undertook to make efforts to preclude entirely the risk of military conflict, including that involving nuclear weapons, between the Soviet Union and the United States, or between either of the parties and other States. At the same time, they agreed to refrain from the use of force against each other and against other countries in circumstances which may endanger international peace and security.
128.	Not long ago there was bitter fighting in IndoChina, in the Middle East, and in South Asia. And these were not the only areas where events took a dangerous turn. Now several international conflicts have, to a certain extent, been channeled in the direction of political settlement.
129.	It is well known that on more than one occasion tensions in Europe have risen to an alarming level. There were no military clashes, but if the total damage inflicted by the "cold war" and its tensions is estimated, it will prove enormous from all standpoints. Nowadays the political development of the European continent is ever more steadily taking a different course. Not only have acute problems of the territorial and political arrangements arising out of the Second World War been solved there, but also prospects for a safer, peaceful future for Europe have been opened up.
130.	Alongside this there is another major asset of detente the development of bilateral relations between States with different social systems. In the past too there were periods when it was impossible to organize business-like co-operation between them. But the experience of decades has shown us that that was rather the exception than the rule. Now peaceful co-existence is increasingly becoming the law of contemporary life. And the very nature of these relations is changing in many ways as they become steeped in the spirit of peaceful co-operation.
131.	Finally, it was precisely detente that put on the agenda the question of restructuring economic relations in the world. The point of this was to eliminate inequality arid discrimination, and to ensure in practice the sovereign right of States to dispose of their natural resources. The sixth special session of the General Assembly called severely to task those who for centuries have been exploiting the labor and resources of others, and indicated ways of eliminating economic oppression. The Soviet Union supports the just demands of the developing countries.
132.	On the whole, it can be stated with confidence that international events are now taking a course closer to peace. However, one should also see one other thing clearly: the movement towards peace does not always follow a straight line, and difficulties along this road will not necessarily decrease with each passing year. In a certain sense the problems which have to be dealt with today are not simpler but perhaps even more complicated than those of yesterday. And there is more to it than just objective causes.
133.	In the final analysis, the solution of the accumulated problems is hampered by the deliberate opposition of those forces whose interests are associated with policies contrary to the policy of detente. A closer look will reveal behind each instance of aggravation whether caused by encroachments on the freedom and independence of nations, by the stepping-up of the arms race, or by attempts to test the durability of existing international treaties the overt or covert activities of those forces. And when at times you hear people say that detente is a purely temporary phenomenon or allege that it has exhausted itself, you can recognize without fail from what quarter these statements come.
134.	The Soviet Union counters them with its own motto, which is not to slacken efforts to ensure that the healthy processes which have now been embarked upon should become irreversible and consolidated. As the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid I. Brezhnev, stressed recently, "If you want peace, pursue a policy of peace and struggle for that policy". We are convinced that in our time the complete elimination of the threat of war is feasible albeit not close at hand provided active and persistent efforts are made to that end.
135.	The fact that the world is still far from what the peoples would like it to be is demonstrated by the tragedy which has afflicted the Republic of Cyprus. Some may have the impression that this is an event of local significance. The Soviet Union takes a different view.
136.	Before the eyes of the world the force of arms is being used ruthlessly to trample on the independence and territorial integrity of a sovereign Member State of the United Nations, a participant in the non-aligned movement. The fact that this is a small country presents developments in a special light. Another hotbed of tension has appeared in the eastern Mediterranean, and unless urgent measures are taken no one can guarantee that the situation will not deteriorate even further.
137.	From the very beginning the Soviet Union came out in defense of the inalienable rights of the State of Cyprus. It has been resolutely calling for an end to outside interference in the affairs of Cyprus, for the withdrawal of foreign troops from its soil, for the restoration of constitutional order, and for the Cypriots to be given a chance to decide their destiny for themselves. That is the only way radically to remove the tension. The demand that , the Charter of the United Nations be observed should not be an empty phrase as those responsible for events in Cyprus would like to see it. It must be complied with in the case of the Cyprus tragedy too.
138.	The Cyprus problem must be brought out of the impasse resulting from attempts of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] to solve it in camera, in political darkness, and in the narrow interests of militarist circles. This purpose that is, a just solution to the Cyprus problem is promoted by the Soviet Union's proposal to convene an international conference on Cyprus within the framework of the United Nations.7 The decisions of such a conference, adopted with the direct participation of representatives of the Republic of Cyprus and aimed at ensuring the country's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, could be effectively guaranteed by the States permanent members of the Security Council, for, under the Charter of the United Nations, it is precisely they who are entrusted with special responsibility for maintaining international peace and security.
139.	IndoChina is situated on the other side of the planet, and the situation there is different. But the underlying reasons why the guns are still firing and blood is still flowing in some parts of the region are the same as in Cyprus. It is all due to the stubborn reluctance of foreign-backed reactionary forces to respect the legitimate rights of the peoples.
140.	To bring to a conclusion the political settlement in Viet Nam it is necessary, in the first place, to make the Saigon regime give up its military provocations and attempts to undermine the Paris agreements on Viet Nam. Strict observance of these agreements by all parties is an indispensable condition for the normalization of the situation. As for Cambodia, its problems must be solved by the Cambodians themselves, in accordance with their national interests and without any outside interference. The positive results of agreements reached in Laos should also be consolidated.
141.	The comprehensive assistance and support given by the Soviet Union and other States of the Socialist community to the Vietnamese people have helped them to achieve victory in the long and heroic struggle against aggression. The Soviet Union will continue to support the Vietnamese people in peacetime too. The aspirations of the patriotic forces of IndoChina to freedom and independence will always be met with our understanding and solidarity. 
142.	For almost 30 years now the Middle East has been in a state of fever. Over this period wars have broken out there time and time again. In fact, the last one was only a year ago. This should be enough to convince anyone that the Middle East problem must be solved and solved justly, with the interests of all the peoples of the region being taken into account.
143.	What does that imply? First of all, the withdrawal of Israeli forces from allI stress, from all the Arab lands seized by them in 1967 and the assurance of the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of Palestine. Otherwise there can be no stable peace in the Middle East. It does not need a prophet to foresee a new flare-up of hostilities if the Middle East settlement is reduced to half-measures, no matter how-well advertised they may be.
144.	There are increasing signs that Israel regards the disengagement of forces on Sinai and the Golan Heights not as the first step towards a general settlement which is what it should be but as a maneuver intended to freeze the situation. The clear unwillingness to leave the occupied Arab territories and, moreover, a desire to consolidate Israel's hold on them are quite evident. What other explanation can there be for the militarist intoxication which has again overcome Israel and for the attempts to exert military pressure on the Arab States? Unless this stops, the disengagement of troops may prove to be a mere regrouping of forces prior to a new clash.
145.	The Soviet Union believes that there must be no delay in implementing measures leading to a political settlement in the Middle East, and this means prompt resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, the most appropriate forum for considering the Middle East problem in all its complex totality and for finding solutions satisfactory to the parties involved in the conflict. Naturally, this fully applies also to the Arab people of Palestine, whose representatives must take their rightful place at the conference.	;
146.	We believe that the time has surely come to address ourselves earnestly to the problem of Palestine. A wider approach is required here, which would open the way to ensuring not only in words but in deeds the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of Palestine, and that is why we favoured including the question of Palestine on the agenda of this session of the General Assembly as a separate item.
147.	There are some who try to represent the Soviet Union's position as one-sided and only serving the interests of the Arab States. Yes, indeed, we do support and will continue to support the legitimate demands of the Arabs. But it would be wrong to see only this particular aspect in our position. When we insist that territories acquired by force should not become a prize for aggression, the implications of our demand go well beyond the limits of the Middle East. It reflects intolerance of aggression in general. What this involves, therefore, is a major international principle and the question of consistency in policy.
148.	Furthermore, the Soviet Union is in favor of Israel's existence and development as an independent sovereign State. We have said so many times
in
and we affirm it once again. Real, not illusory, progress towards a Middle East settlement will create prerequisites for the development of relations between the Soviet Union and all the States of the Middle East, including Israel.
149.	The scope of the policy of peace and detente is broad. It is important not to lose momentum in any field and, above all, wherever serious work has already begun to build more stable relations between States on the basis of the observance of the principles of peaceful coexistence.
150.	In this context, the Soviet Union attaches primary importance to the successful conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. This is question number one in European political life today. An objective assessment of what has already been done at the Conference prompts the conclusion that, on the whole, the results are impressive.
151.	Has anyone ever before succeeded in jointly elaborating practical standards of peaceful relations among States in Europe, in particular, on questions which have hitherto seemed insoluble? Until now nothing of this kind has been seen, at least on such a scale. Today, this work is proceeding successfully. Several important principles have been formulated in detail as specifically applicable to Europe. The arrival at generally acceptable decisions on them, on the basis of a reasonable balance of interests of the parties, is not a routine phenomenon. Not all the participants in the Conference rely, even in their bilateral relations, on such a solid foundation as the one which is now being laid for an all-European agreement.
152.	It has also proved possible to reach agreement on a wide range of questions relating to cooperation among States in the most varied fields: from trade and economics to culture; from the protection of the environment to the extension of human contacts and exchanges of information. Experience has shown that such questions can be settled if they are viewed in direct proportion to the main problem of ensuring peace in Europe, and if the principle of non-interference in internal affairs is strictly adhered to.
153.	The Soviet Union is convinced that there is an opportunity to conclude the Conference at an early date by adopting weighty decisions in the interests of security in Europe. In saying this we not only properly appreciate the collective work that has already been done; we also proceed from the premise that solutions to the still outstanding problems can be found, if all the participants display the necessary political will and realism.
154.	Naturally, it would not be right to expect the Conference to settle at one fell swoop all the questions accumulated over the long years of tension and mistrust. But it is equal to the task of achieving agreements. on crucial problems which can determine a stable peaceful development in Europe for the foreseeable future. It will also be easier to tackle other outstanding issues in the atmosphere of detente. 
155.	The Soviet Union will continue to do everything to ensure the complete success of the Conference. We trust that our Western partners will also take a constructive approach to this task. It is in the interests of the peoples of Europe, and not just of Europe alone, to work to bring nearer the day when agreements designed to legitimize peace and co-operation on the scale of an entire continent can be signed at the highest level.
156.	It is also important to achieve results at the Vienna Talks on the Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. The key to this is strict observance by all of the rule of undiminished security for each side. Agreement on the questions under discussion would in practice supplement political detente in Europe with military detente.
157.	The conversion into a practical proposition of the idea of consolidating peace in Asia through the joint efforts of States should not, in our opinion, be a matter for the distant future. No doubt, the situation there remains complex. There is no small number of trouble spots, conflicts and international disputes on the continent of Asia.
158.	Political thought in Asia, too, is switching more and more to the search for ways of securing peace and stability. And surely this is demonstrated by the efforts of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh to normalize relations on the Hindustan Peninsula, or by the idea of converting the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace.
159.	We note with satisfaction the growing interest in the Soviet Union's initiative concerning the establishment of a collective security system in Asia. More and more States in Asia are supporting it. The Soviet-Indian Declaration signed as a result of the visit of Leonid Uyich Brezhnev to India in November 1973 contains important principles which can serve as a basis for the development of an effective system of relations between States in Asia.
160.	The establishment of peace and co-operation in Asia meets the fundamental interests of all the Asian people. The achievement of this goal is a matter which concerns every country of that continent.
161.	The agenda of this session includes an item which has a direct bearing on the improvement of the situation in Asia. This is the proposal by 34 States, including the Soviet Union, on the withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations [AI9703 and Add. 1-3}. The presence of those troops, which have now been there for more than two decades, represents a source of constant military and political tension in the Korean Peninsula. Their presence is still more inappropriate under present conditions when, on the initiative of the Korean People's Democratic Republic, efforts are being made to bring about the peaceful reunification of Korea.
162.	If we analyze the reasons which have so often caused acute tensions in the world, and which even now frequently lead to dangerous situations, we shall easily see that in many cases this was the result of the armaments race. It is indeed a fact that immediately after the Second World War some States embarked upon a course of building up armaments and setting up military bases on foreign territories, thus making the creation of tensions and saber- rattling their policy. It is a secret to no one that it was precisely that policy of theirs which at times brought the world to a very dangerous brink.
163.	How many speeches have been made on disarmament and the cessation of the arms race in the last 25 years? Probably no other problem has absorbed the attention of statesmen and public figures to such an extent in the post-war period. And this is understandable. Stable and lasting peace is incompatible with the arms race. They are antipodes. One cannot seriously think of eliminating the threat of war while at the same time increasing military budgets and endlessly building up armaments.
164.	Facts must be faced. So far it has not proved possible to stop the arms race. Furthermore, today the arms race absorbs more money than ten or twenty years ago. It has been estimated that the world annually burns in the furnace of armaments over $250,000 million. This is more than the entire national income of the developing States of Asia and Africa. One can only imagine what benefits these resources could yield if they were used for peaceful purposes, for development, to combat hunger, poverty and disease.
165.	No Government -at least openly- declares that it favors the arms race. Nevertheless, arms are accumulating. For three months every year appeals to end the arms race are heard at the session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. But the arms race continues. Ever more and newer papers and resolutions on disarmament are filling the archives of the United Nations. But disarmament still does not manage to overcome its inertia. Conveyor belts keep on moving inexorably, turning out new consignments of destructive weapons.
166.	And so a paradoxical situation develops. The peace movement has never had such momentum as it enjoys today, and never has the world produced such quantities of arms as it does today. On the one hand, there is the longing for peace on the part of hundreds of millions of people who realize the grim danger of the arms race, but, on the other hand, there is the increasing avalanche of armaments.
167.	What is the matter? Maybe some forces which have got out of human control are at work? Certainly not. The reason is policy. And if it is policy, well, one may ask, whose policy?
168.	If it all depended on the socialist countries, the arms race would have been eliminated long ago. No one has tabled more concrete proposals on disarmament than they. Ever since the non-aligned countries moved into the forefront of international affairs they too have been actively working in favor of disarmament. Voices of reason are to be heard in other countries too, and they resound with ever greater confidence both in parliaments and in broad public circles,
169.	Military-industrial circles that profit from the arms race oppose its cessation. Those politicians who are linked with these circles have long since placed their narrow interests above the aspirations of the peoples. The influence of these circles has had a telling effect on all disarmament negotiations, including those in the General Assembly and the Security Council. 
170.	The arms race affects all States, even those not directly involved in it. All the peoples of the world live under one and the same roof. The risks posed by the unrestrained build-up of armaments are a danger to all. On the other hand, is there any country in the world whose economy is not affected, one way or another, by the burden of armaments? Everyone here could adduce numerous examples in confirmation of the correctness of this argument.
171.	Furthermore, recently economic upheavals, which have been affecting many States, have increased in intensity and increasingly affect the material situation of people. Statesmen and economists are racking their brains over the causes underlying all this. But there is one undeniable conclusion that is borne out every day and every hour: the aggravation of economic problems is largely connected with the rising scale of the arms race and with soaring military expenditures.
172.	But if the disarmament problem affects everyone, then the solution to the problem should be sought jointly by all States.
173.	The main thing here is not just to mark time, hiding behind arguments about the complexity of the problem. If right now it cannot be solved at one stroke, solutions should be sought for individual aspects so that this should lead at least step by step to the ultimate goal of disarmament, and in effect, such an approach has already been tried out in recent years and has justified itself.
174.	As positive changes make their way in the world, so objective prerequisites for finding real agreements in the sphere of disarmament improve. It is noteworthy that the largest number of agreements of this kind have been reached in the last few years. Although they do not reverse the arms race, they do curb it in a whole series of ways.
175.	In one case, this takes the form of limiting further perfection of nuclear weapons and the creation of their new destructive models. The Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963, has been serving this end well for over a decade now.
176.	The same objective is served by the Treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States of 3 July 1974, whereby both countries have undertaken to stop, as of 31 March 1976, underground testing of nuclear weapons with the most powerful nuclear charges and also to limit underground nuclear test explosions in general. The Soviet Union will strive to see to it that the prohibition of nuclear weapon tests eventually becomes comprehensive and universal.
177.	In another case, it takes the form of a limit on the territorial spread of armaments. Such is the purport of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which has proved its effectiveness. We are in favor of making full use of the possibilities inherent in that Treaty and of increasing the number of States parties to it. The objective is to make this Treaty universal.
178.	A number of agreements exclude the sea-bed and the ocean floor, outer space and celestial bodies from the sphere of possible emplacement of nuclear weapons. In accordance with an international agreement bacteriological weapons have been prohibited and eliminated from military arsenals, and prospects are emerging for the outlawing of another deadly means of warfare, namely, chemical weapons.
179.	And what about the agreements on the limitation of strategic arms between the Soviet Union and the United States? I feel that there is no need to explain their unprecedented significance since they are designed to narrow the actual material basis of the nuclear-missile arms race. Quite recently these agreements have been supplemented by new important agreements. Last July, the Soviet Union and the United States decided further to limit their anti-ballistic missile systems and mapped out ways of achieving further limitation of strategic offensive arms in terms of both quality and quantity. The Soviet delegation in Geneva, where talks on these questions were resumed the other day, has firm instructions to seek their solution,
180.	The supreme interests not only of the peoples of the Soviet Union and the United States but also of the peoples of the whole world require that the Soviet Union and the United States, possessing the colossal might of nuclear weapons, should make every effort to achieve appropriate understandings and agreements. We should like to express our gratification at the fact that this idea was clearly stated too from the rostrum of the General Assembly by President Ford of the United States [2234th meeting].
181.	When two Powers voluntarily limit their military preparations, when they establish a ceiling above which they will not increase nuclear missile armaments, their actions, apart from anything else, must set a good example for others.
182.	The Soviet Union will continue to work tirelessly to further the cause of disarmament in areas where this is possible; it will look for new fields where concrete results can be achieved through the joint efforts of States.
183.	The Soviet Union took the initiative by proposing the inclusion in the agenda of the twenty- ninth session of the General Assembly, as an important and urgent question, of item 103, entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate for military and other purposes incompatible with the maintenance of international security, human well- being and health" [4/9702].
184.	What is the motive for this? The achievements of scientific and technological progress have expanded the possibilities of influencing nature and the climate of the globe and, in a certain sense, of controlling the complex and powerful processes involved. Unfortunately, the latest discoveries can be used not only for creative, but also for military, purposes with extremely destructive consequences for mankind. These are not the conjectures of science fiction writers, but an actual threat that is assuming an ever more realistic shape. It is in the interests of all peoples to nip this threat in the bud.
185.	The Soviet Union proposes that an international convention should be concluded which will outlaw the military use of the environment. Compliance with the provisions of such a convention, a draft of which we will submit [see AlC.JIL.675], could be secured through the adoption by each State, in accordance with its constitutional processes, of appropriate measures to prohibit activities contrary to the convention and through consultations and co-operation among States, notably within the framework of the United Nations.
186.	The conclusion of such a convention would prevent the emergence of new means of warfare and, at the same time, would facilitate the solution of a problem common to all mankind the protection of the environment. We trust that all the participants in the Assembly will fully appreciate the universal significance of this important initiative and treat this proposal accordingly. The Soviet Union and the socialist countries as a whole seek to gain .nothing from this. We have made this proposal because it is in the interests of all States, all peoples and the whole world.
187.	In its attitude in the United Nations, the Soviet Union proceeds on the assumption that the Organization can and must play an important part in developing and consolidating the positive processes characteristic of the present-day world situation. We have quite a number of useful resolutions to our credit aimed at strengthening international peace. Now, everything depends on their being consistently implemented.
188.	In this regard, I should like to refer especially to some resolutions adopted by the United Nations over the last two or three years by a large majority of votes. In the first place, I have in mind the one on the prohibition of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. This is an Assembly decision of fundamental importance. It must acquire binding force for all States and, in this regard, the Security Council has an important role.
189.	One cannot say that the General Assembly resolution on the convening of a world disarmament conference [resolution 2833 (XXVI)] has not been followed up. An Ad Hoc Committee on the World Disarmament Conference [resolution 3183 (XXVIII)] has even been set up, in which, among other States, three nuclear Powers are participating. However, in fact, the question is not really being dealt with. It is time for the Committee to proceed, in close co-operation with the nuclear Powers, to prepare concrete recommendations on the practical aspects of the convocation of that conference. The boycotting of this important measure by several States is contrary to the clearly expressed desire of the overwhelming majority of States Members of the United Nations. We regard it as a challenge to the world Organization.
190.	Through no fault of the Soviet Union, there is delay in the implementation of such a commonly useful enterprise as that of the reduction of the military budgets of the States permanent members of the Security Council by 10 per cent and the utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries. This example belongs in the same category. This action would have a double effect: it would promote the limitation of the arms race and, at the same time, provide additional assistance to States that need it most. The attitudes towards this proposal act as a kind of litmus paper revealing the intentions of States regarding acute present-day problems.
191.	The further development of bilateral relations between States based on the principles of peaceful coexistence is a vast and far from exhausted reserve for deepening detente. On this basis our country is prepared to establish and expand not just normal but, where possible, friendly relations with all States sharing this approach. This has been and remains one of the most important lines of the Soviet Union's foreign policy.
192.	It is our desire to see the consolidation of all the positive results that have been achieved so far in our relations with leading capitalist States on the basis of fruitful efforts on both sides. We' want to move ahead and make these relations stable. In this context, the statements by the new leaders of the United States, France and the Federal Republic of Germany about their intentions to continue to move towards detente and co-operation have been met in the Soviet Union with satisfaction.
193.	Today economic, scientific and technological links assume an increasingly large role in relations between States with different social systems. If co-operation in these fields is built on respect for the principles of equality and non-interference, it will not only be mutually advantageous but will also promote the establishment of a material basis of sorts for durable peace and good neighborliness.
194.	We value highly the good and, in some instances, close relations which have been established between the Soviet Union and many developing countries. The countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America which have embarked upon the road of national independence and the consolidation of economic independence can continue to rely firmly on our support. We were in at the source of their struggle against colonialism, and at each and every stage of it we have supported and will continue to support the developing States in word and in deed. That is our line of principle, and we shall not deviate from it.
195.	The solution of such complex and urgent problems as those of energy and food, which are attracting much attention, particularly in the United Nations, should also be sought on the path of peace and co-operation, of strict observance of the principles of equality and sovereignty, and of the right of States to dispose of their natural resources.
196.	The number of young States Members of the United Nations has increased at this session of the General Assembly. We should like to express our particular satisfaction at the fact that the People's Republic of Bangladesh has become a full Member of the United Nations and that thus an end has been put to an injustice with regard to that major Asian State.
197.	The Soviet Union, which was one of the first countries to establish diplomatic relations with the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, welcomes that State's admission to the United Nations with great satisfaction. The Soviet Union also welcomes the admission to the United Nations of the newly independent State of Grenada. Soon to come is the proclamation of the national independence of Mozambique. The current attempts to frustrate the process of decolonization that has begun in that country must be most resolutely rebuffed. That of course applies equally and fully to Angola. That will, indeed, be the crowning moment of the armed phase of the struggle for national liberation of the former Portuguese colonies, and will provide even further evidence of the irresistible march of social progress.
198.	The year that has passed since the Fascist coup in Chile has revealed the great depth of the tragedy that has befallen the Chilean people. But it has also demonstrated that endless terror and the suppression of elementary human rights cannot break the will of the people of Chile for a free and independent life. The bloody deeds of the junta are in glaring contradiction with the lofty human principles and purposes of the United Nations, and are a challenge to human honor and decency. It is no accident that the junta in fact remains in a state of international isolation.
199.	The struggle for national independence and economic liberation and for the elimination of the vestiges of the colonial system has been scoring impressive victories in recent years. But that struggle is by no means ended. The manifestations of economic oppression and inequality and the fact that there are still dark blemishes of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination on earth cannot be tolerated. Until they disappear, the peace-loving States and the United Nations as a whole cannot slacken their efforts to eradicate them.
200.	It is always necessary to identify the most topical issues among the great variety of problems posed by the course of world developments. At any given moment, the efforts of States striving to achieve the strengthening of peace should be concentrated precisely upon them. It is the opinion of the Soviet Union that some of the high-priority tasks of today are the following:
-to proceed in practical terms to a Cyprus settlement; stop the violence against that country and its people; secure respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of that State and, for those purposes, convene a representative international conference on Cyprus within the framework of the United Nations;
-to resume as a matter of urgency the work of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East to solve questions concerning the establishment of a just and durable peace in that area;
-to complete the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe at an early date by adopting, at the highest level, decisions ensuring a peaceful future for Europe;
-to achieve specific agreements in the Soviet- American Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, in the multilateral negotiations on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe, and in the Committee on Disarmament;
-to take measures to implement the decisions of the sixth special session of the General Assembly on strengthening the economic independence of developing States.
201.	No one would venture to claim that the solution of all those problems, and of others to which we have drawn the attention of this Assembly, is an easy task. But their solution is necessary and feasible, and all States really interested in developing peaceful and reasonable forms of international inter-course should work towards that end. The Soviet Union will be unstinting in its efforts to promote the establishment of durable and lasting peace on earth.
Last year, at the previous session [.2124th meeting], in my first address as Secretary of State, I spoke to this Assembly about American purposes. I said that the United States seeks a comprehensive, institutionalized peace, not an armistice. I asked other nations to join us in moving the world from detente to cooperation, from coexistence to community.
41.	In the year that has passed some progress has been made in dealing with particular crises. But many fundamental issues persist and new issues threaten the very structure of world stability.
42.	Our deepest problem going far beyond the items on the agenda is whether our vision can keep pace with our challenges. Will history recall the twentieth century as a time of mounting global conflict or as the beginning of a global conception? Will our age of interdependence spur joint progress or common disaster?
43.	The answer is not yet clear. New realities have not yet overcome old patterns of thought and action. Traditional concepts of national sovereignty, social struggle and the relation between the old and the new nations too often guide our course. And so we have managed but not advanced; we have endured but not prospered; and we have continued the luxury of political contention.
44.	This condition has been dramatized in the brief period since the twenty-eighth session. War has ravaged the Middle East and Cyprus. The technology of nuclear explosives has resumed its dangerous spread. Inflation and the threat of global decline hang over the economies of rich and poor alike.
45.	We cannot permit this trend to continue. Conflict between nations once devastated continents; the struggle between blocs may destroy humanity, ideologies and doctrines drawn from the last century do not even address, let alone solve, the unprecedented problems of today. As a result, events challenge habits; a gulf grows between rhetoric and reality.
46.	The world has dealt with local conflicts as if they were perpetually manageable. We have permitted too many of the underlying causes to fester unattended, until the parties believed that their only recourse was war. And because each crisis ultimately has been contained we have remained complacent. But tolerance of local conflict tempts world holocaust. We have no guarantee that some local crisis perhaps the next will not explode beyond control.
47.	The world has dealt with nuclear weapons as if restraint were automatic. Their very awesomeness has chained those weapons for almost three decades; their sophistication and expense have helped to keep constant for a decade the number of States which possess them. Now, as was quite foreseeable, political inhibitions are in danger of crumbling. Nuclear catastrophe looms more plausible, whether through design or miscalculation, accident, theft or blackmail.
48.	The world has dealt with the economy as if its constant advance were inexorable. While postwar growth has been uneven and some parts of the world have lagged, our attention has been focused on how to increase participation in a general advance. We continue to deal with economic issues on a national, regional or bloc basis at the precise moment that our interdependence is multiplying. Strains on the fabric and institutions of the world economy threaten to engulf us all in a general depression.
49.	The delicate structure of international cooperation, so laboriously constructed over the last quarter century, can hardly survive, and certainly cannot be strengthened, if it is continually subjected to the shocks of political conflict, war and economic crisis.
50.	The time has come, then, for the nations assembled here to act together in the recognition that continued reliance on old slogans and traditional rivalries will lead us towards a world ever more torn between rich and poor. East and West, producer and consumer; a world where local crises threaten global confrontation and where the spreading atom threatens global peril; a world of rising costs and dwindling supplies, of growing populations and declining production.
51.	There is another course. Last week before this Assembly [2234th meeting] President Ford dedicated our country to a cooperative,, open approach to build a more secure and more prosperous world. The United States will assume the obligations that our values and strength impose upon us. But the building of a cooperative world is beyond the grasp of any one nation. An interdependent world requires not merely the resources but the vision and creativity of us all. Nations cannot simultaneously confront and cooperate with one another.
52.	We must recognize that the common interest is the only valid test of the national interest. It is in the common interest, and thus in the interest of each nation, that local conflicts be resolved short of force and 'heir root causes be removed by political means; that the spread of nuclear technology be achieved without the spread of nuclear weapons; that growing economic interdependence lift all nations and not drag them down together.
53.	We will not solve these problems during this session, or during any one session, of the General Assembly, but we must at least begin to remedy problems, not just manage them; to shape events, rather that endure them; to confront our challenges instead of one another.
54.	The urgent political responsibility of our era is to resolve conflicts without war. History is replete with examples of the tragedy that sweeps nations when ancient enmities and the inertia of habit freeze the scope for decision. Equally, history is marked by brief moments when an old order is giving way to a pattern new and unforeseen. Those are times of potential disorder and danger but also of opportunity for fresh creation.
55.	We face such a moment today. Together let us face its realities. First, a certain momentum towards peace has been created, in EastWest relations and in certain regional conflicts. It must be maintained. But we are only at the beginning of the process. If we do not continue to advance, we will slip back. Second, progress in the negotiation of difficult issues comes only through patience, perseverance and a recognition of the tolerable limits of the other side. Peace is a process, not a condition. It can be reached only in steps. Third, the failure to recognize and grasp the attainable will prevent the achievement of the ideal. Attempts to resolve all issues at one time are a certain prescription for stagnation. Progress towards peace can be thwarted by asking too much as surely as by asking too little. Fourth, the world community can help resolve chronic conflicts, but exaggerated expectations will prevent essential accommodation among the parties. This Assembly can help or hinder the negotiating process. It can seek a scapegoat or a solution. It can offer the parties an excuse to escape reality or sturdy support in search of a compromise. It can decide on propaganda or contribute to realistic approaches responsive to man's yearning for peace.
56.	The Middle East starkly demonstrates those considerations. In the past year we have witnessed both the fourth ArabIsraeli war in a generation and the hopeful beginnings of a political process towards a lasting and just peace. We have achieved the respite of a ceasefire and two disengagement agreements, but the shadow of war remains. The legacy of hatred and suffering, the sense of irreconcilability have begun to yield however haltingly to the process of negotiation. But we still have a long road ahead.
57.	One side seeks the recovery of territory and justice for a displaced people. The other side seeks security and recognition by its neighbors of its legitimacy as a nation. In the end, the common goal of peace surely is broad enough to embrace all these aspirations.
58.	Let us be realistic about what must be done. The art of negotiation is to set goals that can be achieved at a given time and to reach them with determination. Each step forward modifies old perceptions and brings about a new situation that improves the chances of a comprehensive settlement.
59.	Because these principles were followed in the Middle East, agreements have been reached in the past year which many thought impossible. They were achieved, above all, because of the wisdom of the leaders of the Middle East who decided that there had been enough stalemate and war, that more might be gained by testing each other in negotiation than by testing each other on the battlefield.
60.	The Members of this body, both collectively and individually, have a solemn responsibility to encourage and support the parties in the Middle East on their present course. We have as well an obligation to give our support to the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East and elsewhere. The United States applauds their indispensable role, as well as the outstanding contribution of SecretaryGeneral Waldheim in the cause of peace.
61.	During the past year my country has made a major effort to promote peace in the Middle East. President Ford has asked me to reaffirm today that we are determined to press forward with these efforts. We will work closely with the parties and we will cooperate with all interested countries within the framework of the Geneve Conference.
62.	The tormented island of Cyprus is another area where peace requires a spirit of compromise, accommodation and justice. The United States is convinced that the sovereignty, political independence, and territorial integrity of Cyprus must be maintained. It will be up to the parties to decide on the form of government they believe best suited to the particular conditions of Cyprus. They must reach accommodation on the areas to be administered by the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities as well as on the conditions under which refugees can return to their homes and reside in safety. Finally, no lasting peace is possible unless provisions are agreed upon which will lead to the timely and phased reduction of armed forces and armaments and other war material.
63.	The United States is prepared to play an even more active role now than in the past in helping the parties find a solution to the centuries old problem of Cyprus. We will do all we can, but it is those most directly concerned whose effort is most crucial. Third parties should not be asked to produce miraculous outcomes not anchored in reality. Third parties can encourage those directly involved to perceive their broader interests; they can assist in the search for elements of agreement by interpreting each side's views and motives to the other. But no mediator can succeed unless the parties genuinely want mediation and are ready to make the difficult decisions needed for a settlement.
64.	The United States is already making a major contribution to help relieve the human suffering of the people of Cyprus. We urge the international community to continue and, if possible, to increase its own humanitarian relief effort.
65.	The United States notes with particular satisfaction the continuing process of change in Africa. We welcome the positive demonstration of cooperation between old rulers and the new free. The United States shares and pledges its support for the aspiration of Africans to participate in the fruits of freedom and human dignity.
66.	The second new dimension on our agenda concerns the problem of nuclear proliferation.
67.	The world has grown so accustomed to the existence of nuclear weapons that it assumes they will never be used. But today technology is rapidly expanding the number of nuclear weapons in the hands of major Powers and threatens to put nuclear explosive technology at the disposal of. an increasing number of other countries.
68.	In a world where many nations possess nuclear weapons, dangers would be vastly compounded. It would be infinitely more difficult, if not impossible, to maintain stability among a large number of nuclear Powers. Local wars would take on a new dimension. Nuclear weapons would be introduced into regions where political conflict remains intense and the parties consider their vital interests overwhelmingly involved. There would, as well, be a vastly heightened risk of direct involvement by the major nuclear Powers.
69.	This problem does not concern one country, one region, or one bloc alone. No nation can be indifferent to the spread of nuclear technology; every nation's security is directly affected.
70.	The challenge before the world is to realize the peaceful benefits of nuclear technology without contributing to the growth of nuclear weapons or to the number of States possessing them.
71.	As a major nuclear Power, the United States recognizes its special responsibility. We realize that we cannot expect others to show restraint if we do not ourselves practice restraint. Together with the Soviet Union we are seeking to negotiate new quantitative and qualitative limitations on strategic arms. Last week our delegations reconvened in Geneva, and we intend to pursue these negotiations with the seriousness of purpose they deserve. The United States has no higher priority than controlling and reducing the levels of nuclear arms.
72.	Beyond the relations of the nuclear Powers to each other lies the need to curb the spread of nuclear explosives. We must take into account that plutonium is an essential ingredient of nuclear explosives and that in the immediate future the amount of plutonium generated by peaceful nuclear reactors will be multiplied many times. Heretofore the United States and a number of other countries have widely supplied nuclear fuels and other nuclear materials in order to promote the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. This policy cannot continue if it leads to the proliferation of nuclear explosives. Sales of these materials can no longer be treated by anyone as a purely commercial competitive enterprise.
73.	The world community, therefore, must work urgently towards a system of effective international safeguards against the diversion of plutonium or its byproducts. The United States is prepared to join with others in a comprehensive effort.
74.	Let us together agree on the practical steps which must be taken to assure the benefits of nuclear energy free of its terrors. The United States will shortly offer specific proposals to strengthen safeguards to the other principal supplier countries. We shall intensify our efforts to gain the broadest possible acceptance of IAEA safeguards, to establish practical controls on the transfer of nuclear materials, and to ensure the effectiveness of these procedures. The United States will urge IAEA to draft an international convention for enhancing physical security against theft or diversion of nuclear material. Such a convention should set forth specific standards and techniques for protecting materials while in use, storage arid transfer. The Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex], which this Assembly has endorsed, warrants continuing support. The Treaty contains not only a broad commitment to limit the spread of nuclear explosives but specific obligations to accept and implement IAEA safeguards and to control the transfer of nuclear materials.
75.	Whatever advantages seem to accrue from the acquisition of nuclear explosive technology will prove to be ephemeral. When Pandora's box has been opened, no country will be the beneficiary and all mankind will have lost. This is not inevitable.
If we act decisively now, we can still control the future.
76.	Let me now turn to our economic problems.
77.	Lord Keynes wrote:
"The power to become habituated to his surroundings is a marked characteristic of mankind. Very few of us realize with conviction the intensely unusual, unstable, complicated, unreliable, temporary nature of the economic organization."
78.	The economic history of the postwar period has been one of sustained growth, for developing as well as developed nations. The universal expectation of our peoples, the foundation of our political institutions and the assumption underlying the evolving structure of peace are all based on the belief that this growth will continue.
79.	But will it? The increasingly open and cooperation global economic system that we have come to take tor granted is now under unprecedented attack. The world is poised on the brink of a return to the unrestrained economic nationalism which accompanied the collapse of economic order in the 1930s. And, should that occur, all would suffer: poor as well as rich, producer as well as consumer.
80.	So let us so longer fear to confront in public the facts which have come to dominate bur private discussions and concerns.
81.	The early warning signs of a major economic crisis are evident. Rates of inflation unprecedented in the past quarter century are sweeping developing and developed nations alike. The world's financial institutions are staggering under the most massive and rapid movements of reserves in history. And profound questions have arisen about meeting man's most fundamental needs for energy and food.
82.	While the present situation threatens every individual and nation, it is the poor who suffer the most. While the wealthier adjust their living standards, the poor see the hopes of a lifetime collapse around them. While others tighten their belts, the poor starve. While others can hope for a better future, the poor see only despair ahead.
83.	It can be in the interest of no country or group of countries to base policies on a test of strength, for a policy of confrontation would end in disaster for ail. Meeting man's basic needs for energy and food and assuring economic growth while mastering inflation require international cooperation to an unprecedented degree.
84.	Let us apply these principles first to the energy situation. Oil producers seek a better life for their peoples and a just return for their diminishing resources. The developing nations less well endowed by nature face the disintegration of the results of decades of striving for development as the result of a price policy over which they have no control. The developed nations find the industrial civilization built over centuries in jeopardy.
85.	Both producers and consumers have legitimate claims. The problem is to reconcile them for the common good. 
86.	The United States is working closely with several oil producers to help diversify their economies. We have established commissions to facilitate the transfer of technology and to assist with industrialization. We are prepared to accept substantial investments in the United States and we welcome a greater role for the oil producers in the management of international economic institutions.
87.	The investment of surplus oil revenues presents a great challenge. The countries which most need these revenues are generally the least likely to receive them. The world's financial institutions have coped thus far, but ways must be found to assure assistance for those countries most in need of it. And the full brunt of the surplus revenues is yet to come.
88.	Despite our best efforts to meet the oil producers' legitimate needs and to channel their resources into constructive uses, the world cannot sustain even the present level of prices, much less continuing increases. The prices of other commodities will inevitably rise in a never-ending inflationary spiral. Nobody will benefit. The oil producers will be forced to spend more for their own imports. Many nations will not be able to withstand the pace, and the poorer could be overwhelmed. The complex, fragile structure of global economic cooperation required to sustain national economic growth stands in danger of being shattered.
89.	The United States will work with other consumer nations on means of conservation and on ways to cushion the impact of massive investments from abroad. The preliminary agreement on a program of solidarity and cooperation signed a few days ago in Brussels by the major consumer countries is an encouraging first step.
90.	But the long range solution requires a new understanding between consumers and producers. Unlike food prices, the high cost of oil is not the result of economic factors, of an actual shortage of capacity or of the free play of supply and demand. Rather it is caused by deliberate decisions to restrict production and maintain an artificial price level. We recognize that the producers should have a fair share; the fact remains that the present price level even threatens the economic wellbeing of producers. Ultimately they depend upon the vitality of the world economy for the security of their markets and their investments. And it cannot be in the interest of any nation to magnify the despair of the least developed, which are uniquely vulnerable to exorbitant prices and have no recourse .but to pay.
91.	What has gone up by political decision can be reduced by political decision.
92.	Last week President Ford called upon the oil producers to join with consumers in defining a strategy which will meet the world's longterm need for both energy and food at reasonable prices; he set forth the principles which should guide such a policy; and he announced to this Assembly America's determination to meet our responsibilities to help alleviate another grim reality world hunger. At a time of universal concern for justice and in an age of advanced technology, it is intolerable that millions are starving and hundreds of millions remain undernourished.
93.	The magnitude of the longterm problem is clear. At present rates of population growth, world food production must double by the end of this century to maintain even the present inadequate dietary level and an adequate diet for all would require that we triple world production. If we are true to our principles, we have an obligation to strive for an adequate supply of food to every man, woman and child in the world. This is a technical possibility, a political necessity and a moral imperative.
94.	The United States is prepared to join with all nations at the World Food Conference in Rome to launch the truly massive effort which is required. We will present a number of specific proposals: to help developing nations, which have the lowest yields and the largest amounts of unused land and water and whose potential in food production must be made to match their growing need; to increase substantially global fertilizer production, for we must end once and for all the world's chronic fertilizer shortage; to expand international, regional and national research programs because scientific and technical resources mus? hi mobilized now to meet the demands of the year 2030 and beyond; to rebuild the world's food reserves, as our capacity for dealing with famine must be freed from the vagaries of weather; and to provide a substantial level of concessionary food aid. The United States will in the coming year increase the value of our own food aid shipments to countries in need. We make this commitment despite great pressures on our economy and at a time when we are seeking to cut our own Government's budget, because we realize the dimensions of the tragedy with which we are faced. All of us here have a common obligation to prevent the poorest nations from being overwhelmed and to enable them to build the social, economic and political base for self-sufficiency.
95.	The hopes of every nation for a life of peace and plenty rest on an effective international resolution of the crises of inflation, fuel and food. We must act now and we must act together.
96.	Let us never forget that all of our political endeavors are ultimately judged by one standard to translate our actions into human concerns.
97.	The United States will never be satisfied with a world where man's fears overshadow his hopes. We support the United Nations efforts in the fields of international law and human rights. We approve of the activities of the United Nations .in social, economic and humanitarian realms around the world. The United States considers the World Population Conference, held last month, the World Food Conference to be held a month from now and the continuing Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea of fundamental importance to our common future.
98.	In the coming months the United States will make specific proposals for the United Nations to initiate a major international effort to prohibit torture; a concerted campaign to control the disease which afflicts and debilitates over 200 million people in 70 countries schistosomiasis; and a substantial strengthening of the world's capacity to deal with natural disaster, especially the improvement of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator.
99.	We have long lived in a world where the consequences of our failures were manageable a world where local conflicts were contained, nuclear weapons threatened primarily those nations which possessed them, and the cycle of economic growth and decline seemed principally a national concern. But that is no longer the case. It is no longer possible to imagine that conflicts, weapons and recession will not spread.
100.	We must now decide. The problems we face will be with .us the greater part of the century. But will they be with us as challenges to be overcome or as adversaries that have vanquished us?
101.	It is easy to agree to yet another set of principles or to actions other nations should take. But the needs of the poor will not be met by slogans; the needs of an expanding global economy will not be met by new restrictions; the search for peace cannot be conducted on the basis of confrontation. So each nation must ask what it can do, what contribution it is finally prepared to make to the common good.
102.	Beyond peace, beyond prosperity, lie man's deepest aspirations to a life of dignity and justice. And beyond our pride, beyond our concern for the national purpose we are called upon to serve, there must be a concern for the betterment of the human condition. White we cannot, in the brief span allowed to each of us, undo the accumulated problems of centuries, we dare not do less than try. So let us now get on with our tasks.
103.	Let us act in the spirit of Thucydides that "the bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding go out to meet it".
Mr. President, first of all, I should like to congratulate you on your election as President of the current session of the General Assembly and I am confident that you will preside well and make positive contributions to the current session.
86.	New and important victories have been won by the people of all countries in their struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism since the start of the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly last year. The numerous third world countries have become the main force in the revolutionary struggle against the two hegemonic Powers. More and more people have seen through the so called detente played up by the superPowers. All the basic contradictions in the world are further sharpening, particularly the contradiction between the two superPowers on the one hand and the people of all countries on the other and the contradiction between, the two superPowers themselves. It is now evident to all that the world today is amidst more intense turbulence and unrest.
87.	What should be noted here first is the great October war in the Middle East. The heroic people of Egypt, Syria, Palestine and other Arab countries, in defiance of superPower obstruction and disruption, boldly took up arms and successfully rebuffed Israeli Zionist aggression. This fight exploded the myth of Israeli "invincibility", upset the state of "no war, no peace" imposed by the superPowers and demonstrated the might of the united struggle of the Arab people.
88.	In this Middle East war, the Arab countries used oil as a weapon to deal a heavy blow at Zionism and hegemonism. This was a historic, pioneering action. Its impact far exceeds the scope of the Arab people's anti-imperialist struggle. It has opened up a new dimension for the third world's struggle in defense of national resources against imperialist plunder and exploitation.
89.	The African people's struggle for national liberation has made great progress. Portugal is one of the oldest colonial empires. The downfall of the former Fascist regime in Portugal is a victory for the African people, who have persevered in a long armed struggle, as well as for the Portuguese people, who have persistently opposed the reactionary colonial war.
90.	The peoples of IndoChina have steadily achieved new successes in their struggle against United States aggression and for national liberation. The VietNamese people have carried on an unremitting struggle for the strict implementation of the Paris Agreement of 27 January 1973 and against the Nguyen Van Thieu clique's violations of the Agreement. In Laos, the Provisional Government of National Union has been formed. The Cambodian people have grown ever stronger in their fight against the traitorous Lon Nol clique. The struggle of the Korean people for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland has won ever wider support. There is a growing tendency among the SouthEast Asian countries to free themselves from superPower interference and contention.
91.	The struggle of the Latin American peoples against hegemonism and in defense of their State sovereignty, independence and national economic rights and interests has continued to surge forward. Those peoples initiated the struggle fair the zone of exercise of their maritime rights of 200 nautical miles, which has become the common demand of the great majority of nations.
92.	The Asian, African and Latin American peoples have supported each other in struggle, and they have become ever more keenly aware that unity is strength. At various conferences, they have strongly denounced colonialism, racism, Zionism, imperialism and hegemonism. Their just struggles and those of the people of other countries, supporting and complementing each other, are pounding away at the old international order, which the superPowers vainly attempt to maintain.
93.	In the past year, the contention between the two superPowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, for spheres of influence and world hegemony has become more intense. This is a fact which no agree menu between them can cover up. The Soviet leadership has lauded these agreements to the skies, as if the mere conclusion of agreements between the United States and the Soviet Union would bring detente to the whole world and usher in a "new stage of history", namely, a "world without war". "Detente" has become a kind of quack medicine hawked by the Soviet leadership everywhere. But none of us will forget that it was after the reaching of a stack of agreements at the second United StatesSoviet talks that the Middle East war broke out, and that it was after the reaching of more agreements at the third United StatesSoviet talks that the Cyprus events occurred.
So then, where is the "detente"? Has not there been ample manifestation of the contention between the two superPowers during the Middle East war and the Cyprus events?
94.	To keep a "balance of power" the United States and the Soviet Union reached certain agreements on "strategic arms limitation". But is has become more evident since their third summit talks that, at bottom, these agreements serve the purpose of bigger and more intensified contention. As far as balance is concerned, it has always been relative and temporary whether in nature or in human society, while imbalance is absolute and constant. In the real life of today, there is in fact no "balance of power" between the two superPowers. Instead, each side is desperately trying to outstrip and overwhelm the other, and the wildest arms race is on. No wonder the superPower with the label of "socialism" has, of late, arrogantly boasted that it is "on a historic offensive along the entire front of the global confrontation", and that the pace of its advance is "rapid".
95.	Lenin pointed out: "The content of imperialist politics is 'world domination' and the continuation of this politics is imperialist war." So long as imperialism and social imperialism exist, there will be the danger of war, and genuine detente or "lasting peace" will be impossible. Today, the danger of war comes from the superPowers. One superPower is trying by hook or by crook to carry out infiltration and expansion abroad and squeeze into the other superPower's spheres of influence in Europe and other parts of the world in order to supersede that superPower and realize its own wild ambition of world domination. With this fierce contention between the superPowers going on as it is, eventually either the superPowers will go to war against each other or the people will rise in revolution; either the war will give rise to revolution, or revolution will prevent the war. As Chairman Mao Tsetung has said: "The danger of a new world war still exists, and the people of all countries must get prepared. But revolution is the main trend in the world today."
96.	By stepping up their contention for world hegemony, the two superPowers are bound to hasten the process of their turning into their own opposites. Nowadays, not only have the third world countries risen one after another in revolt against them, but the second world countries in between the superPowers and the third world have also stood up to resist in various ways control and bullying by the superPowers. Beset by troubles at home and abroad, both superPowers are having a very tough' time. One superPower has already overstretched itself and is in a dilemma, unable to attend to all its troubles at the same time. The other superPower is in an even worse predicament. It has wild ambitions but lacks strength, and its difficulties abound. They are both in the plight described by the Chinese verse: "Flowers fall off, do what one may." Overestimation of the strength of the superPowers does not square with the facts. In the final analysis, it is not the one or two superPowers but the people of the world in their thousands of millions who determine the destiny of the world.
97.	The Chinese delegation would now like to state its views on a number of questions confronting the General Assembly at its current session. First, we
would like to state our views on Africa's fight against colonialism.
98.	China consistently supports the liberation struggles of all oppressed nations and peoples and considers this to be her bounden internationalist duty. In Africa, we firmly support the peoples of Mozambique, Angola, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Azania and other regions in their just struggle against colonialism and racism. We hail the birth of the Republic of GuineaBissau and warmly welcome its admission to the United Nations. We firmly demand that Spain terminate its colonial domination in Spanish Sahara and sincerely hope that the Arab countries concerned will work together with the people of Spanish Sahara to seek a reasonable solution to the existing questions of this region through friendly consultations on the basis of unity against colonialism.
99.	We hold that the colonial peoples can win national liberation only by relying mainly on their own efforts to wage a tit for tat struggle against colonialism. Moribund colonialism relies on armed force to carry on its deathbed struggle, and it will never step down from the stage of history unless it is defeated by the armed struggle of the colonial peoples. Both the birth of the Republic of GuineaBissau and the more recent agreement on the independence of Mozambique are in essence the result of the long and persistent armed struggle of the people of GuineaBissau and Mozambique, and are by no means favors bestowed by colonialism.
100.	The downfall of the former Fascist regime in Portugal, which persisted in the colonial war, is, of course, an important event. But this development in no way implies that Portugal will bring independence to the colonial peoples on a silver platter. Recently, under the pressure of the people, the new Portuguese Government had to recognize the right to independence of the peoples in the Portuguese colonies. This is a manifestation of the general trend. But it is yet to be seen whether the new Portuguese Government will suit its actions to its words. Even when that Government has reached an agreement with a colony, it remains to be seen whether the agreement will truly by implemented. The declaration of the Assembly of the Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] adopted at the eleventh ordinary session points out that, if Portugal does not take a clear position on the right to total independence of its colonies in Africa, there will be no other way but pursuit and intensification of the struggle for national liberation.
101.	We warmly endorse this correct stand. According to our experience in China, all reactionaries habitually use counterrevolutionary dual tactics, and we must use revolutionary dual tactics to deal with them. Armed struggle is fundamental, but negotiations are not excluded. Sometimes negotiating is tit for tat; and sometimes not negotiating is also tit for tat. Even in negotiations one must base oneself on fighting. In the course of negotiations, the fundamental interests of the people must be protected. The armed forces of the people must be strengthened, and not weakened.
102.	Moreover, it must be pointed out that while old line colonialisms have not died out, neo colonial isms of various descriptions, including the neo colonialism flaunting the banner of socialism are stepping up their infiltration. These neocolonialisms are sowing discord among African countries and within the national liberation movements to split and demoralize them in a vain attempt to supplant old line colonialisms and control the regions concerned. Sharp vigilance should be maintained against this. The future of the African liberation struggle is bright, but the road ahead remains tortuous. We believe that the great and increasingly awakening African people, strengthening their unity and persevering in a long struggle, will certainly surmount all difficulties and triumph in the end.
103.	Second, on the Mi 'die East question, we wish to say the following.
104.	The Arab people brought about an excellent situation through fighting the October war. This war has strengthened the confidence of the Arab people in victory over the Israeli aggressor and broken the stalemate that was deliberately created by the superPowers. Now, a disengagement has been effected between Egypt and Israel and between Syria and Israel, but the Middle East question is still far from being settled.
105.	The essence of the Middle East question lies in Israeli Zionist aggression and the contention between the two superPowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, for hegemony in the Middle East versus the struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples against aggression and hegemony.
106.	The Chinese Government and people always support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. From the very beginning, we have refused to have any contact with the Israeli Zionists, who persist in aggression. We have firmly opposed the contention between the two superPowers in the Middle East and opposed their support of and connivance with Israel, and we have constantly exposed the truth that social imperialism is giving sham support while actually attempting to control the Palestinian and other Arab peoples.
107.	It is well known that the United Nations has held innumerable discussions on the Palestine question and adopted countless resolutions thereon, of which the one referred to most often is Security Council resolution 242 (1967). All these resolutions have the common feature of twisting the question of the restoration of the Palestinian.people's national rights into a so called "question of refugees". This is a gross injustice. We have always opposed it and will continue to oppose it.
108.	Now, the Arab countries have proposed the discussion of the question of Palestinian national rights at the General Assembly session, so that all countries may hear directly the voices of the millions of Palestinian people and the 100 million Arab people and so that more countries may understand and support their just position. This is entirely necessary.
109.	The restoration of Palestinian national rights and the recovery of the lost Arab territories form a struggle that is an integral whole. There can be no settlement of the Middle East question so long as the lost Arab territories are not recovered and Palestinian national rights are not restored. Whatever maneuvers they may engage in, the two superPowers will never succeed in their attempt to sacrifice the Palestinian national rights and undermine the militant unity of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples.
110.	We hope that the United Nations will rectify its longstanding unjust attitude on the Palestine question, recognize the Palestinian people's national rights and support their restoration. But historical experience merits attention. No unrealistic hopes should be pinned on United Nations resolutions. In the final analysis, the Arab countries can recover their lost territories and the Palestinian people can regain their national rights only by relying on their own close unity and unremitting struggle, with the support of the peoples of the whole world.
111.	Third, our views on the question of Cyprus are as follows.
112.	The question of Cyprus is a legacy of imperialist colonial rule. The internal cause of the recent eruption in Cyprus is the lack of a satisfactory solution to the question between the two communities on the island; and its external cause is the attempt of each of the two superPowers to put this island of strategic importance under its own influence and control.
113.	One superPower stirred up trouble by pulling wires behind the scenes. The other superPower, pretending to "uphold" the independence of Cyprus and feeling anxious, like an ant on a hot pan, issued one government statement after another, supporting one side one day and the other side the other, sowing discord and fanning the flames of trouble. Racking its brains for ingenious devices, it turned up with proposals, first for the sending of a "United Nations special mission" and then for the convening of an international conference with the participation of the five permanent members of the Security Council. Anyone with a discerning eye will see that its "mischievous" actions serve neither the interests of the independence of Cyprus nor the interests of the Greek and Turkish communities or the countries directly related to these communities, but are aimed at meddling in the Cyprus question and further squeezing into the eastern Mediterranean. In quest of hegemony in the Mediterranean, it has redoubled its efforts to threaten, cajole, subvert and undermine the Balkan countries, causing their grave uneasiness and aggravating tension in this region.
114.	We hold that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus must be respected. We hope that a reasonable solution will be found so that the Greek and Turkish communities can live together in equality and harmony. Cyprus, Turkey and Greece are all friends of China. We have all suffered from imperialist tactics of sowing discord and divide and rule. As for the questions left over from history, we believe that they will not be difficult to resolve so long as the Greek and Turkish communities in Cyprus and the countries concerned seek to do so by peaceful means and through patient consultations. We should be constantly on guard against superPower meddling and intervention.
115.	Fourth, on the questions of the South Asian subcontinent and nuclear free zones, we hold the following views.
116.	The dismemberment of Pakistan by India with the backing of the Soviet Union gave rise to turbulence and unrest on the South Asian subcontinent. Great efforts have been made by the Government of Pakistan to promote a normalization of relations between India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. By April this year, the Indian Government had finally implemented in full the resolutions of the General Assembly and Security Council of 1971 on the ceasefire between India and Pakistan, the withdrawal of troops and the repatriation of prisoners. This ought to have created favorable conditions for the relaxation of the situation on the South Asian subcontinent. But a new wave arose when the previous one had barely subsided. In May, India exploded a nuclear device allegedly for peaceful purposes. In June, the Indian Government imposed on the people of Sikkim the so called "Government of Sikkim Bill", which it had concocted singlehandedly. And, more recently, the Indian Parliament adopted a constitutional amendment, making Sikkim a so called "associate state" of India. To put it bluntly, this is the annexation of Sikkim. It is another naked act of expansionism perpetrated by the Indian Government after dismembering Pakistan by armed force.
117.	The Indian Government's annexation of Sikkim has aroused the opposition of the Sikkimese people as well as the Indian people and met with condemnation by India's neighbors and world public opinion. The Soviet propaganda organs, alone, sing the praises of India. This shows that Soviet revisionist social imperialism is the boss behind the scenes of Indian expansionism.
118.	The Soviet Union is unscrupulous in its efforts to interfere in, subvert, divide and control the South Asian countries. It is conspiring to engineer another dismemberment of Pakistan. It dreams of opening a corridor to the Indian Ocean to serve its interests in its contention with the other superPower for hegemony in the South Asian subcontinent and the Indian Ocean. The two superPowers are competing with each other in setting up military bases in the Indian Ocean, some of which are overt bases while others are covert ones, nominally for civilian, but actually for military, use. The turbulent situation in South Asia and the Indian Ocean calls for vigilance.
119.	The turbulence and unrest in South Asia totally contradict the desire for peace of the peoples of all countries in this region. The proposal put forward by Pakistan for the establishment of a nuclear free zone in South Asia [AI9706] is entirely, reasonable. China gives it her firm support. We also firmly support the proposal of Iran and Egypt for the establishment of a nuclear weapon free zone in the Middle East [AI9693 and Add./J]. China is a nuclear country, although her nuclear weapons are still in the experimental stage. We are developing nuclear weapons for defense and for breaking the nuclear monopoly and ultimately destroying the .nuclear weapons. The Chinese Government has solemnly declared on many occasions that at no time and in no circumstances will China be the first to use nuclear weapons. It consistently holds that the nuclear countries should undertake not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear countries or nuclear free zones. We are ready to make such an undertaking in regard to the proposed nuclear free zones in South Asia and the Middle East. We hope that all the other nuclear countries will do the same.
120.	Fifth, I turn to the questions of Cambodia and IndoChina.
121.	In the past year, the Cambodian people have continued to win new victories in their war against United States aggression and for national salvation. The People's Armed Forces of National Liberation of Cambodia launched sustained offensives on all fronts and kept annihilating the effective strength of the enemy. The liberated zone is expanding and becoming ever more consolidated. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia under the leadership of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, head of State of Cambodia, is the Cambodian people's sole lawful Government. It has been recognized by more than 60 countries, and its friendly relations with third world countries are developing steadily. It enjoys a high international prestige. After the tour of Prince Sihanouk, Deputy Prime Minister Khieu Samphan visited many countries in Asia, Africa and Europe this year. They were both accorded a warm welcome in the countries they visited. The just struggle of the Cambodian people has won support on an ever wider scale from people all over the world.
122.	The traitorous Lon Nol clique is a handful of national scum repudiated by the people of Cambodia. This clique is rent by disunity and beset with numerous contradictions. In the areas under its rule, the economic situation is deteriorating and mass movements are raging like a storm. It is in a dire plight. Of late, it has advanced a proposal for socalled "peace negotiations", attempting to achieve a demagogic effect. We all know that the key to restoring peace in Cambodia lies :n the cessation of United States aggression and interference in Cambodia. So, the purpose of that socalled proposal is simply to cover up the fact of United States aggression and interference in Cambodia and prolong the moribund life of the Lon Nol clique. The Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia has already opposed and rejected that proposal. The Chinese Government resolutely supports the solemn and just stand of the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia.
123.	It is utterly illegal for the Lon Nol clique to usurp Cambodia's seat in the United Nations. Last year, some people used procedural tactics to postpone for a year the discussion on the question of restoring the lawful rights of the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia. That was wholly unjustifiable. The Chinese Government firmly maintains that this session of the General Assembly should adopt a resolution to immediately expel the representatives of the traitorous Lon Nol clique and restore to the Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia its rightful seat.
124.	More than one year has elapsed since the signing of the Agreement on ending the war in Viet Nam, but peace has not yet been restored in South Viet Nam. The Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam has worked tirelessly for the strict implementation of the Paris Agreement. But its efforts have met with obstruction and sabotage from the Saigon administration. Relying on massive United States military aid, the Saigon administration refuses to implement important provisions of the Paris Agreement, with the result that the situation in South Viet Nam has thus far remained tense. We demand that the United States Government strictly comply with the Paris Agreement and stop its involvement and interference in South Viet Nam, so that peace can really be restored in Viet Nam.
125.	The Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam is the authentic representative of the South Viet-Namese people. The Paris Agreement recognizes the fact that there exist two administrations in South Viet Nam, namely, the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam and the Saigon administration. It is unreasonable that the United Nations should accept only the observer of one side, that is, the Saigon administration. To rectify this irrationality, we hold that the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam should be invited to send its observer to the United Nations.
126.	Sixth, with regard to the Korean question, our views are as follows.
127.	The General Assembly at its last session reached a consensus on the Korean question, confirmed the three principles of Korea's independence, peaceful reunification and great national unity and decided to dissolve the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea.1 This was a welcome development.
128.	The facts over the past year show that the United Nations should not rest content with the progress made but should continue to go forward. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has made many efforts to push ahead the north south dialog and promote the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. But all these efforts have been unreasonably rejected by the South Korean authorities. The proposals on minor issues advanced by the South Korean authorities are wholly aimed at covering up their unwillingness to conduct negotiations on the fundamental question of reunifying the north and the south. What they really want is division, not reunification. On the pretext of a so called threat from the north, the South Korean authorities have taken a series of "emergency measures", depriving the South Korean people of all basic democratic rights. They have arrested, tried, imprisoned or murdered large numbers of people of various strata who call for democracy, freedom and peaceful reunification, ranging from young students and professors to political figures. Even people like former President Yoon Bo Sun and Catholic Bishop Chi Hak Soun have not escaped such persecution. Before the case of kidnapping Kim Dae Jung is closed, the South Korean authorities have already gone ahead with more sinister actions. Today, South Korea is in fact under the reign of terror of a Fascist dictator. It is mainly because they have the backing of United States troops that the South Korean authorities dare so feverishly to repress the people and sabotage the north south dialog. In order to eliminate outside interference in Korea and promote the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea, the withdrawal of foreign forces from South Korea is entirely necessary.
129.	In paragraph 2 (c) of the explanatory memorandum attached to the request for the inclusion in the agenda of the twenty ninth session of an additional item on the question of Korea, which was submitted by the United States and other countries [see A/9741 and Add. 15], it is asserted that the United States troops under the United Nations flag have not interfered in the internal affairs of the host country. This makes a mockery of common sense. Does not the presence of tens of thousands of United States troops serve to embolden the South Korean rulers, to say the least? The consensus of the last session of the General Assembly affirmed that the reunification of North and South Korea should be achieved by peaceful means without interference by outside force. As a logical consequence of affirming this principle, the foreign troops under the United Nations flag should be withdrawn from South Korea. As for the statement contained in the draft resolution annexed to the explanatory memorandum that "tension in Korea has not been totally eliminated", well, to put it bluntly, this is another way of referring to the so called threat from the north, which is a myth that has long been exploded. By now even that neighboring country which has all along supported South Korea no longer believes in this myth. The assertion that the "United Nations Command" cannot be withdrawn because of the existence of this "threat" is sheer deception.
130.	The Chinese delegation is firmly against that draft resolution. It strongly maintains that the current session of the General Assembly should discuss and adopt the draft resolution submitted by Algeria and other countries for the withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations [see Al9703/Add.3].
131.	Seventh, the Chinese delegation's views on the question of disarmament are the following.
132.	It is quite understandable that disarmament is a matter of concern to people when the arms race, and especially the nuclear arms race, between the two superPowers has become more intense and glaring. But hopes are one thing, reality another. For instance, we all talked about disarmament here a year ago. Now, after a year has passed, have the armaments accumulated by the two superPowers decreased, or have they increased? In our view, they have increased. Is the danger of war greater or less than last year? In our view, at least one cannot say it is less.
133.	Why is this so? First, because the two superPowers are fiercely contending with each other on a global scale. And their arms expansion and war preparations serve their policy of hegemonism. Secondly, because the superPowers, when faced with increasingly acute economic troubles, inevitably turn to the further militarization of the national economy as the way out. In this regard, the present situation resembles that of the 1930s in many ways.
134.	Disarmament is an old issue, and China's views on it are well known. We are in favor of disarmament. But we favor genuine and not sham disarmament, still less empty talk about disarmament coupled with actual arms expansion year after year. Some say that to hold a disarmament conference is better than none. We understand this well intentioned desire. But we consider that, when the arms race between the two superPowers, which directly threatens the people of the world, is being stepped up, and when the superPower with the label of "socialism" is actually bent on using empty talk at a disarmament conference as a cover for its arms expansion and war preparations, the convening of a nominal disarmament conference or its preparatory meeting will only pro* duce the effect of lulling the people of the world.
135.	The Chinese Government is in favor of holding a genuine world disarmament conference. But the conference must have a clear aim and the necessary preconditions. The clear aim is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and absolutely not the so called limitation of strategic arms. The necessary preconditions are: all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear superPowers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that at no time and in no circumstances will they be the first to use nuclear weapons, particularly against nonnuclear countries and nuclear free zones for example, the Soviet Union should, first of all, undertake obligations in respect of the nuclear free zone in Latin America and they must withdraw from abroad alt their armed forces, including nuclear missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. Only thus will it be possible for all countries, big and small, on an equal footing, to discuss with equanimity and resolve the question of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons and other questions, free from any threat of force.
136.	In the absence of a reduction of the armaments of the two superPowers, what should the numerous small and medium countries do in the face of their threat? In our opinion, the small and medium countries should strive to strengthen their necessary and independent defense capabilities in the light of specific conditions. This is a fundamental and reliable abroad.
13>. As expected, the Soviet Government, which comes up with some novelties each year, has put forward this year an item entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate for military and other purposes incompatible with the maintenance of international security, human well being and health" [item 103J. The letter requesting the inclusion of this item as an important and urgent matter in the agenda of this session [A 19702] is so obscurely worded that one cannot make out its real meaning. We would rather wait till the Soviet representative explains the matter in clear and simple language before acting whether it deserves some comment,
138. Eighth, the Chinese delegation would like to state the following views on the question of defending State sovereignty and national economic rights and interests.
139* Inspired by the victorious struggle which the Arab countries and people waged with oil as a weapon, the third world countries have started an immense tide of struggle to defend their State sovereignty, control their national resources, develop their national economy and oppose exploitation and plunder by imperialism, and particularly that of the superPowers. Through the efforts of numerous small and medium steed countries from all parts of the world, the General Assembly at its sixth special session finally adopted the Declaration and the Program of Action on the Establishment of a Hew International Economic
Order. This was a significant victory for the united struggle of the third world countries. It marks a new trend in the struggle of the people of the world against imperialism, and particularly against hegemonism, a trend of deepening this struggle by carrying it into the economic field.
140.	Since the sixth special session, the developing countries have strongly demanded the implementation of the provisions of the Declaration and the Program of Action and the continued transformation of the old international economic relations based on exploitation and plunder. More and mote developing countries are taking bold action to control their national resources and the production and pricing of their raw materials. They have further united themselves in various raw material producers' organizations to strive to break superPower manipulation and monopoly. An important part of this struggle of the third world is the work of formulating the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, initiated by the President of Mexico.
141.	But the superPowers have done their utmost to belittle or deny the great significance of the Declaration and the Program of Action and tried by all means to obstruct the realization of the just demands of the third world. One superPower openly declared its disagreement with certain principal paragraphs in the two documents and obstinately refused to implement their provisions. The other superPower has set in motion its propaganda machine to vilify the Declaration and the Program of Action as showing "regionalism" and "economism", "reflecting group interests", and so on and so forth. This fully shows that both superPowers want to preserve the old order of exploitation and plunder.
142.	Some people say that the current economic difficulties are caused by the increase in oil price. This is a specious statement. In the final analysis, the present economic difficulties are the inevitable outcome of the imperialist system; they are not due to increase in the prices of raw materials, still less to any alleged misdeeds on the part of the oil producing countries. Those people are daily spreading the idea that Arab and other oil producing countries have reaped a windfall of tens of billions of United States dollars through the oil price rise. But they forget that the international monopoly capital has reaped an immeasurably greater amount of super profits through long years of plunder and exploitation and through the forcing down of the prices of oil and other raw materials. Ever since the emergence of colonialism and then imperialism, the parity between the prices of raw materials and industrial goods on the world market has always been unfair. Particularly in times of economic crises, the colonialists and imperialists invariably use every possible means, including the forcing down of the prices of raw materials, to shift the grave consequences of economic crises on to the broad masses in the colonies and semi colons, i.e., the developing countries of today. The imperialists regard this state of affair* **s normal and reasonable, and even as sacred and inviolable. Now, this sacred and inviolable state of affairs is being violated. To fly into a rage is futile. To bluff is also f 'tile. The profound significance of the oil battle lieu in the fact that the developing countries have united themselves and independently exercised control over their national resources and fought against plunder, exploitation and the shifting of crises on to them. Of course, higher oil prices have caused non oil producing countries of the third world some temporary difficulties. Ways should be sought to resolve these difficulties, but this struggle and its great historic significance must not be negated on this account.
143.	Combating maritime hegemonism and formulating a new law of the sea is an important aspect of the struggle of the developing countries to safeguard state sovereignty and develop their national economy. At the recent Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea held in Caracas, the great majority of the developing countries were for the establishment of an exclusive economic zone of 200 nautical miles. Driven by circumstances, the two superPowers ostensibly gave up their opposition an attitude in which they had persisted all along. But, as if by agreement, they both raised a number of preconditions and restrictions under the name of a "package deal". The substance of these preconditions and restrictions is insistence on "freedom of passage" through straits within territorial seas and on "freedom of fishing" and "freedom of scientific research" in the exclusive economic zones. Nominally they have accepted a 200 nautical mile economic zone, but actually they want to emasculate the exclusive economic zone so that it will be devoid of any concrete substance and the developing countries will be left with nothing whatsoever. To put it bluntly, the "freedoms" demanded by the superPowers are their freedom to plunder the developing countries and their freedom to pursue hegemonism.
144.	In particular, the super Power which claims to be "the natural ally of the developing countries" has put on an even more wonderful show. Assuming a compassionate tone, it exclaimed that international trade and security would be impaired if freedom of passage through straits within territorial seas should be denied, and that if it was not allowed to go fishing iii the exclusive economic zone, the fish there would die uselessly. You see, how kindhearted it is. In fact, these are but crocodile tears, which cannot disguise its vicious super features.
145.	It is a serious struggle to defend State sovereignty, control national resources, develop national economy and combat superPower plunder and exploitation. The super Powers have bound to put up a desperate fight, but it will be of no avail. At the sixth special session of the General Assembly and the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea at Caracas, numerous developing countries came forward to expose and condemn the superPowers and resolutely called for smashing the old international order and taking their destiny into their own hands. This is a thing that has never happened before. The superPowers have never been so isolated. The situation is excellent. We are confident that the numerous developing countries, closing their ranks, allying with all forces that can be allied with and persevering in struggle, will surely continue to win new victories.
146.	International developments show that the world has changed enormously and profoundly. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution this torrential tide is sweeping into every corner of the earth. Storms have broken out even in places that have been rather quiet for decades. The world situation at present is indeed aptly described by the verse, "The wind sweeping through the tower heralds a rising storm in the mountains." And this wind is gathering momentum. At such a juncture , it is our hope that this session of the General Assembly will do some useful things to advance the cause of human progress. The Chinese delegation is ready to work with all of you toward this end.
Mr. President, let me begin by congratulating you warmly on your election to this high and responsible office. Your unanimous election is proof of the confidence placed in you and in your country and of the certainty that you will make this particularly important General Assembly session a success. To these congratulations I should like to add our sincere thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Benites. We were very happy to be able to begin our co-operation in the United Nations under his wise and experienced leadership.
36.	I also wish to welcome most warmly the three new Members: Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea- Bissau. We are looking forward to co-operating closely and trustfully with these countries in the framework of our Organization.
37.	The twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly is being held against a background of international events and developments which must be regarded as a challenge to political reason. We share the deep concern that permeates the introduction to the Secretary-General's report on the work of the Organization despite intensive efforts to achieve detente, the number of conflicts involving the use of force is not on the decline; the global network of economic relations is in many places damaged, in some already torn: there is a shortage of raw materials, a struggle over prices; inflation and monetary fluctuations are driving us towards a crisis; the economic situation in some parts of the world has continued to deteriorate dramatically; hunger is still spreading. There are still people who are denied their elementary rights; the gap between the proclamation and the realization of human rights continues to be unbearably wide. Many people no longer believe that their problems can be settled by mutual agreement. This feeling of desperation not only breeds resignation and fatalism; it also generates action that is unjustifiable from any point of view, acts of individual terrorism in the shadow of which no country can feel safe - a terrorism that also leaves its mark on countries not involved.
38.	But our chief concern must be to prevent any further breaking up of international solidarity and to reverse the process of disintegration.
39.	The Federal Republic of Germany has gone through certain experiences which distinguish it from many other countries represented, here and which determine the nature of our participation in the work of this great world Organization. With your permission I will mention those experiences, in order to illustrate that what we need today is not less but more international solidarity.
40.	The Federal Republic of Germany emerged from a separation into states of the indivisible German nation. We are therefore more deeply conscious than others of the fact that States, however great may be their need for existence, are imperfect entities. Our citizens are less inclined to think in terms of nation-States, to regard their Government and their political institutions as the source of all wisdom and to believe that those institutions alone can cope with the massive problems inherent in the pursuit of peace, freedom, human dignity and welfare. We therefore view with concern the re-emerging tendency in some parts of the world to overrate oneself as a nation and the attempts of some countries to increase their prosperity at the expense of their neighbors' procedure that has always resulted in the weakening of all. The Federal Republic of Germany therefore trains its policy on the objective of European unity. We are convinced that only a united Europe can effectively solve the existing political, economic and social problems confronting the member States of our Community. That Community is also willing to share responsibility for solving problems beyond its frontiers; the more closely it is knit together, the more it will be able to do in this respect. This morning [2238th meeting] my French colleague mentioned the request for the granting to the European Community of observer status in the United Nations. This request is further proof of a determination of the European Community to co-operate actively in the solution of world-wide tasks.
41.	The other experience of the Germans has been that force, rather than solving problems, in fact makes them all that much more difficult to settle. Once reconciliation had been achieved with the neighbors in western Europe, especially with the French people, the Federal Government under the then Chancellor, Willy Brandt, and under my predecessor and now Federal President, Walter Scheel, concluded agreements on the renunciation of force with those countries from which we have been separated by a sorrowful past characterized by force and conflict. The Federal Government and I can say this also on behalf of all responsible political forces in the Federal Republic of Germany bases itself on the principle of the renunciation of force. As the United Nations Charter expressly lays down, peoples may and should, in the exercise of their free self-determination, manage their own affairs. This also implies, in our view, that divided countries may reunite if that is their own free decision and that nations may join supranational communities. But if force enters into the conduct of international relations, then it will be the seed from which ever more conflict and violence will spring, and consequently will be the source of distress, want and disaster.
42.	Both these experiences, the imperfection of our States and the senselessness of force, have led the Federal Republic of Germany of necessity on to the road taken by this world Organization. Only by means of a well-structured international order can the people in our State systems find the framework within which they feel confident they can live in security.
43.	On behalf of my country I speak up for the form of co-operation embracing all mankind, the most important model of which is the United Nations, a form of co-operation which, though it is certainly a laborious and tedious way, is the only worthy one and promises to be more successful in the end. Peace, freedom, human dignity, welfare and a reliable system of international relations are indivisible.
44.	Today more than at any other time in the past it is the political will for co-operation that counts. The international institutions cannot be stronger than that political will. This is a question not merely of being willing to play a constructive part in bringing about international treaties, but also of being resolved to comply with them.
45.	This is the prerequisite for the working of that new form of international relations the development of which has governed the period since the Second world war which, we may hope, will also have been the last world war. It is a precondition which will have to be established in all countries, but not only on the part of governments.
46.	I am deeply convinced that it is also the individual citizen in our countries who will have to develop a willingness to act in a way which I have tried to describe as international solidarity. The problems that have been the subject of United Nations conferences in past months and will be the subject of other conferences in the months ahead for instance those on commodity and developing problems, population trends, the use of the high seas, and the world food problems are matters which concern every individual. A government's sense of the common responsibility and its willingness to play a constructive part in resolving these problems depend on the degree of understanding of their peoples.
47.	International co-operation in its multifarious forms has created a framework within which it has been possible to bring about extraordinary changes in the world in the past two and a half decades. Let me mention only two of those changes: the process of liberating the former colonial nations which is reflected most strikingly in this very Assembly where the original 51 members have now become 138; and the development by the United Nations of a peace-creating and peace-preserving policy, which has helped prevent the spread of local and regional conflicts.
48.	Increasingly, doubts are being voiced today about those same international rules and organizations whose often quiet work in the background has made such developments at all possible.
49.	On behalf of the Federal Government I would like to state the following.
50.	We want to strengthen the United Nations and enhance its possibilities of action. Whatever its imperfections, there is no alternative to the United Nations. Those who have the peaceful development of mankind at heart must support it.
51.	The tasks of the many regional groupings are complementary to the universal tasks of the United Nations. For us, the standing of the United Nations is not in any way lowered because of the fact that we are a member of a defense alliance, and that, together with others, we seek political and economic union in Europe. This diversity of international groupings is commensurate with the diversity of international relations. This pattern is useful as long as no organization turns against others and as long as all respect the rules we have all agreed upon within this widest framework. My country will abide by both these principles.
52.	Organizations are the work of men and, as such, imperfect; moreover, times and problems change. For the Federal Republic of Germany there is no reason to question the foundations of the existing international order. Rather, we have to develop its rules and institutions and adapt them to the new requirements, Let us join in studying all aspects of the United Nations system and considering where the Organization itself or the rules upon which it is based can be improved and its problems thus resolved. The Federal Republic of Germany will assist in such a review in the same spirit in which it is seeking within other organizations, especially GATT and IMF, to bring about an organic reform of the international system.
53.	We shall have to examine very closely the forms of international co-operation we have developed to see whether they are suited to removing the causes of the crises that have arisen in many parts of the world. In the United Nations Charter the solution of world-wide economic, social and humanitarian problems receives the same priority as the aim of safeguarding peace. Both realms are indivisible. We know that peace is more than a state in which fighting may have stopped for a while. An international economic order embracing the principle of equality and partnership in trade relations also will in itself help to safeguard peace.
54.	Those who still doubt the need for rapid action will have had their eyes opened by developments in the past 12 months. The prices of many major primary commodities have escalated in hitherto unknown proportions; energy prices have risen vertically. You all know the consequences: alarming balance-of-payments deficits on the one hand; vast surpluses on the other. This has piled plenty of additional fuel on the fire of world-wide inflation. Data which had served as a valid basis for economic planning were called into question overnight. In many countries there is a growing feeling of uncertainty in the face of an economic trend which appears less calculable than ever in the past. The consequences affect all. The difficulties facing the industrial countries are considerable, but they are not to be compared with those of the least developed countries, which are lacking in natural resources and whose very existence is threatened. We have to tighten our belts, but for them it is a question of survival.
55.	This is a challenge which does not distinguish between different systems: it affects all nations, rich and poor, developing and industrialized.
56.	I place very much weight on this point. An exacerbation of the conflict of interests between commodity-producing and industrialized countries not only creates problems between those directly concerned, but also strikes first and most tellingly at third countries. This kind of situation results in new tensions, and many countries would be sorely tempted to try to save their own skins without consideration for others. Let us guard against such a temptation.
Terrible experiences of the past have taught us that seeking refuge in economic isolationism does not remove the difficulty. On the contrary, world economic relations are so intertwined that action which is felt to be egotistical is bound to produce counter-measures. Consequently, the "every man for himself' approach leads straight to economic chaos and creates tensions between States and their peoples. What we want is just the opposite: we want to remove existing disparities, especially the gulf between developing and industrialized countries; we want to quell further conflicts; and we want to avoid the situation of some being entirely dependent on others. To achieve this aim we shall have to bring about a world-wide improvement of our economic and social structures; we shall have to boost productivity and encourage sensible growth without neglecting the task of protecting the environment a task which has lost none of its urgency since the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm in 1972. When the commodity-producing countries seek to obtain higher market prices for their raw materials, they must be assured that there will be no excessive price fluctuations in the commodity markets. At the same time, we must seek to ensure long-term supplies of those commodities. But in the interest of all we must make sure that the bigger proceeds from energy and raw materials are reasonably used and thus fed back into the international economy. The money should be used where it is most urgently needed.
57.	We are prepared to help find solutions, both regional and world-wide, that will prevent any threats to the international monetary system.
58.	At the sixth special session of the General Assembly last April the important dialog on world-wide economic problems was begun. We shall have to continue that dialog with much patience and resolution and with a good sense of judgment. No one will benefit from decisions that are not supported by all the world's major trading partners; no one will benefit from resolutions that question the world economic order based on division of labor and freedom of trade or that represent an attempt to replace such an order by a system of global dirigisme.
59.	True, the present world economic system is not without defects and weaknesses. We must therefore develop it still further, improve it and adapt it to the needs of all nations. The Federal Republic of Germany has made specific contributions towards this end and is willing to carry on along this road.
60.	We appreciate the need for the industrial countries to make their markets more accessible to products from the less-developed countries. The European Community, of which my country is a member, has been catering to this need for a good number of years by granting general tariff preferences. It is currently negotiating a comprehensive system of mutual economic relations with 44 African Caribbean and Pacific countries.
61.	The Federal Government supports co-operative projects also by private companies in developing countries. It is trying by appropriate measures to steer investment activities towards the least-developed countries.
62.	In recent years the Federal Government has constantly increased the share of its development aid that goes to those countries that are in special need of international solidarity, and it will continue to do so.
63.	The Federal Republic of Germany has declared its readiness to provide, as a member of the European Community, a substantial contribution towards the emergency operation of the United Nations for the benefit of the most seriously affected countries, as soon as, the other countries involved have agreed to play a corresponding part.
64.	The Federal Republic of Germany is taking part in the fight against hunger in the world and in efforts to solve the world food crisis. Within the European Community, too, our contributions are sizable. We help supply fertilizers. The President of the United States of America [2234th meeting] and his Secretary of State [2238th meeting] have rightly re-emphasized before this Assembly the importance of this problem.
65.	Higher commodity prices and the problems they entail confront us with tremendous economic difficulties. Nevertheless, the Federal Government will make special efforts to continue to ^increase its development aid. In the years ahead it intends to increase that aid at a higher percentage rate than the national budget as a whole. For 1975 this has already been decided. Multilateral aid will continue to feature prominently in our development-assistance program.
66.	We are making efforts to increase and intensify exchanges in the field of science and technology. All countries should have access to the scientific and technological resources of this world, so as to become more and more able to solve their problems on their own. This, too, is the aim of our projects in the sphere of educational aid. We welcome the idea of a United Nations conference on science and technology, and we shall do our best to encourage the promotion of that project.
67.	Last year's events have once again thrown into relief the interdependence of the world economy and have made clear to us how sensitive the complex economic mechanisms of highly developed countries are. Even their capacity has its limits. Their economies can function only under their own laws, and domestic stability plays a great role in this. Only countries with a well-functioning economy can be good trading partners to developing countries; only they can help and, over the long term, attend to the problems of others beyond their own frontiers. Industrial countries with economies shaken by inflation are bound to lose in efficiency.
68.	Hence, the results of the Federal Republic of Germany's consistent policy of domestic stability benefit others as well.
69.	We are aware that the solution of economic and social problems is possible only When the political prerequisites are there, the most important being an ail-out effort to ensure peace. This task remains^ the prime mission of the United Nations. We can note with satisfaction that in many parts of the world hard work is being done to eliminate conflicts and tensions. To encourage and support those efforts is important.	
70.	With regard to peace and security, the obvious cases today are two areas whose conflicts have a direct bearing on us Europeans particularly; they are the Middle East and Cyprus. The conclusion of the disengagement agreements in the Middle East has generated new hopes for a comprehensive peaceful settlement of the conflict.
71.	Such initial steps must be followed by others, in order to establish an equitable and lasting peace ensuring the existence of all States and peoples in that region while taking into consideration the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The progress; made so far is an indication that even among the parties to the conflict the conviction has grown that a genuine solution can be attained by peaceful means only. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes this development, in which the efforts made by the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger, played a decisive part.
72.	Peace in the Middle East will set free powerful forces that can be harnessed to the reconstruction and development of the whole eastern and southern Mediterranean areas. The Federal Republic of Germany and its European partners will not fail to co-operate. By initiating a European-Arab dialog, the nine members of the Community have already laid the first foundations for that great task.
73.	The Federal Government most deeply deplores the recent events in Cyprus with its tragic consequences for the country and its people. We hope that those involved in the conflict will succeed soon in finding a negotiated settlement securing the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus and restoring to that country external and internal peace.
74. Both in the Middle East and in Cyprus the United Nations used its instruments to help in the efforts to bring about a cease-fire and make negotiations possible. I wish in this connexion to emphasize the valuable work done by Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim, to whom we owe appreciation and gratitude.
75.	We thank the soldiers of the peace-keeping forces for their dedication in the service of the United Nations, and we pay a tribute to those who gave their lives in that service.
76.	The Federal Republic of Germany recognizes the important functions of the peace-keeping forces and has therefore been supporting the actions in the Middle East and Cyprus by voluntary additional contributions. The efficiency and possibilities of action of the United Nations forces could be further enhanced if we succeeded in agreeing on general guidelines for peace-keeping operations. We should increase our efforts to bring about such an agreement.
77.	What concrete contribution can we make to an active peace policy? The foreign policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is geared to furthering detente. Detente in itself will not remove existing differences, nor automatically provide more security. But the policy of detente is an effective instrument in the efforts to eliminate old conflicts and prevent the emergence of new ones and it is only.
in an atmosphere of detente that efforts at arms limitation and arms control with due regard to security interests will make any sense at all.
78.	The Federal Government includes in its policy of detente the most difficult and burning problem prevailing in Germany itself the division of our country with all its painful consequences for the people. I wish to repeat what the Federal Government made clear at the twenty-eighth session [2119th meeting] from this rostrum. We cannot and will not accept the division as history's final dictum on the German nation. That dictum will be spoken by the German people themselves. The Federal Government sticks to its policy of working for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people will regain its unity in free self-determination.
79.	This does not prevent us, however, from exhausting the full measure of co-operation attainable in the, circumstances. This, our policy, has paved the way for contractually, settled relations with the other German State, the German Democratic Republic. It has since been seen that co-operation between the States of a divided country in the United Nations is possible despite fundamental differences of political views, that it is beneficial for all, andI should think for the world Organization too.
80.	Detente in Europe had to begin Where differences clashed their hardest., that is, in Berlin. The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin of 3 September 1971 opened the way. Hence, one of the criteria by which to measure detente is the manner in which that Agreement works in all its parts. Berlin's secure future is an indispensable element of detente in Europe, and it remains a vital interest of our policy.
81.	The Federal Republic of Germany wants to see the policy of detente effectively continued. It is in this spirit that the Federal Government cooperates actively and constructively in the Geneva Conference on Security arid Co-operation in Europe and in the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. We do not seek advantages benefiting just one side; we seek a way that will facilitate the coexistence of nations on the crowded European continent, and it is our hope that these conferences will bring us nearer the time when, in Europe, a highly armed East and West will no longer confront each other.
82.	We cannot and will not reconcile ourselves to the thought that the arms race in which not only the great Powers participate is being carried on and on. The economic resources of mankind must increasingly be used to put an end to hunger and misery in the world, but they should be concentrated on that task now, not after there has been a winner in the arms race.
83.	That is why I feet that, even more that hitherto, we must seek practical, controlled measures of disarmament and arms control. As before, the Federal Republic of Germany is determined to contribute actively to this. Disarmament and arms control are an integral part of our policy. We are prepared to assume additional responsibility also in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament and are certain that we will have an opportunity to do so in the near future.
84.	In this connexion I wish to underline the great importance which we attach to the policy of the non- proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Federal Republic of Germany intends to participate in the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons scheduled for 1975. It hopes that this will provide it with another opportunity to help oppose anything that might jeopardize the policy of non-proliferation.
85.	In this General Assembly the Federal Republic of Germany focuses its special attention on three sets of problems of world-wide co-operation, namely, the strengthening of the international order and its institutions; the improvement of international economic relations in the spirit of partnership and solidarity; and concrete contributions to detente and disarmament with a view to ensuring a lasting peace. It does so in the awareness of, and with respect for, the expectations, the wishes, the hopes and longings of the people of the German nation and all other nations. All our endeavors are ultimately aimed at enhancing the welfare of each individual human being.
86.	This idea leads us to a central aspect of the United Nations work to which this General Assembly should also devote its full attention. I mean the question of individual human rights, of the protection of the individual within the community, and I should like to warn against the illusion that it would suffice to guard the outward order by outward means against war and destruction. What we need is not just the formal recognition of human rights but also their universal acceptance and application so as to endow the outward measures for the preservation of peace with inner firmness and the power of conviction.
87.	These are elementary rights which must be respected and applied all over the world: in Europe and I mean all parts of Europe less than on other continents.
88.	We expect that the entry into force of the two International Covenants on Human Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI)] which the Federal Republic of Germany ratified in December 1973 will spark off fresh impulses.
89.	As a new member of the Commission on Human Rights, we want to co-operate responsibly in that body's efforts to give effect to human rights. We want to help and do our best to ensure that the individual shall be protected both from arbitrary treatment by the State and from want, and that population groups shall be protected from discrimination on racial, religious, political and other grounds.
90.	We welcome the decision of the Commission on Human Rights and its bodies to prepare studies on the subject of self-determination. The rights of self-determination is a regulative principle to be applied not only in the sphere of decolonization or to one particular continent but in all parts of the world.
91.	Self-determination and human rights are the central issues at stake also in southern Africa. The problems of decolonization and the elimination of racial discrimination in that region will again be occupying the attention of this General Assembly. We have left no doubt about our attitude; we demand that any remaining colonialism be eliminated. We condemn all forms of racial discrimination. We can note today with satisfaction that since the last session of the General Assembly fundamental changes have begun.
92.	We welcome Portugal's historic decision to recognize the independence of Guinea-Bissau and to open the road to independence for Mozambique and Angola. We see in this a confirmation of our view that courage, energy and wisdom can solve these problems too.
93.	The guarantee of individual human rights, the total ban on racism in any form or place, and the achievement of the self-determination of nations are tasks which my people, prompted not the least by its own historic experience, would like to help to accomplish sincerely and energetically.
94.	In his treatise Of Eternal Peace, written in 1795, the German philosopher Immanuel Kant, whose two hundred and fiftieth birthday we celebrate this year, drew up principles for international co-operation. These universal aims are also pursued by the United Nations. The principles which this Organization established for international coexistence almost three decades ago are today sure of world-wide recognition. However, white solemn declarations and resolutions are a good thing, we must do more. It will be the task of the General Assembly at the present session to give practical impetus, to point the way for our future work, so that by concrete measure seven if they are only small steps ahead we come nearer to achieving the aims of the United Nations. At the end of this session of the General Assembly we shall be judged by the progress we have made along this path.
Sir, my first words will be to offer you my personal congratulations and those of my country on your election to the distinguished office of President of the General Assembly and to tell you of the hopes this gives us for the success and the efficacy of our work.
105.	A few months ago, in this very Hall, you participated actively in the special session on raw materials and development. Your election to the presidency of this twenty-ninth session rightly confirms the importance of the role you have played, and since virtually all international relations now fall within the realm of our debates, it provides you with an arena commensurate with your abilities and experience as a statesman. In honoring you, the community of nations is also honoring your country, Algeria. Everyone can understand why France has special reasons to welcome this.
106.	I should also like to pay a special tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Benites, who had the rare privilege during the past 12 months of presiding over two sessions of the Assembly, during which he displayed outstanding qualities as a statesman and jurist and was thus able to crown most prestigiously a career that had been so closely linked to the work of our Organization for so many years.
107.	Lastly, I should like to greet Mr. Kurt Wald heim, with whom I have enjoyed a longstanding friendship. I should like to tell him of the trust and high esteem in which he is held by the French Government for his tireless efforts and for the competence and effectiveness he has shown in carrying out his extremely important and difficult tasks.
108.	This is the first time that I have had the honor of speaking on behalf of France before this Assembly, a privileged forum in which to recognize that there is a basic truth which characterizes the modern world and will dominate our common destiny with increasing severity, regardless of the degree of development or the political philosophies of the societies to which we belong.
109.	In this "little corner of the universe" -to quote Pascal- on this earth which the human eye has been able to contemplate in its entirety for the first time in its history a blue ball, an oasis of life in the blackness of space, a planet which scientific and technological progress has shrunk and at the same time unified by subjecting it to accelerated and profound change men, peoples and States arc dependent on each other and are becoming increasingly interdependent. The death knell will sound for everyone it we fail to appreciate this interdependence, if selfishness, fanaticism, the lust for power and domination threaten the possibilities for a sincere effort to seek together gradual and well-balanced solutions to the difficulties of our times, difficulties which our very progress only serves to accentuate.
110.	The fine name of the United Nations thus takes on renewed significance. The enemy that we must confront together is underdevelopment; it is the tragedy of poverty and hunger which the past year, alas, has shown to be distressingly present; it is the turmoil that inflation is causing in international economic relations; it is disorder, inequality and injustice in all their forms; it is the remnants of racial discrimination; it is everything that still exists to hinder the full recognition of and respect for the rights of the individual and the rights of peoples.
111.	Need 1 stress before this Assembly of nearly 140 nations-and I doubt that anyone can remain indifferent to a reminder of the great universalis! traditions of my country and the message it brought to the world almost two centuries ago that France, with the legacy of the French Revolution, is determined to strengthen the liberal nature of its diplomacy, to be in the vanguard of the peaceful struggle to give the world greater liberty, greater equality and greater fraternity?
112.	I should like to recall here the words spoken by the President of the French Republic last June when the Paris diplomatic corps was presented to him:
"This change signifies, lastly, that France, reaffirming and emphasizing her liberal mission, will do everything in her power to contribute to the dawning of a new era in international relations based on mutual esteem and respect and on a spirit of understanding and liberty, and, Under pressure from the peoples of the world, to ensure that the bastions of constraint and intolerance are toppled. She thus hopes to introduce into relations among States a greater measure of simplicity, trust and, may I venture to say, optimism."
113.	The essence of the "liberal" philosophy which France advocates and which must, in our opinion, be applied by everyone to international relations is this: that order and justice are in no way contradictory but, rather, are complementary; that only progress towards political and economic order, coupled with consideration for the interests of each State, is likely to guarantee our international society the minimum of stability without which there can be no lasting progress for anyone.
114.	This joint effort and the transformation it entails must, of course, be made without losing sight of the ultimate goal of our Organization. The intention to ensure peace and security by gradually eliminating the causes of conflict, whether political or economic in nature, must be matched by the constant concern to eliminate any desire for, or any possibility of, not only conflict but even confrontation.
115.	The two basic principles which my country long ago initiated and advocated -namely, detente and cooperation - must therefore be implemented more and more at the international level.
116.	In the midst of the alarming turmoil of today's world, it is sometimes difficult to perceive practical ways of implementing these principles. However, a closer look reveals a few breaches in the wall, a few rays of light of unmistakable brightness. We are living in a world of light and shadow. Perhaps it might be useful for me to state how France and the French Government currently view the causes for concern and the reasons for hope.
117.	You will not be surprised if first, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, I turn my eyes to Europe. As current President of the Council of the European Economic Community, I can testify to the aspiration of our peoples gradually to organize themselves so that from their age old civilization there can emerge little by little a new political organization based on pluralism but capable also of unifying what must be unified.
118.	This organization of Europe involves, first and foremost, for my country and for its partners in the Community, the creation in the western part of our continent of a coherent entity that will be capable of confronting the problems of our time; one that will be able to make a genuine contribution to detente and cooperation which are so necessary for our world if it is to survive; and, I might say, one that will serve as a model. The task begun nearly 25 years ago, right after a war which we decided would be the last, is not a simple one. But the leaders of our countries are determined not to miss the rendezvous with destiny which history has scheduled for our generation.
119.	That is why you will hear the voice of the European Economic Community becoming more and more distinct. It will speak the language of peace, justice and reconciliation. For, although this Community must of necessity actively pursue its own development, it cannot and it never would wish to turn in upon itself. By virtue of its mission and by necessity as well, the Community is open to the world, alive to the hopes and needs of the underprivileged, aware of its responsibilities in international balance and progress. That is why it intends, through concrete and innovative action, to make its contribution to the necessary effort to restore order to economic, financial and, hence, political relations among the countries of the globe.
120.	The Community is faithful to its traditional friendships, first among which is its friendship with the United States of America and Canada, a friendship which is even stronger now that it is yet better balanced and which is constant and indispensable to peace. And yet it does not forget the role that geography and history have allocated to it in the Mediterranean and in Africa, nor the close ties it has maintained with the Soviet Union and all the countries of Eastern Europe, whose contribution to our civilization is so important and with which we hope to foster genuine detente in the Old World. In this spirit we are taking part, as you know, in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, well aware of the scope of the undertaking and thus of the need to work towards the desired goal with great patience and wisdom.
121.	Another source of comfort and confidence in the future stems from a new and important step our Organization has taken towards its goal of universal representation, which we are now close to achieving. We are happy to welcome in our midst during this twenty-ninth session the representatives of Bangladesh, Grenada and GuineaBissau.
122.	After the trials that marked its birth, Bangladesh, despite serious economic difficulties, courageously is embarking on the path that should lead to reconciliation and cooperation on the subcontinent. May the efforts made by the States concerned achieve the results that we all are hoping for.
123.	There are two reasons why we can be pleased with the decolonization that is under way in the Portuguese Territories of Africa: first of all, because it has come about in connexion with a return to democracy in a country that is a friend of France, and secondly, because it is being done for the benefit of a whole group of courageous peoples that have long had many reasons to ask themselves why they were deprived of the independence which their neighbors enjoyed.
124.	I should like to hail the delegation of the Republic of GuineaBissau and convey to it our best wishes and congratulations. I should also like to pay a tribute to its members and to the representatives of the new Portuguese Government, a tribute that the political wisdom evidenced during the recent fruitful negotiations in Algiers rightly deserves. The European Economic Community, deeply committed to the values of the democracy on which it is founded, can only welcome any agreements which result in the practical application of the principles of selfdetermination on the continent of Africa. It feels that recognition of these principles will soon be extended to Mozambique and then to Angola. It welcomes in particular the agreement that was just concluded at Lusaka.
125.	Allow me to add at this point that France, which was one of the first Powers to foster self determination for many countries that are now influential Members of our Organization, is currently completing its own endeavors in this domain by preparing, with the agreement of the freely elected leaders of the Comoros, the accession to independence of these islands. The French delegation will in a few weeks be pleased to give further information which will emerge from the bill providing for an early referendum in the Comoro Archipelago.
126.	Other aspects of the world situation are, however, more disturbing.
127.	The situation in Africa is still troubled by tensions and the injustices which persist in the southern part. I would like to record once again here France's complete disapproval of the policy of apartheid. Furthermore, France regrets that the efforts made by our Organization to begin a dialog with the Government in Pretoria with a view to leading Namibia to self-determination and independence have remained fruitless.
128.	The situation in the Middle East is still marked by dangerous uncertainty. Following upon the tragic events which have taken place since our last session, disengagement agreements have been concluded thanks to the wisdom of the parties to the conflict and to the tireless diplomacy of the Secretary of State of the United States. These agreements and the stabilized situation on the battlefield, thanks to the control of the United Nations, are the first encouraging steps. However, we must not permit the momentum of peace to grind to a halt. The basic problems have not been settled. The situation is still precarious and it is therefore imperative that the negotiations should be resumed so that an equitable settlement can be reached as soon as possible, one that can be endorsed by the international community, that is to say, the Security Council.
129.	France for its part is still in favor of a settlement based on Security Council resolution 242 (1967), confirmed by its resolution 338 (1973), which provide for Israel's withdrawal from the occupied territories, as well as for commitments to peace giving each State the right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries.
130.	France believes it is high time for the international community to recognize the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, which this settlement should take into account. It is ready to contribute to the quest for a settlement based exclusively on the genuine interests of the peoples of the region and acceptable to the parties concerned -each and every one of them- among which my country is far from forgetting Israel.
131.	Although the crisis which broke out in Cyprus on 15 July and which was singularly exacerbated on 14 August had the highly positive effect of promoting a return to democracy in Greece -and I would like in passing to pay a tribute to the courageous efforts of Mr. Caramanlis- it is yet one more example of the serious difficulties we face this year.
132.	In the first place, the crisis concerns the United Nations which, after trying to promote a settlement to the conflict by sending an international force to Cyprus in 1964 and more recently by sponsoring enlarged talks between the communities, must now do everything in its power to prevent the crisis from deteriorating and to facilitate a speedy settlement.
133.	It is for the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in this matter, which it did as the tragic events unfolded by adopting resolutions that my country helped to draft, as was its duty. We remain convinced that respect for these resolutions by the parties concerned is still the indispensable basis for an equitable settlement.
134.	Troubled by this dispute and anxious to restore harmony in Cyprus and between two countries linked to the European Economic Community by the same tie, the nine members of the Community have felt it to be their duty, during the course of several meetings, to add their efforts to those of the Security Council.
135.	The most serious problem in Cyprus today is, without question, that of the refugees. We feel that permitting these people to return to their homes freely is consistent with both justice and public international law. We therefore believe that we should make an urgent appeal on this point in the hope of preventing the inception of another tragic refugee problem such as those which, unfortunately, we have already had, which are poisoning the international atmosphere. The problem in Cyprus can be resolved only by negotiation, without recourse to force. In this respect, we consider the talks now under way between the leaders of the island's two communities to be encouraging. I hope that these talks will pave the way, if the necessary gestures are forthcoming, for the negotiations that we should like to see started among Greece, Turkey and Cyprus, countries to which we are bound by longstanding ties of friendship.
136.	There is another region where war continues to wreak havoc in various but no less cruel ways, and that is SouthEast Asia. We welcomed the Paris agreements on VietNam and the hope that they engendered. Can it be said today that those agreements are really being respected? I am fully aware of the difficulties encountered by each of the parties; but how can one fail to hope that they will have the strength to overcome the legacy of the past and ultimately to achieve peace with understanding and reconciliation?
137.	Faced with these highly contrasting pictures, we can probably say that at least the danger of world confrontations involving the fate of all mankind seems to be less threatening than it was a few years ago.
138.	Detente is still fragile. The protective net that it could cast still hangs too slack. Detente obviously remains -and will long remain - linked to a sustained defense effort.
139.	France, for its part has, over the past 15 years, halved the proportion of its gross national product destined for military expenditure. But France has not neglected the need to ensure its security and independence by the means that others have already adopted. As a country that was the battlefield of two world wars, France is profoundly aware of the duty incumbent upon it to be capable of defending its independence. Having noted the refusal, and perhaps even the inability, of the greatest Powers to renounce their nuclear weapons, France has resolved, to its regret, to acquire them itself.
140.	We too have had to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere, which, in terms of number and size, can in no way be compared with the tests previously carried out by others in the same field. We went ahead with our tests only when we were sure that they would cause no harm; and this was verified by our own controls and by those of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. We have now reached a stage in our nuclear technology that makes it possible for us to continue our program by underground testing, and we have taken steps to do so as early as next year.
141.	If, given the present state of the world, no country can renounce the means of ensuring its defense, it is obviously in the general interest gradually to lighten the burden necessarily imposed by the arms race on our economies and, by the same token, on the opportunities for development. Therefore the French Government wishes solemnly to reaffirm that it is prepared to participate immediately in any undertaking designed to lead to genuine disarmament, that is to say, to the effective, gradual and controlled destruction of all existing arsenals. It was in this spirit that France gave its support to the idea of convening a world conference which, if it were to include the five nuclear Powers, might create the conditions under which real progress could be made and might strengthen the foundations for the lasting peace that is the highest aspiration of all peoples.
142.	After this brief review of the world picture as it is today, I should like now to come to what is doubtless the basic issue. I refer to the present state of international economic relations and the outlook for those relations. This vital problem does not appear on our agenda, but is should be, quite clearly, the focal point of our concerns, all the more so since the situation which prompted the convening of a special session of the General Assembly this spring has deteriorated markedly in the last four months.
143.	Insecurity is spreading far and wide. The most striking example of this is inflation, which is becoming rampant and to varying degrees affects every country with its attendant woes. All the elements of a world crisis are already present.
144.	The developing countries, those which are not producers of oil or of important raw materials, are obviously those most affected by the rising prices of the products necessary to economic activity. But the majority of the industrialized countries have also been seriously affected, at least for the time being, There are only two or three major countries among us that are sure of having the resources indispensable to the survival of their economies and their populations, come what may, because those resources exist in their own territories. But although such States, unlike the others, do not have to fear strangulation, none, I repeat, none of the Members of our Organization can remain blind to the serious threats to the mechanisms of the world economy, to the flow of production and trade, and therefore, ultimately, to world peace.
145.	The events we are witnessing are, of course, not lacking in positive features. The general redistribution of trump cards held by the highly industrialized nations and the developing nations begun by still disorganized courses of action will be described in history books as a decisive turning point of the era in which we live. This will be true if this redistribution proves itself eventually to be a transition to a new world order, better balanced and more just, and the prelude to an original and fruitful common effort.
146.	Such a redistribution was both necessary and inevitable. My country, which in the past has constantly warned against the dangers inherent in the progressive deterioration of the terms of trade and in the growing gap between the industrial societies and the less favored countries, is the first to recognize that it would have been unhealthy and, ultimately, detrimental to everyone to cling to a system of inadequate remuneration for basic commodities. The prolongation of this system was doubtless one of the causes of the recent price rises.
147.	This puts me in an even better position to say frankly to this Assembly that none of us can allow himself to ignore the urgency and gravity of the problem which the somewhat random nature of those increases presents not only to my country but, I believe, to all of us. Our world community can withstand the severe disruption of equilibrium that has just occurred only if we make a combined effort, on the one hand, to halt the trends towards a breakdown that are beginning to emerge, and, on the other, to achieve a new world order based on mutual consultation and cooperation.
148.	In the spirit of the Charter, which for 30 years has encouraged us to cooperate in order to ensure economic and social progress for our peoples, appreciable efforts have already been made along such lines. The texts adopted on 1 May by the General Assembly during the sixth special session [resolutions 3201 (SVI) and 3202 fSF/j] are in keeping with this tradition of the Organization. Their significance and importance, I feel, lie not so much in the Program of Action that was outlined as in the clear and precise affirmation of the interdependence of all the elements of the world economy.
149.	That the growth of the world economy is currently being compromised and with it the opportunities for development is so obvious as to make it superfluous to stress the need to open up new vistas in cooperation among our States. Together we must define the main lines along which the world economy must operate. In this connexion, the right of the third world countries not only to receive a fairer share of the fruits of economic and world progress but also to influence the choices on which this activity depends cannot be contested. I would add to this the hope that international aid, which is still indispensable, will gradually give way to structural reforms in which the less favored countries should have a voice.
150.	Although the very great majority of the States that we represent have no intention of withdrawing into themselves, they reject the mechanisms of laissez faire, which are erratic and merciless to the weak, and my country, which has championed international cooperation for many long years now, cannot but give them our complete approval on this point. The march towards a better order is, however, incompatible with disregard for economic realities and laws, the solidarity which unites consumer and producer, and, especially, the basic consideration that no one, no matter how powerful he may be, can be sure of gaining lasting advantages by means of unilateral decisions.
151.	Within a country, when one group in society tries to increase its share of the national income and when, on the other hand, other groups try to prevent their share from being reduced, inflation becomes rampant and restores, after a fashion, an often unjust and precarious balance between the claims of each group. Today this is also what is happening in the world's economy. The free rein given to market trends, the exploitation of strong positions, and the setting up of a sliding scale mechanism or of automatic indexing can lead only to a speeding up of the inflationary spiral. Among nations, as within each nation, nothing can take the place of dialog and negotiation among all the parties concerned. The natural framework for this dialog is, of course, the United Nations, and one can only regret that six months after the sixth special session no serious discussion on setting the world's economy in order has been initiated.
152.	The United Nations, and not only its specialized bodies, has a general competence in this matter and is particularly qualified since it both anticipates and reflects the world community of the future to arrive at a truly "integrated" concept of our planet's economy. But this is a tremendous task and the adjustments to be made are numerous and difficult. The "global" approach within the United Nations must be supplemented by efforts at cooperation and consultation on a regional scale which should, of course, take place within an international framework.
153.	It is in this spirit that the member countries of the European Economic Community have, as representatives know, just embarked on what we both call the EuropeanArab dialog with the 20 countries of the League of Arab States. Of course the undertaking is still in its early stages and it would be premature to specify its goals, but I think it is quite natural for me to mention it today in this forum, especially since you, Mr. President, have played and are continuing to play an important and even decisive role in the conception and application of this undertaking.
154.	The new type of cooperation that we are trying to establish between the two groups of countries does set an example and is promising. It is a question of working together, with all the participants on an equal footing, towards social and economic progress, towards entente and rapprochement between the member countries of the European Economic Community and the member countries of the League of Arab States. It is also understood that the undertaking must not interfere with the interests of any country. On the contrary it must, when the time comes, extend its benefits beyond the European Arab group, especially to the regions close to Africa and the Mediterranean.
155.	My hope is that it will be possible to present some results of this undertaking at the forthcoming session of the General Assembly. However, it might be useful, if our partners in the League of Arab States would agree, to inform the United Nations before that time of what developments may have emerged.
156.	It is in the same spirit of cooperation that the European Economic Community participated in the ministerial conference which took place at Kingston, during which a fruitful dialog emerged between the countries of the Community and the Caribbean, African and Pacific States on the major political trends of their future association. The conference also set an example. Innovative formula were introduced which, I have no doubt, will help to create a new style in relations between industrialized and developing nations, and even in the drafting of a new strategy for development.
157.	The European Economic Community and the United Nations are quite clearly called upon to cooperate more and more often. This is why my delegation, speaking on behalf of the Community [A 19701], has asked for an item to be included on the agenda for this session relating to the granting to the Community of observer status within the Organization.
158.	Another example of this cooperation is quite obviously the Community's offer to participate, together with other States, in the urgent measures advocated by the General Assembly at its sixth special session.
159.	Let me say a word about the Organization to conclude my statement. The Charter assigns it the mission of maintaining peace and contributing to the emergence of a world that is more stable and more equitable. Let us not be complacent; the distance we must still travel before this ideal becomes a reality is great. But let us learn to apply to ourselves the severe judgments we sometimes bring to bear on the shortcomings and plodding of the United Nations. The Charter in itself possesses no magic formula, and no change could give it one. The work of the Organization depends primarily on the determination of the Governments represented here.
160.	One cannot reproach the United Nations for having failed to discern the great issues at stake in today's world or for failing with respect to the great questions of the day because of a lack of imagination or indifference. The problems of development, hunger, the sea and population have been dealt with in four world conferences held under the auspices of the United Nations this year. Let us note, however, that the conclusions drawn from these major international meetings sometimes leave us dissatisfied. This is not only because it is difficult to reconcile so many interests and differing viewpoints, even when goodwill is present. It is, perhaps, also because our methods and our procedures could be improved by concentrating on the most important issues and on the search for effective action.
161.	While these international meetings have the advantage of exposing all points of view, the size and number of the meetings pose problems of organization, method and procedure that are quite different from those the smaller, earlier conferences had & solve. There is a great temptation to use certain stratagems in order to finish more quickly, and it is noticeable that States are in no hurry to put into practice recommendations that have not evolved through the conventional process. Let us then try to act in concert genuinely, in the sole interest of the common good. We can do so within the context of the present Charter, whose potential could be more fully realized.
162.	We are living in an age of transition. All around us we find hope, efforts being expended, and the first stages of entente and union, but at the same time we see opposition, and conflict. Which trend will finally prevail? The one that will inevitably lead to our organizing ourselves and unifying ourselves or the one that will lead, albeit temporarily I hope, to hostility, violence and division? Which will prevail?
163.	The future of this world never before so conscious of its potential unity, never before so torn by real divisions is still uncertain. The task of our Organization is to guide it in the right direction, but that is also and primarily the task of each of the States represented here. The choice is either organization and reason, or passion, violence, rivalry and confrontation, and eventually, chaos and misfortune for us all. The simple statement of this choice is sufficient to explain our determination and our faith in the emergence of universal reconciliation.
Mr. President, I thank you for calling upon me at this late hour when the prospect of lunch must be so much more alluring than the thought of another indigestible speech. I can only undertake that I shall not be over-long or take too much of your time.
203.	I must, however, begin by offering the congratulations of the United Kingdom to you, Mr. President, on your election to the presidency of the Assembly, especially as your country has played such a large and important role in the work of the Organization, and we are all looking forward to a period of constructive work under your guidance.
204.	Like others who have spoken, we also welcome two new Members from the Commonwealth Bangladesh and Grenada as well as Guinea- Bissau, the latest country to achieve its independence.
205.	This is the first time I have had the honor of addressing the Assembly and I regret it will not be possible for me to stay after lunchtime. I must invoke the newcomer's privilege of making some remarks, with your permission, about our hopes and aspirations for this Organization.
206.	I start by giving an assurance that it is the firm policy of my Government to give all possible support to the United Nations. We do so because we believe that this body is the best forum in which to come to grips with many of the daunting problems that face mankind.
207.	It should not need an energy crisis, a population crisis, a raw-material crisis, to tell us that the world is shrinking and making us more interdependent. These are by now the cliches of our perorations; we no longer need to prove the point. Yet when action is needed we still do not behave as though we believe it. To say this implies no criticism of this Organization itself.
208.	Too often we use the United Nations as a whipping-boy for our own inability to act in concert in response to a common problem. The weaknesses in international co-operation which exist today are not United Nations weaknesses. The responsibility rests with us, the Member nations, that have willed that the United Nations should work on the basis of the lowest common denominator of agreement between the Member States. This negative consensus for that is what it is sometimes means little more than a wafer-thin formula to paper over our differences without any real meeting of minds. Such a consensus cannot be construed as universal approval. Indeed, because it happens in this way, there are occasions when the words in which we express this negative consensus have no chance of being translated into action because the action proposed does not correspond with realities. 
209.	What we need in order to be able to act together is positive consensus: a determined effort to reach common ground and an equal determination to work together to overcome the political and economic threats to our peoples.
210.	I do not underestimate the difficulties. Our interests are as varied as the nations we represent. But in the past, diverse nations have successfully sunk their differences and combined to face a common enemy. We face common enemies today: inflation, recession and poverty. Let us unite to defeat them.
211.	But if we are to achieve this positive consensus for which I ask, we need not only sound policies; we need the attitude of mind expressed by the then Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Willy Brandt, when he spoke to this Assembly at the twenty-eighth session and said:
".. .we have not come here to use the United Nations as a wailing-wall ... or to make claims we know cannot be met here in any case, Rather have we come to assume our share in the responsibility for world affairs on the basis of our convictions and within the framework of our possibilities" [2128th meeting, para. 6],
It is in that spirit that the United Kingdom Government is determined to bring to this Assembly the political will to make a responsible contribution to solving the problems before us. This will be the evidence of our pledge of support.
212.	Before I came here I took the precaution of reading the deliberations of the preceding session of the General Assembly. In many speeches then as indeed is the case of speeches on this occasion the recurring theme was the progress of detente. Mr. Kissinger referred then [2124th meeting] to a commonality of interests between the United States and the Soviet Union in establishing a broad, web of constructive relationships. Mr. Gromyko said [2126th meeting] and he referred to it again today that we had achieved a shift from an extended period of tension in the world to business-like co-operation. He knows and the Soviet Union knows that since I assumed my present office it has been my firm desire that the United Kingdom should play a full and positive part in fostering such "business-like co-operation" in our bilateral contacts.
213.	On the level of multilateral negotiations, the talks in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and about mutual and balanced force reductions have been moving, to put it politely, at a very slow pace. I hope we can shift both sets of talks into a higher gear so that we can report some positive results before this Assembly meets next.
214.	The talks in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in particular are given sufficient good will and understanding for the concerns and interests of all the participants ripe for an early conclusion. We have always recognized that the talks on mutual and balanced force reductions would be much more complex and long-term. But our aim in both sets of negotiations should be the same, to achieve in Europe an order which would allow our people to live in security and co-operation and at the same time reduce the crippling burden of arms spending.
215.	It would be a triumph indeed if Europe, which too often in this century has been the center of inhumanity and senseless conflict, could set the pattern for a new order of international relations free of war and the threat of war. Fortunately, it is some years since the threat of war between East and West was a major preoccupation of the United Nations; but the complex of new and interrelated problems are in their different ways as serious a threat to us all.
216.	This transfer of our attention has, of course, been brought about by massive and unprecedented increases in the price of oil. On the surface but only on the surface it might appear that there is a. natural difference of interest between those countries which would like to see oil prices reduced and those which wish to keep them at their present levels or indeed to increase them. That is not so. It is in the interests of both producer and consumer alike that the prices of commodities and of manufactured goods should not chase each other upwards in a never ending spiral.
217.	In the meantime, even if, as we hope, prices will not remain at their present peak, we have to face the problem of how to adapt the world's monetary and economic systems to accommodate the vast oil revenues now accruing to certain countries some of which cannot immediately absorb them.
218.	The objective is clear and quite straightforward. It is to marry the revenue of the oil-producing countries with the' technology of the developed countries, so that the increased production and world trade which would result from such a marriage would be used primarily to benefit the developing countries of the world which need them most. Our knowledge of international monetary mechanisms is sufficiently advanced to enable us to do this and to do it in a way that would be fair both to the oil-producing countries themselves and to those that need the resources. New techniques will be required, but it is by no means impossible to create them if there is the political will and an understanding of the problem.
219.	The unprecedented world-wide economic boom of recent years led to higher commodity prices prior to the recent increases in world oil prices. In turn these higher prices for raw materials found their way into the price of manufactured goods, and the resulting inflation coincided with a period in which the Bretton Woods system for controlling international monetary relationships fell into disarray. Collective action is now urgent if we are to ensure that the large surplus oil funds are used constructively to maintain demand and the level of world trade, because inevitably the surpluses of the oil producers are matched by deficits on the part of the consumers.
220.	In our view it will be an error which will have global consequences if the oil consumers try individually to eliminate their oil-induced deficits in advance of international agreement on the disposal and investment of the oil producers. That way lies general recession, increasing poverty and social unrest The surplus must be taken into account. 
Mr. President, I have already had occasion to congratulate you on your unanimous election, and also to welcome the three new Members to our Organization. On the present occasion I am happy to convey to the Secretary- General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, our appreciation of his ceaseless endeavors in the cause of peace and in the fulfillment of the principles and purposes of the Charter. We are fortunate indeed in having him as our Secretary-General today, when his views are needed on collective and co-operative action to tackle the diverse and urgent problems facing mankind at present.
73.	In the 29 years of its existence the United Nations has come to represent the overwhelming majority of the peoples and nations of the world. While this is indeed a matter for satisfaction, it is the few remaining areas of darkness that command our attention. I refer to the flagrant violation of the human rights of the majority of its people by the Government of South Africa, to the blatant refusal of South Africa to vacate Namibia, and to the continuance of the illegal racist regime in Zimbabwe. These continued affronts to the conscience of mankind are nagging reminders that, as long as some members of the human race are in bondage, the others are not wholly free. In our view, this Assembly should therefore consider more effective means of compelling these regimes practicing racism to respond positively to the collective will of the world represented by the United Nations.
74.	It is a matter of particular satisfaction to us to welcome the new wind of change in Portugal. Guinea-Bissau has attained independence and world recognition by admission to our Organization. We welcome the installation of an interim Government in Mozambique representing the will and aspirations of its people, and we look forward to welcoming Mozambique soon in our Organization as an independent and sovereign member. This is an irreversible trend and we are confident that the people of Angola will also win their freedom soon in conditions of peace and honor. India is appreciative of the decision of the present Government of Portugal to liquidate its colonial empire. This decision will enable Portugal to assume its proper place in the world of today, a place befitting its distinct history and rich culture. I am glad to say that Portugal and India have decided to re-establish diplomatic relations and to develop cultural relations between the two countries.
75.	Now I should like to turn my attention to the areas of conflict. Recent events in Cyprus remind us of the fatal danger of neglecting, until too late,, the potential causes of conflict. In 1960 we saw the freeing of Cyprus from colonial rule and its birth as a sovereign, independent and non-aligned State, whose bi national character was guaranteed by some external Powers. In retrospect, this curious system of external guarantees has proved to be unwise in principle and self-defeating in practice. Recently, one external intervention led to another and a threat to world peace and security was thus created. It is the people of Cyprus who suffered greatly as a consequence and all our sympathies are with them in this moment of crisis and uncertainty in their lives. But the fact that all States without exception have declared their respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of non-aligned Cyprus is a good augury, for it provides the essential elements for a durable structure of peace and a return to constitutionality. We welcome the negotiations taking place directly between the leaders of the two communities in Cyprus which have been arranged with the assistance of the Secretary-General. We hope that their talks will also encompass future internal constitutional arrangements, and that agreement can be reached at an early date so that the withdrawal of foreign forces now in Cyprus becomes possible. The non-aligned countries have already declared their willingness to be available for any assistance that they can render.
76.	The situation in the Middle East may freeze into another period of neglect, if the momentum towards a solution of the basic problems slows down. Only the rapid and full implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) can lead to a just and enduring peace. The restoration of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people is another cornerstone in the structure of a lasting peace. Israel's refusal to vacate Arab territories captured as a result of aggression is a continuing provocation to the Arab States and negates the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. If the catastrophe of another war in the Middle East is to be avoided, Israel should end its aggression and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people should be restored to them.
77.	The war in Cambodia shows no signs of ending, which is a matter of deep concern and anguish for us. In South Viet Nam, violations of the Paris Agreement continue to take place, with the legacies of external interference persisting and jeopardizing the prospects of early implementation of the provisions of the Agreement. How much longer are the peoples of IndoChina destined to suffer the ravages of war with all its frightful weapons? In South Viet Nam international efforts should be directed to the fulfillment of the constitutional provisions of the Paris Agreement. The people of Cambodia should be allowed to determine their future free from external interference and in conditions of peace and security. In Laos we welcome the formation of the Provisional Government of National Union, which is a testimony to the wisdom and statesmanship of the Laotian- leaders. We hope that this development, which has terminated several years of hostilities, will create conditions of peace and progress for the Laotian people.
78.	In our part of the world, I am happy to report that tangible progress has been made in creating an atmosphere of good neighborliness. The Simla Agreement of 3 July 1972 provides a good and common basis for India and Pakistan to turn away from a period of confrontation and conflict to one of peace and co-operation. We have made special efforts to implement the Simla Agreement and, in spite of unfortunate delays, the two countries have concluded some agreements designed to normalize relations. The latest agreement signed at Islamabad on 14 September 1974 provides for the restoration of communications and travel facilities, and we hope that the progress achieved so far will lead to more agreements in other fields and to an era of peace and prosperity for the peoples of India and Pakistan.
79.	We are actively engaged with our other neighbors to develop and extend bilateral and mutually beneficial co-operation in newer fields. The maritime boundary agreement with Sri Lanka is a significant example. Similarly, mutually satisfactory agreements on borders and other long-pending matters have been concluded with Indonesia, Burma and Bangladesh. Our relations with our other neighbors, Afghanistan, Bhutan and Nepal, are characterized by the spirit of mutual understanding and the desire to co-operate for our mutual benefit.
80.	Our underground peaceful nuclear explosive experiment of 18 May 1974 must be seen in the context of our endeavor, at the national level, to develop our natural resources and capacities to the fullest extent for the benefit of our people. The international community has long recognized that nuclear explosive technology can be of great value in the development process. The non-aligned countries had also stressed this in the Declaration adopted by the Third Conference of Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Countries, held at Lusaka from 8 to 10 September 1970. We have no intention of making nuclear weapons. I wish to reiterate once again in this forum our firm and consistent policy to use nuclear energy and technology solely for peaceful purposes.
81.	I should now like to say a few words about the areas of challenge that face the world community. Since the end of the last world war, the principal challenge to mankind has been the discovery of the basis for lasting world peace and security. In recent years, we have seen the evolution of a period of detente and a general relaxation of tensions among the great Powers. We welcome this development as a positive contribution to removing dangers of global conflict. However, the process of detente between the great Powers will have more meaning for the rest of the world if it takes into account the interests of all countries and if the benefits of detente are used to meet the challenges that face mankind, especially disarmament and development.
82.	Disarmament has been the subject of continuous discussion in multilateral forums since the days of the League of Nations. But progress was slow, and the arms race entered a qualitatively new phase with the stockpiling of nuclear weapons to such an alarming extent that they are capable, if used, of destroying their targets five times over and obliterating all signs of modern civilization. India feels that nuclear dis-armament should receive the highest priority in our deliberations, for it provides the key not only to the prevention of wars of mass destruction but also to the release of resources for tackling what the Secretary-General has called the other "ancient enemies of mankind poverty, disease, natural disaster" [A/9601/Add.I]. Progress towards disarmament is possible only if nuclear-weapon States abjure all nuclear weapons and accept equal obligations with the rest of the world community. We support the early convening of a world disarmament conference after adequate preparation and with the participation of all States.
83.	The holding of the Caracas session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea was an event of outstanding importance. Significant progress was made, as nearly 150 countries worked to reconcile their interests, which were sometimes widely divergent. As a developing country with a long coast-line, India attaches special importance to this .Conference. With several years of preparatory work behind us, it. is our hope that further progress will be made towards an equitable and universally acceptable treaty on the law of the sea during the third session of the Conference to be held in Geneva next year.
84.	During this year there have been major changes in the international economic scene. This world body dealt with the problems of development not only in the sixth special session held earlier this year but also in the World Population Conference which has just concluded in Bucharest, and it will deal with them further in the World Food Conference which is to be held in November. We are particularly appreciative of the fact that for the first time population questions have been accepted as an integral part of the developmental process. We hope that the World Food Conference will be a first step in tackling, at the international level, an important problem which so far has been neglected by the international community.
85.	The problems of development will acquire ever greater urgency and importance with the rapid depletion of natural resources and the increasing population of the world. They are already assuming global proportions, and their effects will be felt everywhere. They cannot, be solved nationally or regionally, because there is already a growing and irreversible trend of interdependence among nations. Only global solutions can cope with global problems. Every problem today is virtually a world problem and calls for a world response.
86.	The earth's resources are finite, and so is its capacity to absorb wastes. The world is in the grip of economic forces that appear to be uncontrollable. There is rampant inflation as well as stagnation in production. These phenomena have aggravated an already iniquitous situation with extremes of poverty and wealth in the world. In some parts of the world there seem to be no limits to the appetite for consumption, while in other countries millions of people are short of even the essentials of simple and plain living^ such as food, clothing, housing and medicine. The future growth of the developing countries is at the mercy of the high world prices of fertilizers, fuel and industrial goods. What are the global options available in this grave economic situation? It is not enough for the affluent countries to confine their concern to monetary fluctuations. There is an imperative need to help the countries most seriously affected by the current economic crisis. Any long-term global balance between demand and supply and natural resources must take into account, first and foremost, the requirements of those countries.
87.	We welcome the statement of the Secretary- General in the thought-provoking introduction to his report that "it is an underlying assumption of the United Nations that no problem of human relations is insoluble [ibid.]. It is in that spirit that we view the decisions of the sixth special session which are designed to pave the way to a new international economic order. While we appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-General in trying to maintain the momentum generated by the special session, we note that he has himself pointed out that "failure to sustain international action and collective responsibility may easily put in question the actual survival of millions of people" [ibid.].
88.	An emergency operation has been entrusted to the Secretary-General to provide immediate practical assistance to the most seriously affected countries, which have been rendered unable to meet the mounting costs of their essential imports [resolution 3202 (S-VI), chap. X], The responsibility for their present predicament is clearly not their own; they have been reduced to this precarious situation by economic events outside their control. In recognition of this fact, the sixth special session decided that emergency measures were necessary for assisting these countries, and it also envisaged the necessity for medium-term assistance to them. However, we are disappointed at the offers received so far of help for these countries. If tragic consequences to many countries and general disillusionment as to the effectiveness of international co-operation are to be averted, assistance must be forthcoming quickly and in adequate measure.
89.	Perhaps at no time before in human history has mankind been confronted with problems of the present scope and scale. And at no time before has man been so conscious of the unity and common destiny of his own kind. Nor has he ever been in a better position than now to regulate his resources, his consumption and his environment in such a manner as to meet his material and spiritual needs. There is no forum more appropriate than the United Nations for meeting to the full extent the challenges facing us. There is no better time than the present, and the lead can only come from those who are blessed with the means to do so.
At the outset of my remarks, I wish to associate myself with all those who have expressed sorrow and sympathy at the disaster which has befallen Honduras.
213.	Next, a special word of congratulations to the new Members of the United NationsBangladesh, Guinea-Bissau and Grenada. The Jewish people, which was deprived of its independence for hundreds of years, is, perhaps more than any other, in a position to value the significance of national sovereignty and spiritual freedom. In the name of Israel and its people I wish them prosperity and progress.
214.	Likewise, I cannot refrain from extending my warm greetings to Portugal, which has chosen the path of decolonization and of its own liberation from the burdens of empire.
215.	And now, turning from those who have gained their freedom to those who have not, I am in duty bound, both from a human and a Jewish point of view, it draw the attention of this Assembly, and, thereby, that of world opinion, to the suffering and distress of a small Jewish community numbering 4,500 souls, all that is left of the ancient Jewish community of Syria, which is subjected to unceasing oppression.
216.	Human rights are indivisible, and the freedom of the individual concerns us all. I am "my brother's keeper": it is in this spirit of international solidarity that I express the hope that the Jewish community of Syria will, as an act of humanity, be finally allowed to go.
217.	In turning now to the situation of another Jewish community -the Jews of the Soviet Union, numbering more than 3 millionI voice the hope that the Soviet Government will recognize and respect the national rights of this Jewish group and permit those who so wish to leave for Israel and be reunited with their families and their people. The Jewish people, divided a? it is between East and West, has always been the first and principal victim of wars, both hot and cold, and is second to none in its yearning for peace and detente. Conflict with Powers great and small is not our desire, but we can neither keep silent nor rest until the right of every Jew to go to Israel is recognized.
218.	The Soviet Union, as a multinational State, cannot indeed it has no right to ignore the aspirations of members of the Jewish national group to full national life in their historic homeland. It is not possible to solve the problem of the rights of the Jewish people in the Soviet Union, a problem anomalous from the national point of view, by means anomalous in human and moral terms. The granting of permission to go to Israel to those who want to go will not only solve an agonizing Jewish problem which is unique in human history, but, I believe, will also provide the solution for a Soviet problem with which the Soviet Government has struggled for many years.
219.	In expressing appreciation for what has already been done, I appeal to the Soviet Government to show greater generosity, to cease harassing those who have applied to emigrate, to release the prisoners of Zion, to open the gates, and they will earn the praises of civilized men everywhere for their humanity.
220.	Our world is at a crossroads: on the one hand, affluence, waste and indifference; on the other, starvation, short expectation of life and untold suffering. Each of the States Members of the United Nations, and the Organization as a whole, must, as soon as possible, base its economic, technological and political cooperation on the concept of one world, all of whose parts and policies are interconnected. If not, the most gloomy of prophecies on the fate of humankind will be realized, and this at a time when man has reached the heights of scientific and technological advance. Unlimited resources to eliminate starvation and sickness are at hand. What is lacking is the goodwill, human responsibility and governmental understanding to establish a new international system which will advance mankind to lives of greater dignity and happiness, lives without war, lives of plenty and spiritual satisfaction. To this end it would be well to examine anew the existing international in order to see whether it is able to cope with these great and urgent tasks.
221.	Social justice is a concept which is no longer confined to the boundaries of States. Our world is now faced with stark alternatives: to proceed along the false path, whose end cannot be seen, of a widening gap between rich and poor nations; or to embark on constructive international cooperation.
222.	As Jawaharlal Nehru so wisely put it: "The law of life should not be the competition of acquisitiveness but cooperation, the good of each contributing to the good of all."
223.	The alternatives faced by our generation are cooperation or decline. {Let us cooperate. Israel, though small in size and limited in resources, and itself still in the stage of development, is doing its best to cope with the manifold problems of a poor and semiarid land, and with the integration of hundreds of thousands of refugees. Nevertheless it has in the past provided such assistance as it could to other developing countries in all continents in the fields of science, education and economic and social development, and will gladly extend such aid in the future.
224.	One year has passed since the Yom Kippur War -a bloody encounter started by Egypt and Syria, reinforced by contingents from other Arab States, and enjoying the material and political support of the Soviet Union. More than 2,500 Israeli soldiers lost their lives in that war, more than 12,000 Egyptians and more than 3,000 Syrians and others. Most of them died in the bloom of youth and left bereaved parents, widows and orphans behind them. Israeli prisoners were savagely maltreated in Syrian and Egyptian prisons. More than 40,000 men were wounded, and many permanently disabled. The agony of bereavement of the widows, of the orphans and of the disabled is shared equally by the peoples on both sides of the lines.
225.	Following this war the Security Council adopted resolution 338 (1973), paragraph 3 of which reads:
"The Security Council
"Decides that, immediately and concurrently with the ceasefire, negotiations shall start between the parties concerned under appropriate auspices aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in the Middle East."
226.	It is not to the credit of the Security Council that it was only in October 1973 -24 years after the signature in 1949 of the General Armistice Agreements between Israel, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria- that it specifically called for peace negotiations. That, at any rate, was progress and it is better late than never. But why did so important and essential a resolution have to wait until the end of the sanguinary war of October last?
227.	The disengagement agreements between Israel and Egypt, and between Israel and Syria, also represent a measure of progress. Since the 1967 Arab Summit Conference in Khartoum, with its triple negatives -no peace, no recognition, no negotiations- this was a first positive step. It was taken in the light of the experience of the war, and as a result of the constructive initiative of the United States and of the remarkable efforts of its Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger.
228.	But here, too, the same grave question presents itself: why did that come so late, and why only after bloodshed? After all, partial arrangements could have been reached without war, and before the war, both in the Suez Canal area and on the Golan Heights. In 1971 Israel responded affirmatively to the American proposal for proximity talks for a partial agreement with Egypt, and there was no reason why, as time went on, we should not have responded in the same way to proposals for similar talks with the other neighboring States. It was the other side that rejected the proposal and thus killed that constructive initiative for no good reason. In the event we did finally have face-to-face talks, that is to say, something more than proximity talks, at the first session of the Geneva Conference, at the negotiations between Israel and Egypt at kilometer 101 on the CairoSuez road, and on the occasion of the signature of the agreement with Syria in Geneva. Why then should this have been done at the cost of tens of thousands of casualties on both sides?
229.	If further proof were required, the October War showed clearly that there is not, there cannot be, and there never will be, a military solution of the ArabIsrael conflict, which persists beyond all reason and beyond all political realism: a conflict which saps the very marrow from the bones of all the peoples of the area and, despite the extensive resources of our area, debilitates their economies and their societies.
230.	Let us look at the facts. In this war the aggressors enjoyed three marked advantages which, under normal circumstances, should have been decisive: first, overwhelming strength in manpower and modern sophisticated weaponry; secondly, initiative; and, thirdly, surprise. Yet despite these great advantages the citizen army of Israel rapidly overcame the effect of the surprise, halted the forward movement of the attacking forces and passed over to a bold counteroffensive which brought Israel troops well beyond the former ceasefire lines in the Golan Heights and into large areas to the west of the Suez Canal, thus surrounding the Egyptian Third Army. I do not think that any particular military expertise is required to realize what would have happened to the aggressors' forces if, at that stage, the Security Council had not hurriedly called for a ceasefire, which, of course, it did not do earlier, before it became clear that the wheel had turned in Israel's favor.
231.	That is the essential difference between an Israeli victory and an Arab victory. If the Arab armies had triumphed, the world would have witnessed an act of genocide, whereas the Arab defeat was limited to the field of battle, and in fact opened the window to the beginnings of reason and to a small step, a very small step, in the political sphere.
232.	If, despite the advantages which the Arab armies had in manpower, armaments, initiative and surprise, these were the results of the October War, what could another war bring, besides more victims, and more suffering? Another war like that would only create new complex problems the solution of which will be infinitely more difficult.
233.	I do not mention these things with joy, but with sorrow. I do not wish to exult in the Israeli victory nor to embarrass Egypt and Syria. On the contrary, at this time when it is the duty of us all to make a special effort to advance towards a political settlement, it is incumbent that all refrain from provocative statements and disparaging slogans. I recall these things only because I want to repeat, and to emphasize, that there can be no military solution to this pernicious conflict. Reinforcement of the armaments of the Arab countries might encourage new aggression but it cannot decide the issue in a new war.
234.	After the October War, there can again be no doubt that not a single one of the problems encompassed in the ArabIsraeli dispute can be solved by war, and that, in the same way, there is no problem, including the question of the independent identity of the Palestinians, which cannot be solved by sincere negotiations between the parties. Let us therefore do our utmost to ensure that the unnecessary war of Yom Kippur 1973 will be the last war ever to be fought between Arab and Israeli.
235.	Israel has naturally drawn its conclusions from the last war. But we wish to continue to progress along the political road, which opened after the war. However, if a new war is forced on us, we shall be ready. I hope and pray that our neighbors have also drawn conclusions from October 1973, and that they agree with us that it is time to finally abandon the course of armed force so as to devote their efforts consistently, patiently and seriously to the political option.
236.	The disengagement agreements between Israel and Egypt on the one hand and between Israel and Syria on the other, in which the emergency forces of the United Nations under the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral are playing a praiseworthy part, may provide a suitable opening. These agreements are not only military in character; they also have their political aspects.
237.	First, the very fact of negotiations, sometimes indirect and sometimes direct, is a political and psychological step forward for all those who desire peace in our area and in the world.
238.	Secondly, an emended period of tranquility at the fronts has also made a contribution to the creation of the new climate and also possibly of a new dynamic for a political solution.
239.	Thirdly, the disengagement agreements include the following paragraph:
"This agreement is not regarded by Egypt and Israel as a final peace agreement. It constitutes a first step toward a final, just and durable peace according to the provisions of Security Council resolution 338 (1973) and within the framework of the Geneva Conference."5
There is a similar paragraph in the IsraelSyria agreement.6
240.	But the disengagement agreements and mutual observance of the ceasefire are not enough. We must go forward with negotiations, without prior conditions, keeping constantly in mind the idea of peace and mutual tolerance in order to plant the seeds of trust which are vital for the creation of an atmosphere of conciliation, compromise and understanding.
241.	This objective is at cross purposes with the continuation of a state of belligerency, which not only contains within itself the dangers of renewal of hostilities, with all their horror and suffering, but also diverts the major part of the human resources and the wealth of the area to the buildup and maintenance of huge armies at the cost of its social and economic development. This useless aberration has already held back an entire generation, and its persistence will cause further suffering to millions.
242.	There is a historical paradox here. The Middle East is one of the richest areas of the globe. It has natural wealth, fertile soil, abundant water for irrigation, international lines of communication, incomparable sites for pilgrimage and tourism and old, historic peoples possessed of ancient cultures and modern skills alike. But this bountifully endowed area is still, from the social and economic point of view, one of the most backward in the world.
243.	It would not be difficult to prove that the expenditure of vast treasure on weapons of war and on the maintenance of huge armies is one of the main factors in this backwardness. The Soviet Union is doing no service to the people of the area when it counts weapons of war among its main exports to some of the countries of the Middle East as if these, and not means of production and technological agreements, can raise these nations from their misery. This Soviet policy, which is inspired by a one-sided, antiIsrael attitude and by incitement to intransigence and inflexibility, is one of the principal causes of tension in the Middle East and is used deliberately as a major means of Soviet implantation in a number of the countries of the area at the expense of their sovereignty. It is a policy that stands in stark contradiction to the spirit and objectives of detente, on which the hopes of all of us rest.
244.	I am bound to state with emphasis that either detente will be global and apply to the Middle East as well, or there will be no detente at all. Detente which does not include the Middle East is without political or strategic meaning.
245.	Peace and cooperation between the peoples of our region are needed not only to strengthen our economies and develop our societies but, not less vitally, to ensure the true independence of all peoples of the Middle East. There is no validity in a peace which serves the interests of one side only; and there is no substance in a peace dictated by one side to another or by a third party extraneous to both. Such a peace will always be precarious and temporary. As Albert Einstein once said: "Peace cannot be kept by force; it can be achieved only by understanding". Only a peace founded on respect for the interests of both parties can be genuine, stable and durable. The geo-strategic conditions which have evolved in the Middle East make such a peace possible, that is to say, a peace which will provide on the one hand a satisfactory solution for the interests of all the Arab States and also for the needs of the Palestinians, and on the other a solution for Israel's vital need for defensible borders.
246.	Israel would be prepared to give favorable consideration to a significant territorial compromise, but it cannot compromise on its security. In short, I sincerely believe that it is possible to achieve peace agreements which will serve the reasonable interests of the parties to the dispute and will open a new chapter in the history of each of the States of the Middle East and of the whole region. But up to now the Arab States have, regrettably, pursued a sterile policy of "not an inch", while Israel has set her face towards peace, a peace of equitable compromise, even though it might be painful to both sides. In order to reach this lofty objective we would prefer negotiations for a full and integral peace agreement. But, if it transpires that the conditions are not yet ripe for this, the possibilities might be examined of reaching interim agreements, based on compromise, which will put an end to belligerency in its various components, that is to say, interim agreements providing for effective mutual security arrangements that in the course of time will lead to negotiations for a peace treaty which will determine, inter alia, the final borders.
247.. Israel is cognizant of the existence of the question of Palestinian identity. It holds that it can and should be resolved in the context of the settlement of the dispute with its neighbor to the east. It is there, on both sides of the Jordan, that the great majority of the Palestinian population is concentrated. Moreover, most of the citizens of Jordan are Palestinians and most of the Palestinians are Jordanian citizens. It is also a fact that the area east of the Jordan is an integral part of the historic land of Israel or Palestine and that it is already the national home of the Palestinians. If there is any ethnic significance in the Palestinian concept it applies equally to the peasant, the townsman and the Bedouin east of the Jordan and to the peasant, the townsman and the Bedouin to its west. It is in the light of these considerations that the Israel Government, on 21 July 1974, resolved that:
"The Government will work towards negotiations for a peace agreement with Jordan.
"The peace will be founded on the existence of two independent States onlyIsrael, with united Jerusalem as its capital, and a JordanianPalestinian Arab State, east of Israel, within borders to be determined in negotiations between Israel and Jordan. In this State, the independent identity of the Jordanian and Palestinian Arabs can find expression in peace and good neighborliness with Israel."
248.	However, the Palestinian community in general must in no way be equated with the terrorist organizations. From my own personal acquaintance with this community I refuse to identify it, or at least its great majority, with the terrorist group known as the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], which is not a national liberation movement but the roof organization of disunited and splintered terrorist groups whose pretensions are not supported by the broad masses of the Palestinian population. It is a fact that more Arabs than Israelis have been killed by these organizations. It is also a fact that more terrorists have been killed in the armed clashes between regular Arab forces and the terror gangs and between the rival terror gangs themselves than by Israeli security forces.
249.	These facts are obvious to anybody who cares to examine them. We refuse to recognize the PLO and we will not recognize it, because of its doctrines and of its deeds alike. The charter of Palestine, which embodies the political ideology of the PLO, stands in direct contradiction to the Charter of the United Nations. It denies absolutely the right of Israel to exist and postulates its destruction as a principal objective.
250.	This ideology is accompanied by the criminal methods of warfare used by the organizations which make up the PLO, methods such as indiscriminate terror, deliberate murder of women and children, pupils and teachers, athletes at the Olympic Games, passengers on a Sw.ss airliner, chance visitors and Jewish and Christian pilgrims at airports, and Arab women workers in Galilee. In reality the situation here is not that of a subject people trying to liberate itself with its own underground forces, but of gangs of desperadoes imposing themselves on a people and attempting to form and dominate it by means of the destruction of another people: this at a time when there is ample room for two States, Jewish and Arab, to coexist in peace in the historic land of Israel or Palestine on both sides of the Jordan, their common border to be determined by negotiations.
251.	It is of course no secret that with the* parliamentary situation existing in the General Assembly, the preconceived ideas held by a great number of those taking part here, and the irrelevant considerations which guide many delegations, a majority might concede the PLO demands. A resolution that would do so will be regarded by Israel as an arbitrary resolution, one impinging on its fundamental rights, illegal and not binding in any way. Every representative here would reject a resolution which strikes at the foundation of his country's being. One cannot ask of any nation to agree to its own elimination or to commit suicide.
252.	Understanding for the needs of the Palestinians -certainly; satisfaction of the demands of arch murderers who appoint themselves as saviors- decidedly not.
253.	I regret that many Members of the United Nations do not delve into this problem thoroughly, with the consequence that, either deliberately or through misunderstanding, they reward these murderers and in so doing stoke the fires in the Middle East. Israel will not submit to violence and terror. Terrorism is an infectious disease which knows no national frontiers. Many States have already paid the price of submission to terrorism, and I am afraid that the last word has not been said on the subject. Following the latest terrorist attacks in Paris and at the Hague, President Valery Giscard d'Estaing said: "Violence, which is sometimes presented and justified as an avant-garde act, is nothing but the rising to the surface of those depths of barbarism and primitive cruelty of which humanity has devoted all its efforts to rid itself." These are trenchant words, but there is need for action and for courageous cooperation in order to put an end to manifestations of terror before further disasters occur.
254.	The essence of the PLO is terror. It is no coincidence that whenever a concrete proposal for a political solution is put forward, the PLO leadership rises up against any such peace initiative. Its insistence on including the question of Palestine in the agenda of this General Assembly session is designed, above all, to destroy the prospects of the political efforts at the very beginning. A debate on this matter cannot fail to poison the international atmosphere. Acceptance of the PLO demands may well condemn the prospects of the negotiating process to failure, just when the first ray of light has been glimpsed on the horizon.
255.	Palestinians who wish to give constructive expression to their independent identity can be helped to do so in the context of the negotiations with Jordan. Moreover, I would not agree to a genera! settlement without including in it the satisfaction of the needs of the Palestinians. It is, after all, not Israel which has prevented the crystallization of what is known as "Palestinian identity". To the extent that such a desire existed among the Palestinians, it is the Arab States that have frustrated it during all these years. If not, how can one explain the fact that during 19 years of Arab rule in the Gaza Strip and on the West Bank, this identity never achieved any definite form or full expression?
256.	The joint communique by Egypt, Syria and the PLO in Cairo, on 21 September 1974, also deals a blow to the prospects of a constructive solution to the issue of Palestinian identity. In the same way that the PLO bends all ,ts efforts to prevent political progress in the area, certain Arab States are whittling down the hopes for a solution of the Palestine question by granting the terrorist organizations the monopoly of representation of the Palestinians, when they know perfectly well that these organizations are not able to be a party to negotiations because of what they are.
257.	There is no sadder example of the heartless attitude of the Arab Governments than the freeze they have imposed on the status of the 1948 refugees. It is true that many of them have been absorbed in the economies of the Arab States in which they now live, but there has been a deliberate policy to prevent a constructive solution to this sore problem in order to exploit human suffering for political and propaganda ends. If the problem in itself were not so sad I would say that there is nothing more ludicrous than the annual fundraising efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to make up the deficit in its budget, and this at a time when the Arab oil States command the biggest monetary reserves in the world.
258.	Israel did not adopt this course-not towards the 600,000 Jewish refugees who fled the Arab States stripped of all their possessions and not towards the survivors of the millions of Jews destroyed by the Nazis, with the blessing of the Mufti Haj Amin el Husseini, who found refuge among his own kind in Nazi Berlin and Fascist Rome. All of these were fully absorbed in Israel -economically, socially and culturally.
259.	In the light of the vast economic opportunities which now exist in the Middle East, the refugee problem must and can be solved. Far more difficult refugee situations in other parts of the world have been solved long ago. Given goodwill -without which no problem can be resolved- the question of compensation for both Arab and Jewish refugees can be settled. Israel is contributing and will continue to contribute its share in the solution of this painful human problem.
260.	There are those who foresee the approach of war on this or that front in the Middle East. As far as Israel is concerned, we shall faithfully observe the ceasefire and the separation of forces agreements, on a reciprocal basis, until they are replaced or supplemented by new agreements. But in the same way as we shall display the utmost goodwill in seeking to achieve balanced and constructive progress in the political sphere, we shall neither submit nor lend ourselves to the blackmail of threats of war or even of war itself.
261.	We want to see progress in the efforts to achieve a political solution, both as an end in itself and as a means of avoiding war. In the face of the rapid rearmament of the other side, we shall strengthen our forces in order to prevent war or to gain victory if, God forbid, it should break out anew. At the same time, we shall continue to seek a settlement of the conflict by peaceful means. In other words, we shall prepare for the worst and hope and work for the best.
262.	In one of his recent speeches, President El Sadat said that our generation must be satisfied with the end of belligerency and that the treaty of peace would be signed by the coming generation. I am astonished that so distinguished a statesman should renounce the great and historic opportunity to bring about peace and cooperation. I trust that this was not his last word. Peace should not be postponed to the next generation. It is the duty of the generations which have taken part in the war to overcome their differences and to assure peace for their descendants. Let us all do our best to secure peace speedily in our time. It is possible. In order to achieve it, one needs perhaps more courage than is needed for the decision to go to war. Let us all demonstrate both wisdom and courage for the benefit of all the peoples of our region.
Mr. President, I congratulate you most warmly on your election to the President's chair, for which your qualities and long experience as Foreign Minister of your country so admirably fit you. I wish you well in the direction of our business, which includes many important and some difficult issues. The year of your presidency will be an important year. We shall in fact be getting to grips with matters which are central to the future welfare, and even the existence, of human society.
4.	First of all, I must speak of the recent tragic death of our beloved Prime Minister, Mr. Norman Kirk, who last year spoke for New Zealand in this debate. He was a good and humane man -a champion of the poor and the weak. We were deeply touched and comforted by the sympathy shown to us by people from all over the world at the time of our loss. Such solidarity occurs only when we lose a leader who has risen above local concerns, as he did one who has worked to advance the cause of the whole human family. The response to his death suggests that multitudes hunger for new attitudes among the leaders of nations. New Zealand will miss him greatly. But my Government will still try to bring to reality his personal vision of a new world social and economic order. We shall continue to strive, as Mr. Kirk did, to translate into international terms the vision of a decent and humane society which motivates our policy at home. Our goal remains to help to harness the great resources and skills of the people of this planet, so that everyone, not just a few, will have a chance to live as human beings should. We shall continue to work to strengthen the United Nations as a center for harmonizing the actions of nations and for protecting the rights of the smaller nations.
5.	The last three years have witnessed a remarkable change in national attitudes. In 1972, the year of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, held at Stockholm, the international community became aware of, and accepted the existence of certain physical limits to economic growth: limits to the availability of natural resources and of food; limits to the amount of pollution that can be discharged into the environment before inevitable and unwelcome consequences follow. In 1973 the world began to receive sharp, warnings of some of these physical limits, particularly in the supply of energy and of food. It became painfully apparent that our ability through existing institutions to make efficient and humane use of the world's talents and resources for the common good was more limited than we had thought and more limited than we could put up with.
6.	In 1974 it became obvious that the world had better make a more serious effort to understand the interdependence of all peoples and all States. At a number of historic conferences the nations at last started to study realistically the fundamental changes that will be needed if we are to bring about the new order that the world requires a new order that will ensure a more equitable use of the world's resources to meet the demands of the future. These conferences included the sixth special session of the General Assembly, on raw materials and development, the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, the World Population Conference, 1974, and, soon, the World Food Conference. The common theme of these conferences was, and will be, interdependence. Whatever subject is studied, the same lesson emerges: we are one people, we are all one of another; and if we ignore that truth all of us will suffer and none of us may have a future in any meaningful sense of the word at all. At one time only visionaries and preachers spoke in such terms. Now the message has spread to the so-called practical people.
7.	Governments, in their concern about the state of the planet, are having to look up from problems of local tension and conflict which are themselves hard enough to solve and to face fundamental issues affecting the very survival of humanity. The great issues of today are population, food, energy, natural resources, the environment and the embracing need for an economic order which will enable all people to realize their full potential as human beings. For the immediate and foreseeable future these constitute the agenda these will be the primary concerns of the international community and of the United Nations. Our success in dealing with them will largely determine the climate in which relations between States will develop in the next decade.
8.	Detente is not just a question of political relations between the great Powers. True, detente must be based on a general acceptance of the interdependence of the great Powers and the small, of developed and developing nations. It must be based on the willingness of all of us to work together to solve the problems about which I have spoken. What alternative is in fact open to us?
9.	To deal first with the subject of food, the shortage of food is growing worse. The international community has recognized the urgent need to act and to deal with the situation. Without food there can be no human energy. The World Food Conference will be a vitally important meeting. World food stocks have sunk to the lowest level in 50 years. We are now living literally on a hand-to-mouth basis. The assessment prepared for the World Food Conference has indicated that there will be a very significant food deficit in developing countries in the 1980s. Others have forecast the possibility of mass starvation by the end of the century. As a matter pf Immediate anxiety, a grave food shortage looms next winter. Weather conditions have reduced the harvests in the United States and Canada, and, therefore, the possibility of their being used, as they so often have been, as a backstop. The drought in the Sahel has brought famine to Africa. Further shortages seem likely to hit countries in Asia.
10.	Weather is one cause of these troubles but nations are also at fault. The institutions for producing and marketing and distributing food have failed us. Above all, they have failed those countries and those people on the lowest incomes. There is an enormous unused potential for food production, but the international community has not yet devised ways of sharing its resources and skills for the benefit of all. The World Food Conference must provide the framework for such co-operation. If a crisis situation is developing, there will be a tendency to concentrate on short-term food aid. A world food security arrangement, which has so far eluded our efforts, is more necessary than ever be-fore. We must ensure that arrangements are made for sufficient stores of food, so that people do not starve in the emergencies which past experience teaches us will unfortunately occur from time to time.
11.	The world, however, cannot just rely on the traditional food producers, There is a fundamental imbalance in food production. The answer is not to produce more and more food in the rich countries and ship it off as aid to distant parts. We must give top priority to increasing national production in developing countries. In many regions there are untapped resources of land and water. These can and must be utilized to expand food production. It is essential that the World Food Conference produce arrangements that will transfer agricultural technology to developing countries and increase the supply of the agricultural inputs they must have: money, energy, fertilizer, seeds, chemicals and equipment.
12.	Most of New Zealand's special expertise is in the varied field of agriculture. We have shaped our development assistance and technical co-operation according to programs to make it available to others who need and want it. In the last year over 30 per cent of our bilateral aid involved the transfer of agricultural technology, materials, equipment and training. In providing this aid we are making a strong effort to ensure that it is practical and literally down to earth. Our friends in the South Pacific tell us that in the past years their islands have been nearly buried by feasibility studies, surveys and reports by international experts. They have been studied and surveyed beyond all bearing. What they want now is action. So do we. We do not underestimate the value of research. Our own agricultural success has depended on it very much indeed. But we think that if production is to be increased, as it should be, this will be done by men prepared to dirty their hands in the field, and not by those who polish the seat of a chair in a distant office. We for our part try to avoid inflicting on other people chair polishers disguised as experts. And we hope that the students from other countries whom we train in New Zealand will get the message that countries are developed only by hard work and effort, and that workers are deserving of equal respect whether they wear collars and ties or just shirts.
13.	As a major agricultural exporter, New Zealand certainly shares the interest of developing countries and other States in the orderly marketing and distribution of food. We are constantly working for the elimination of barriers to trade and for the creation of stable markets at fair prices. Obviously in this area we are working in our own interest; but we believe also that we are working in the interests of others just as much as in our own. The World Food Conference should provide constructive guidance to the multilateral trade negotiations at present under way. We hope it will also give the incentive to remove the present stumbling blocks to progress in these negotiations. This is an area of activity in negotiations in agricultural trade that is usually dull and hard, and greatly complicated by national politics. But if food is to be produced in much greater quantity and it must be if the rapidly growing number of people are to be fed we must get an imaginative breakthrough in this vital field.
14.	I have spoken of our concern about the world food shortage. I have said that we wish to make available to developing countries the benefits of the technology and expertise that we have built up in our agriculturally-based economy. Together with our colleagues from Sri Lanka, we have promoted emergency arrangements to ensure that the countries most in need can obtain sufficient supplies of nitrogenous fertilizers at prices they can afford.
15.	We are convinced that real and lasting progress can be made by developing countries only if aid policies are closely co-ordinated with trade and monetary policies. The sixth special session of the General Assembly was an historic event, in some ways a revolutionary event. Its consequences will work themselves out over many years.
16.	But the most important revolutions, we believe, occur in men's minds, not in the streets. Colonialism collapsed in two decades because of a conviction that its day was over. As the cumulative result of years of effort in education, sometimes through oratory and pressure, the conscience dormant in most people was brought to life and even the colonial Powers came to share this conviction, some more slowly than others. But I believe that we are now on the brink of another and even more profound shift in attitudes. We are beginning to accept, not just in words, but through practical decisions, that all members of the world society in which we live have a just claim on the wealth and the more decent life that that society can make possible. To discuss a new economic order is now to discuss reality.
17.	A momentum has been established. Much more discussion will no doubt be required before consensus is reached on specific actions and before the change in attitudes is complete. But to achieve this we have to keep up the momentum and concentrate the energies of the international community on a manageable, realistic field of action. For our part we would like to suggest that the Assembly at this session identify as priority tasks for the coming year the four main issues for priority action: food, trade access, reform of the monetary system and emergency assistance. We think it would be useful if at this session the Assembly directed the subsidiary organs of the United Nations to bear this in mind in drawing up their own agenda and work programs.
18.	At the sixth special session, the General Assembly established an emergency program of measures to help the countries hardest hit by the economic situation [resolution 3202 (S-VI)]. My country has allocated $10 million for this program. At the meeting to be held on 27 September on this subject I shall give more details of this contribution. However, we believe that a firmer basis should be established within the international community for providing large-scale emergency assistance whenever the need arises. We must have the means to avert the risk of the energy crisis or any other similar catastrophe creating a "fourth world" of countries so hopelessly placed that they are without any prospect of economic and social development for decades to come. My Government accepts that developing countries must increase their share of international trade, principally through improved access to the markets of the developed countries of the world. We support the generalized system of preferences and we are at present reviewing the New Zealand scheme with a view to introducing improvements into it.
19.	New Zealand does not play a major role in the world financial institutions. But we have supported, and will continue to support, the principle that the developing countries should be full participants in discussions leading to major decisions on the international monetary order.
20.	L turn now to disarmament. Against this back-ground of human need, which all the speakers this morning touched on, it is surely tragic folly, to squander resources at an ever-increasing rate to perfect weapons of destruction. We already have enough nuclear weaponry to obliterate all life from this earth several times over. Almost everyone says he wants to stop the arms race and to use the scarce resources that would be saved for constructive purposes: for aid and human welfare. Each year this Organization solemnly proclaims how essential it is that additional resources be devoted to economic and social development. Each year it proclaims the need for disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament. Yet each year its proclamations are ignored. We now watch with despair medium-sized and even small-sized Powers trying to follow the bad example of the great nuclear Powers.
21.	Since the Assembly last met in regular session the tempo of nuclear-weapon testing has been stepped up. Two super-Powers have told us that a decade must elapse before they will be able to disentangle themselves from the spider's web of the arms race- a decade to strike what they choose to call "a strategic balance".
22.	In the same time-span we face the prospect, even the certainty, if the international community does not act with vigor to prevent it, that there will be further additions to the nuclear club. Given the example set by the super-Powers and I do not feel at all comfortable in lecturing others we have to say that we completely reject the notion that the possession of these dreadful and suicidal weapons can in some way enhance a nation's status or security. On the contrary, the greater the number of States that possess such a capacity the more unstable the relationships between States will become and the greater will be the danger to world peace. We are deeply concerned that recent events may undermine the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex]. Some find defects in this Treaty, but, despite, the defects, it does offer a path back to sanity and reason.
23.	For many years the nations of the South Pacific have been close to the testing of nuclear weapons. Interested parties may argue that the tests are harmless, but those of us who have been closest to them are keenly aware of the dangers that testing poses for the human environment. We know that these tests can create anxiety and apprehension in ordinary people everywhere. We urge that this Assembly again assert, clearly and without equivocation, that testing in every form must be ended, soon, urgently, through a comprehensive test-ban treaty. The Assembly should act to advance the principles of the non-proliferation Treaty.
24.	We believe that the Assembly should stand ready to encourage positive proposals from countries of a given region to increase regional stability and security. In recent years that search for international security and stability has been given new impetus through regional activities. New Zealand continues to see merit in this approach, and we urge outside States to co-operate fully in giving effect to these initiatives by smaller countries in various parts of the world.
25.	I come now to the law of the sea. The law of the sea occupies a crucial place among the issues upon which the international community should focus most urgently in the coming year. In a world where population and resources press heavily upon one another, it is of critical importance to agree upon a just use of the resources of the oceans.
26.	The session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea held at Caracas this year was especially important for the countries of the South Pacific. It gave New Zealand and its neighbors a most welcome chance to stress the special dependence of small island nations on the sea island States such as those in the South Pacific are at a disadvantage: they are geographically remote and they have very few agricultural and mineral resources. The development of their nearby maritime areas represents one of the few ways in which they can hope to supplement their slender land resources. New Zealand was encouraged that at Caracas these special needs were generally recognized.
27.	Much work remains to be done; but we were heartened by the progress made. For the first time we now have within reach the essentials of a new agreement on a 12-mile territorial sea and a 200-mile economic zone. Undoubtedly, there will be a great deal of hard negotiation to come before a fair and balanced agreement can be reached on all the major issues. New Zealand, as a coastal State, recognizes the just interests of others: of the land-locked States and of those with limited access to the resources of the sea. We recognize the just interests of all countries, but especially the developing countries, in preserving the "common heritage of mankind'' in the resources of the deep sea-bed. We hope that all countries will look to the next session of the Conference, in 1975, as the stage at which compromises must be made. And we believe that, if approached in that spirit, the session will lead quickly to the final treaty.
28.	I shall now speak of the South Pacific and Niue. In connexion with the South Pacific islands, but in a different context, we are pleased to note that in a referendum on 3 September the people of Niue chose to become fully self-governing, in free association with New Zealand: On 19 October New Zealand and Niue will end their relationship of administering Power and Non-Self-Governing Territory; we will enter a new period of partnership on a basis of equality. As a self-governing State, Niue will take its place as a full member of the South Pacific Forum along with other independent and self-governing States in the Pacific, including Papua New Guinea. Niue's new Constitution contains my Government's assurance that New Zealand's economic assistance to Niue will continue as before. During the process of self-determination it has been helpful for the people of Niue, as well as for New Zealand, to have the United Nations constantly and closely involved.
29.	New Zealand is conscious, as never before, of the importance of Africa on the world's stage. We see the need, not only for Africa but also in the wider interests of the international community, to find lasting and peaceful solutions to the problems of that continent.
30.	It is understandable that the situation in southern Africa should be of such continuing concern to this Assembly. New Zealand stands solidly with the world community in rejecting the policy of apartheid in South Africa. My Prime Minister welcomed a recent opportunity to assure the Chairman of the Special Committee on Apartheid, Ambassador Ogbu of Nigeria, that New Zealand would continue its stand on sporting contacts with South Africa: South African teams will not be allowed to enter New Zealand, unless they represent a sport in which apartheid is not practiced.
31.	New Zealand also continues to offer practical support to the victims of apartheid: it contributes to the United Nations Educational and Training Program for Southern Africa, the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the United Nations Trust Fund for Namibia.
32.	In addition, my Government has decided to contribute more than $200,000 over a two-year period to a joint project with UNICEF to provide humanitarian assistance through liberation movements for the tens of thousands of displaced persons from Southern Rhodesia, Namibia and Angola who are at present living in -Zambia. This money is given to supply drugs, vaccines, high-protein food supplements, agricultural tools and educational aid.
33.	Before I conclude, may I express my Government's pleasure at the admission of Bangladesh, Grenada and Guinea-Bissau to membership in the United Nations. We welcome also the historic change which now allows us to look forward to the early admission of two other important African countries, Mozambique and Angola. Their accession to independence will mark a major step in the process of decolonization and a further major step in the liberation of Africa. It will bring us still closer to the full realization of the principle of universality, to which my Government attaches great importance.
34.	I have said that the primary concerns of this Organization today are people, food, energy, natural resources, the environment and the need for a new economic order. These are universal concerns; every nation has a duty to play its part in helping to solve them. New Zealand believes that all nations can best do this within the great family of the United Nations, accepting the obligations as well as the privileges of membership.
Mr. President, on behalf of the Soviet delegation, I should like to congratulate you upon your election to the important post of President of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly. I should like to wish you success in the fulfillment of this important task. The unanimity with which you were elected once again demonstrates the respect which is enjoyed internationally by your country, the Algerian People's Democratic Republic.
120.	No session of the General Assembly is the same as the previous one, nor is the world situation against the background of which they convene the same. This is particularly noticeable against the swiftly changing background of events in recent years. What does remain unchanged, however, is the criterion that the United Nations and each of its Members must be guided by at all times and in all things -namely, concern for the maintenance of international peace and security. It is against this fundamental criterion that the activities of the United Nations and the practical actions of States in the international arena should be measured.
121.	With regard to the Soviet Union, we throw onto the scales of peace the entire influence of our State, the whole authority of our policy. This has always been the case and it will continue to be. Those who are earnestly seeking for ways to establish and consolidate peaceful relations and to settle disputed problems around the negotiating table can definitely count on the reliable co-operation of the Soviet Union.
122.	For more than half a century our country has consistently pursued a policy of peace, a policy of rebuffing aggression and safeguarding the rights of peoples, as that policy was formulated by Vladimir ilyich Lenin. In present-day conditions too the struggle for peace means for us not just an abstract category but a matter of concrete efforts to give practical effect to the foreign policy guidelines laid down by the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. It is the expression of the Soviet people's will for peace and uncompromising determination to make it stronger.
123.	Implementation of the Congress's decisions the program of Peace and Co-operation has already yielded tangible results in the improvement of the international situation. This is clear to any impartial observer. It is equally clear that the current positive changes are to everyone's benefit. Indeed, if there is an area where the fundamental interests of all nations, without exception, do converge, that is the maintenance of peace.
124.	The Soviet Union pursues its policies in close co-ordination with its allies and friends. The socialist community of States unites its participants in a common creative effort the building of an advanced society which by its very nature rejects war. It is no accident that many major peace initiatives have been sponsored by the socialist countries. The session of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty last April reaffirmed their joint determination to fight for the triumph of the ideals of peace and the economic and social progress of the peoples.
125.	The general state of world affairs is being molded by a tremendous number of factors, ranging from political and military to national or even psychological factors. And it therefore hardly lends itself to one-dimensional assessment. But the main trend of international development arouses no doubts: it is detente and the desire for detente which are today the predominant features.
126.	For the first time, international detente has gone beyond good wishes and verbal assurances. It is a term that has now found a place for itself in the political vocabulary precisely because it is backed by some very real content the positive changes in reality itself. From the vantage point of recent years one can distinctly see how much has been done in this respect.
127.	Through joint efforts by many States it has become possible to reduce the risk of armed conflict between the two social systems. But of special significance are the well-known agreements of 1972-1974 between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. This applies above all to the Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. The two major Powers undertook to make efforts to preclude entirely the risk of military conflict, including that involving nuclear weapons, between the Soviet Union and the United States, or between either of the parties and other States. At the same time, they agreed to refrain from the use of force against each other and against other countries in circumstances which may endanger international peace and security.
128.	Not long ago there was bitter fighting in IndoChina, in the Middle East, and in South Asia. And these were not the only areas where events took a dangerous turn. Now several international conflicts have, to a certain extent, been channeled in the direction of political settlement.
129.	It is well known that on more than one occasion tensions in Europe have risen to an alarming level. There were no military clashes, but if the total damage inflicted by the "cold war" and its tensions is estimated, it will prove enormous from all standpoints. Nowadays the political development of the European continent is ever more steadily taking a different course. Not only have acute problems of the territorial and political arrangements arising out of the Second World War been solved there, but also prospects for a safer, peaceful future for Europe have been opened up.
130.	Alongside this there is another major asset of detente the development of bilateral relations between States with different social systems. In the past too there were periods when it was impossible to organize business-like co-operation between them. But the experience of decades has shown us that that was rather the exception than the rule. Now peaceful co-existence is increasingly becoming the law of contemporary life. And the very nature of these relations is changing in many ways as they become steeped in the spirit of peaceful co-operation.
131.	Finally, it was precisely detente that put on the agenda the question of restructuring economic relations in the world. The point of this was to eliminate inequality arid discrimination, and to ensure in practice the sovereign right of States to dispose of their natural resources. The sixth special session of the General Assembly called severely to task those who for centuries have been exploiting the labor and resources of others, and indicated ways of eliminating economic oppression. The Soviet Union supports the just demands of the developing countries.
132.	On the whole, it can be stated with confidence that international events are now taking a course closer to peace. However, one should also see one other thing clearly: the movement towards peace does not always follow a straight line, and difficulties along this road will not necessarily decrease with each passing year. In a certain sense the problems which have to be dealt with today are not simpler but perhaps even more complicated than those of yesterday. And there is more to it than just objective causes.
133.	In the final analysis, the solution of the accumulated problems is hampered by the deliberate opposition of those forces whose interests are associated with policies contrary to the policy of detente. A closer look will reveal behind each instance of aggravation whether caused by encroachments on the freedom and independence of nations, by the stepping-up of the arms race, or by attempts to test the durability of existing international treaties the overt or covert activities of those forces. And when at times you hear people say that detente is a purely temporary phenomenon or allege that it has exhausted itself, you can recognize without fail from what quarter these statements come.
134.	The Soviet Union counters them with its own motto, which is not to slacken efforts to ensure that the healthy processes which have now been embarked upon should become irreversible and consolidated. As the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Leonid I. Brezhnev, stressed recently, "If you want peace, pursue a policy of peace and struggle for that policy". We are convinced that in our time the complete elimination of the threat of war is feasible albeit not close at hand provided active and persistent efforts are made to that end.
135.	The fact that the world is still far from what the peoples would like it to be is demonstrated by the tragedy which has afflicted the Republic of Cyprus. Some may have the impression that this is an event of local significance. The Soviet Union takes a different view.
136.	Before the eyes of the world the force of arms is being used ruthlessly to trample on the independence and territorial integrity of a sovereign Member State of the United Nations, a participant in the non-aligned movement. The fact that this is a small country presents developments in a special light. Another hotbed of tension has appeared in the eastern Mediterranean, and unless urgent measures are taken no one can guarantee that the situation will not deteriorate even further.
137.	From the very beginning the Soviet Union came out in defense of the inalienable rights of the State of Cyprus. It has been resolutely calling for an end to outside interference in the affairs of Cyprus, for the withdrawal of foreign troops from its soil, for the restoration of constitutional order, and for the Cypriots to be given a chance to decide their destiny for themselves. That is the only way radically to remove the tension. The demand that , the Charter of the United Nations be observed should not be an empty phrase as those responsible for events in Cyprus would like to see it. It must be complied with in the case of the Cyprus tragedy too.
138.	The Cyprus problem must be brought out of the impasse resulting from attempts of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] to solve it in camera, in political darkness, and in the narrow interests of militarist circles. This purpose that is, a just solution to the Cyprus problem is promoted by the Soviet Union's proposal to convene an international conference on Cyprus within the framework of the United Nations.7 The decisions of such a conference, adopted with the direct participation of representatives of the Republic of Cyprus and aimed at ensuring the country's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, could be effectively guaranteed by the States permanent members of the Security Council, for, under the Charter of the United Nations, it is precisely they who are entrusted with special responsibility for maintaining international peace and security.
139.	IndoChina is situated on the other side of the planet, and the situation there is different. But the underlying reasons why the guns are still firing and blood is still flowing in some parts of the region are the same as in Cyprus. It is all due to the stubborn reluctance of foreign-backed reactionary forces to respect the legitimate rights of the peoples.
140.	To bring to a conclusion the political settlement in Viet Nam it is necessary, in the first place, to make the Saigon regime give up its military provocations and attempts to undermine the Paris agreements on Viet Nam. Strict observance of these agreements by all parties is an indispensable condition for the normalization of the situation. As for Cambodia, its problems must be solved by the Cambodians themselves, in accordance with their national interests and without any outside interference. The positive results of agreements reached in Laos should also be consolidated.
141.	The comprehensive assistance and support given by the Soviet Union and other States of the Socialist community to the Vietnamese people have helped them to achieve victory in the long and heroic struggle against aggression. The Soviet Union will continue to support the Vietnamese people in peacetime too. The aspirations of the patriotic forces of IndoChina to freedom and independence will always be met with our understanding and solidarity. 
142.	For almost 30 years now the Middle East has been in a state of fever. Over this period wars have broken out there time and time again. In fact, the last one was only a year ago. This should be enough to convince anyone that the Middle East problem must be solved and solved justly, with the interests of all the peoples of the region being taken into account.
143.	What does that imply? First of all, the withdrawal of Israeli forces from allI stress, from all the Arab lands seized by them in 1967 and the assurance of the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of Palestine. Otherwise there can be no stable peace in the Middle East. It does not need a prophet to foresee a new flare-up of hostilities if the Middle East settlement is reduced to half-measures, no matter how-well advertised they may be.
144.	There are increasing signs that Israel regards the disengagement of forces on Sinai and the Golan Heights not as the first step towards a general settlement which is what it should be but as a maneuver intended to freeze the situation. The clear unwillingness to leave the occupied Arab territories and, moreover, a desire to consolidate Israel's hold on them are quite evident. What other explanation can there be for the militarist intoxication which has again overcome Israel and for the attempts to exert military pressure on the Arab States? Unless this stops, the disengagement of troops may prove to be a mere regrouping of forces prior to a new clash.
145.	The Soviet Union believes that there must be no delay in implementing measures leading to a political settlement in the Middle East, and this means prompt resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, the most appropriate forum for considering the Middle East problem in all its complex totality and for finding solutions satisfactory to the parties involved in the conflict. Naturally, this fully applies also to the Arab people of Palestine, whose representatives must take their rightful place at the conference.	;
146.	We believe that the time has surely come to address ourselves earnestly to the problem of Palestine. A wider approach is required here, which would open the way to ensuring not only in words but in deeds the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of Palestine, and that is why we favoured including the question of Palestine on the agenda of this session of the General Assembly as a separate item.
147.	There are some who try to represent the Soviet Union's position as one-sided and only serving the interests of the Arab States. Yes, indeed, we do support and will continue to support the legitimate demands of the Arabs. But it would be wrong to see only this particular aspect in our position. When we insist that territories acquired by force should not become a prize for aggression, the implications of our demand go well beyond the limits of the Middle East. It reflects intolerance of aggression in general. What this involves, therefore, is a major international principle and the question of consistency in policy.
148.	Furthermore, the Soviet Union is in favor of Israel's existence and development as an independent sovereign State. We have said so many times
in
and we affirm it once again. Real, not illusory, progress towards a Middle East settlement will create prerequisites for the development of relations between the Soviet Union and all the States of the Middle East, including Israel.
149.	The scope of the policy of peace and detente is broad. It is important not to lose momentum in any field and, above all, wherever serious work has already begun to build more stable relations between States on the basis of the observance of the principles of peaceful coexistence.
150.	In this context, the Soviet Union attaches primary importance to the successful conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. This is question number one in European political life today. An objective assessment of what has already been done at the Conference prompts the conclusion that, on the whole, the results are impressive.
151.	Has anyone ever before succeeded in jointly elaborating practical standards of peaceful relations among States in Europe, in particular, on questions which have hitherto seemed insoluble? Until now nothing of this kind has been seen, at least on such a scale. Today, this work is proceeding successfully. Several important principles have been formulated in detail as specifically applicable to Europe. The arrival at generally acceptable decisions on them, on the basis of a reasonable balance of interests of the parties, is not a routine phenomenon. Not all the participants in the Conference rely, even in their bilateral relations, on such a solid foundation as the one which is now being laid for an all-European agreement.
152.	It has also proved possible to reach agreement on a wide range of questions relating to cooperation among States in the most varied fields: from trade and economics to culture; from the protection of the environment to the extension of human contacts and exchanges of information. Experience has shown that such questions can be settled if they are viewed in direct proportion to the main problem of ensuring peace in Europe, and if the principle of non-interference in internal affairs is strictly adhered to.
153.	The Soviet Union is convinced that there is an opportunity to conclude the Conference at an early date by adopting weighty decisions in the interests of security in Europe. In saying this we not only properly appreciate the collective work that has already been done; we also proceed from the premise that solutions to the still outstanding problems can be found, if all the participants display the necessary political will and realism.
154.	Naturally, it would not be right to expect the Conference to settle at one fell swoop all the questions accumulated over the long years of tension and mistrust. But it is equal to the task of achieving agreements. on crucial problems which can determine a stable peaceful development in Europe for the foreseeable future. It will also be easier to tackle other outstanding issues in the atmosphere of detente. 
155.	The Soviet Union will continue to do everything to ensure the complete success of the Conference. We trust that our Western partners will also take a constructive approach to this task. It is in the interests of the peoples of Europe, and not just of Europe alone, to work to bring nearer the day when agreements designed to legitimize peace and co-operation on the scale of an entire continent can be signed at the highest level.
156.	It is also important to achieve results at the Vienna Talks on the Mutual Reduction of Forces and Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. The key to this is strict observance by all of the rule of undiminished security for each side. Agreement on the questions under discussion would in practice supplement political detente in Europe with military detente.
157.	The conversion into a practical proposition of the idea of consolidating peace in Asia through the joint efforts of States should not, in our opinion, be a matter for the distant future. No doubt, the situation there remains complex. There is no small number of trouble spots, conflicts and international disputes on the continent of Asia.
158.	Political thought in Asia, too, is switching more and more to the search for ways of securing peace and stability. And surely this is demonstrated by the efforts of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh to normalize relations on the Hindustan Peninsula, or by the idea of converting the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace.
159.	We note with satisfaction the growing interest in the Soviet Union's initiative concerning the establishment of a collective security system in Asia. More and more States in Asia are supporting it. The Soviet-Indian Declaration signed as a result of the visit of Leonid Uyich Brezhnev to India in November 1973 contains important principles which can serve as a basis for the development of an effective system of relations between States in Asia.
160.	The establishment of peace and co-operation in Asia meets the fundamental interests of all the Asian people. The achievement of this goal is a matter which concerns every country of that continent.
161.	The agenda of this session includes an item which has a direct bearing on the improvement of the situation in Asia. This is the proposal by 34 States, including the Soviet Union, on the withdrawal of all foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations [AI9703 and Add. 1-3}. The presence of those troops, which have now been there for more than two decades, represents a source of constant military and political tension in the Korean Peninsula. Their presence is still more inappropriate under present conditions when, on the initiative of the Korean People's Democratic Republic, efforts are being made to bring about the peaceful reunification of Korea.
162.	If we analyze the reasons which have so often caused acute tensions in the world, and which even now frequently lead to dangerous situations, we shall easily see that in many cases this was the result of the armaments race. It is indeed a fact that immediately after the Second World War some States embarked upon a course of building up armaments and setting up military bases on foreign territories, thus making the creation of tensions and saber- rattling their policy. It is a secret to no one that it was precisely that policy of theirs which at times brought the world to a very dangerous brink.
163.	How many speeches have been made on disarmament and the cessation of the arms race in the last 25 years? Probably no other problem has absorbed the attention of statesmen and public figures to such an extent in the post-war period. And this is understandable. Stable and lasting peace is incompatible with the arms race. They are antipodes. One cannot seriously think of eliminating the threat of war while at the same time increasing military budgets and endlessly building up armaments.
164.	Facts must be faced. So far it has not proved possible to stop the arms race. Furthermore, today the arms race absorbs more money than ten or twenty years ago. It has been estimated that the world annually burns in the furnace of armaments over $250,000 million. This is more than the entire national income of the developing States of Asia and Africa. One can only imagine what benefits these resources could yield if they were used for peaceful purposes, for development, to combat hunger, poverty and disease.
165.	No Government -at least openly- declares that it favors the arms race. Nevertheless, arms are accumulating. For three months every year appeals to end the arms race are heard at the session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. But the arms race continues. Ever more and newer papers and resolutions on disarmament are filling the archives of the United Nations. But disarmament still does not manage to overcome its inertia. Conveyor belts keep on moving inexorably, turning out new consignments of destructive weapons.
166.	And so a paradoxical situation develops. The peace movement has never had such momentum as it enjoys today, and never has the world produced such quantities of arms as it does today. On the one hand, there is the longing for peace on the part of hundreds of millions of people who realize the grim danger of the arms race, but, on the other hand, there is the increasing avalanche of armaments.
167.	What is the matter? Maybe some forces which have got out of human control are at work? Certainly not. The reason is policy. And if it is policy, well, one may ask, whose policy?
168.	If it all depended on the socialist countries, the arms race would have been eliminated long ago. No one has tabled more concrete proposals on disarmament than they. Ever since the non-aligned countries moved into the forefront of international affairs they too have been actively working in favor of disarmament. Voices of reason are to be heard in other countries too, and they resound with ever greater confidence both in parliaments and in broad public circles,
169.	Military-industrial circles that profit from the arms race oppose its cessation. Those politicians who are linked with these circles have long since placed their narrow interests above the aspirations of the peoples. The influence of these circles has had a telling effect on all disarmament negotiations, including those in the General Assembly and the Security Council. 
170.	The arms race affects all States, even those not directly involved in it. All the peoples of the world live under one and the same roof. The risks posed by the unrestrained build-up of armaments are a danger to all. On the other hand, is there any country in the world whose economy is not affected, one way or another, by the burden of armaments? Everyone here could adduce numerous examples in confirmation of the correctness of this argument.
171.	Furthermore, recently economic upheavals, which have been affecting many States, have increased in intensity and increasingly affect the material situation of people. Statesmen and economists are racking their brains over the causes underlying all this. But there is one undeniable conclusion that is borne out every day and every hour: the aggravation of economic problems is largely connected with the rising scale of the arms race and with soaring military expenditures.
172.	But if the disarmament problem affects everyone, then the solution to the problem should be sought jointly by all States.
173.	The main thing here is not just to mark time, hiding behind arguments about the complexity of the problem. If right now it cannot be solved at one stroke, solutions should be sought for individual aspects so that this should lead at least step by step to the ultimate goal of disarmament, and in effect, such an approach has already been tried out in recent years and has justified itself.
174.	As positive changes make their way in the world, so objective prerequisites for finding real agreements in the sphere of disarmament improve. It is noteworthy that the largest number of agreements of this kind have been reached in the last few years. Although they do not reverse the arms race, they do curb it in a whole series of ways.
175.	In one case, this takes the form of limiting further perfection of nuclear weapons and the creation of their new destructive models. The Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963, has been serving this end well for over a decade now.
176.	The same objective is served by the Treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States of 3 July 1974, whereby both countries have undertaken to stop, as of 31 March 1976, underground testing of nuclear weapons with the most powerful nuclear charges and also to limit underground nuclear test explosions in general. The Soviet Union will strive to see to it that the prohibition of nuclear weapon tests eventually becomes comprehensive and universal.
177.	In another case, it takes the form of a limit on the territorial spread of armaments. Such is the purport of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which has proved its effectiveness. We are in favor of making full use of the possibilities inherent in that Treaty and of increasing the number of States parties to it. The objective is to make this Treaty universal.
178.	A number of agreements exclude the sea-bed and the ocean floor, outer space and celestial bodies from the sphere of possible emplacement of nuclear weapons. In accordance with an international agreement bacteriological weapons have been prohibited and eliminated from military arsenals, and prospects are emerging for the outlawing of another deadly means of warfare, namely, chemical weapons.
179.	And what about the agreements on the limitation of strategic arms between the Soviet Union and the United States? I feel that there is no need to explain their unprecedented significance since they are designed to narrow the actual material basis of the nuclear-missile arms race. Quite recently these agreements have been supplemented by new important agreements. Last July, the Soviet Union and the United States decided further to limit their anti-ballistic missile systems and mapped out ways of achieving further limitation of strategic offensive arms in terms of both quality and quantity. The Soviet delegation in Geneva, where talks on these questions were resumed the other day, has firm instructions to seek their solution,
180.	The supreme interests not only of the peoples of the Soviet Union and the United States but also of the peoples of the whole world require that the Soviet Union and the United States, possessing the colossal might of nuclear weapons, should make every effort to achieve appropriate understandings and agreements. We should like to express our gratification at the fact that this idea was clearly stated too from the rostrum of the General Assembly by President Ford of the United States [2234th meeting].
181.	When two Powers voluntarily limit their military preparations, when they establish a ceiling above which they will not increase nuclear missile armaments, their actions, apart from anything else, must set a good example for others.
182.	The Soviet Union will continue to work tirelessly to further the cause of disarmament in areas where this is possible; it will look for new fields where concrete results can be achieved through the joint efforts of States.
183.	The Soviet Union took the initiative by proposing the inclusion in the agenda of the twenty- ninth session of the General Assembly, as an important and urgent question, of item 103, entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate for military and other purposes incompatible with the maintenance of international security, human well- being and health" [4/9702].
184.	What is the motive for this? The achievements of scientific and technological progress have expanded the possibilities of influencing nature and the climate of the globe and, in a certain sense, of controlling the complex and powerful processes involved. Unfortunately, the latest discoveries can be used not only for creative, but also for military, purposes with extremely destructive consequences for mankind. These are not the conjectures of science fiction writers, but an actual threat that is assuming an ever more realistic shape. It is in the interests of all peoples to nip this threat in the bud.
185.	The Soviet Union proposes that an international convention should be concluded which will outlaw the military use of the environment. Compliance with the provisions of such a convention, a draft of which we will submit [see AlC.JIL.675], could be secured through the adoption by each State, in accordance with its constitutional processes, of appropriate measures to prohibit activities contrary to the convention and through consultations and co-operation among States, notably within the framework of the United Nations.
186.	The conclusion of such a convention would prevent the emergence of new means of warfare and, at the same time, would facilitate the solution of a problem common to all mankind the protection of the environment. We trust that all the participants in the Assembly will fully appreciate the universal significance of this important initiative and treat this proposal accordingly. The Soviet Union and the socialist countries as a whole seek to gain .nothing from this. We have made this proposal because it is in the interests of all States, all peoples and the whole world.
187.	In its attitude in the United Nations, the Soviet Union proceeds on the assumption that the Organization can and must play an important part in developing and consolidating the positive processes characteristic of the present-day world situation. We have quite a number of useful resolutions to our credit aimed at strengthening international peace. Now, everything depends on their being consistently implemented.
188.	In this regard, I should like to refer especially to some resolutions adopted by the United Nations over the last two or three years by a large majority of votes. In the first place, I have in mind the one on the prohibition of the use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. This is an Assembly decision of fundamental importance. It must acquire binding force for all States and, in this regard, the Security Council has an important role.
189.	One cannot say that the General Assembly resolution on the convening of a world disarmament conference [resolution 2833 (XXVI)] has not been followed up. An Ad Hoc Committee on the World Disarmament Conference [resolution 3183 (XXVIII)] has even been set up, in which, among other States, three nuclear Powers are participating. However, in fact, the question is not really being dealt with. It is time for the Committee to proceed, in close co-operation with the nuclear Powers, to prepare concrete recommendations on the practical aspects of the convocation of that conference. The boycotting of this important measure by several States is contrary to the clearly expressed desire of the overwhelming majority of States Members of the United Nations. We regard it as a challenge to the world Organization.
190.	Through no fault of the Soviet Union, there is delay in the implementation of such a commonly useful enterprise as that of the reduction of the military budgets of the States permanent members of the Security Council by 10 per cent and the utilization of part of the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries. This example belongs in the same category. This action would have a double effect: it would promote the limitation of the arms race and, at the same time, provide additional assistance to States that need it most. The attitudes towards this proposal act as a kind of litmus paper revealing the intentions of States regarding acute present-day problems.
191.	The further development of bilateral relations between States based on the principles of peaceful coexistence is a vast and far from exhausted reserve for deepening detente. On this basis our country is prepared to establish and expand not just normal but, where possible, friendly relations with all States sharing this approach. This has been and remains one of the most important lines of the Soviet Union's foreign policy.
192.	It is our desire to see the consolidation of all the positive results that have been achieved so far in our relations with leading capitalist States on the basis of fruitful efforts on both sides. We' want to move ahead and make these relations stable. In this context, the statements by the new leaders of the United States, France and the Federal Republic of Germany about their intentions to continue to move towards detente and co-operation have been met in the Soviet Union with satisfaction.
193.	Today economic, scientific and technological links assume an increasingly large role in relations between States with different social systems. If co-operation in these fields is built on respect for the principles of equality and non-interference, it will not only be mutually advantageous but will also promote the establishment of a material basis of sorts for durable peace and good neighborliness.
194.	We value highly the good and, in some instances, close relations which have been established between the Soviet Union and many developing countries. The countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America which have embarked upon the road of national independence and the consolidation of economic independence can continue to rely firmly on our support. We were in at the source of their struggle against colonialism, and at each and every stage of it we have supported and will continue to support the developing States in word and in deed. That is our line of principle, and we shall not deviate from it.
195.	The solution of such complex and urgent problems as those of energy and food, which are attracting much attention, particularly in the United Nations, should also be sought on the path of peace and co-operation, of strict observance of the principles of equality and sovereignty, and of the right of States to dispose of their natural resources.
196.	The number of young States Members of the United Nations has increased at this session of the General Assembly. We should like to express our particular satisfaction at the fact that the People's Republic of Bangladesh has become a full Member of the United Nations and that thus an end has been put to an injustice with regard to that major Asian State.
197.	The Soviet Union, which was one of the first countries to establish diplomatic relations with the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, welcomes that State's admission to the United Nations with great satisfaction. The Soviet Union also welcomes the admission to the United Nations of the newly independent State of Grenada. Soon to come is the proclamation of the national independence of Mozambique. The current attempts to frustrate the process of decolonization that has begun in that country must be most resolutely rebuffed. That of course applies equally and fully to Angola. That will, indeed, be the crowning moment of the armed phase of the struggle for national liberation of the former Portuguese colonies, and will provide even further evidence of the irresistible march of social progress.
198.	The year that has passed since the Fascist coup in Chile has revealed the great depth of the tragedy that has befallen the Chilean people. But it has also demonstrated that endless terror and the suppression of elementary human rights cannot break the will of the people of Chile for a free and independent life. The bloody deeds of the junta are in glaring contradiction with the lofty human principles and purposes of the United Nations, and are a challenge to human honor and decency. It is no accident that the junta in fact remains in a state of international isolation.
199.	The struggle for national independence and economic liberation and for the elimination of the vestiges of the colonial system has been scoring impressive victories in recent years. But that struggle is by no means ended. The manifestations of economic oppression and inequality and the fact that there are still dark blemishes of colonialism, apartheid and racial discrimination on earth cannot be tolerated. Until they disappear, the peace-loving States and the United Nations as a whole cannot slacken their efforts to eradicate them.
200.	It is always necessary to identify the most topical issues among the great variety of problems posed by the course of world developments. At any given moment, the efforts of States striving to achieve the strengthening of peace should be concentrated precisely upon them. It is the opinion of the Soviet Union that some of the high-priority tasks of today are the following:
-to proceed in practical terms to a Cyprus settlement; stop the violence against that country and its people; secure respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of that State and, for those purposes, convene a representative international conference on Cyprus within the framework of the United Nations;
-to resume as a matter of urgency the work of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East to solve questions concerning the establishment of a just and durable peace in that area;
-to complete the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe at an early date by adopting, at the highest level, decisions ensuring a peaceful future for Europe;
-to achieve specific agreements in the Soviet- American Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, in the multilateral negotiations on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe, and in the Committee on Disarmament;
-to take measures to implement the decisions of the sixth special session of the General Assembly on strengthening the economic independence of developing States.
201.	No one would venture to claim that the solution of all those problems, and of others to which we have drawn the attention of this Assembly, is an easy task. But their solution is necessary and feasible, and all States really interested in developing peaceful and reasonable forms of international inter-course should work towards that end. The Soviet Union will be unstinting in its efforts to promote the establishment of durable and lasting peace on earth.
Last year, at the previous session [.2124th meeting], in my first address as Secretary of State, I spoke to this Assembly about American purposes. I said that the United States seeks a comprehensive, institutionalized peace, not an armistice. I asked other nations to join us in moving the world from detente to cooperation, from coexistence to community.
41.	In the year that has passed some progress has been made in dealing with particular crises. But many fundamental issues persist and new issues threaten the very structure of world stability.
42.	Our deepest problem going far beyond the items on the agenda is whether our vision can keep pace with our challenges. Will history recall the twentieth century as a time of mounting global conflict or as the beginning of a global conception? Will our age of interdependence spur joint progress or common disaster?
43.	The answer is not yet clear. New realities have not yet overcome old patterns of thought and action. Traditional concepts of national sovereignty, social struggle and the relation between the old and the new nations too often guide our course. And so we have managed but not advanced; we have endured but not prospered; and we have continued the luxury of political contention.
44.	This condition has been dramatized in the brief period since the twenty-eighth session. War has ravaged the Middle East and Cyprus. The technology of nuclear explosives has resumed its dangerous spread. Inflation and the threat of global decline hang over the economies of rich and poor alike.
45.	We cannot permit this trend to continue. Conflict between nations once devastated continents; the struggle between blocs may destroy humanity, ideologies and doctrines drawn from the last century do not even address, let alone solve, the unprecedented problems of today. As a result, events challenge habits; a gulf grows between rhetoric and reality.
46.	The world has dealt with local conflicts as if they were perpetually manageable. We have permitted too many of the underlying causes to fester unattended, until the parties believed that their only recourse was war. And because each crisis ultimately has been contained we have remained complacent. But tolerance of local conflict tempts world holocaust. We have no guarantee that some local crisis perhaps the next will not explode beyond control.
47.	The world has dealt with nuclear weapons as if restraint were automatic. Their very awesomeness has chained those weapons for almost three decades; their sophistication and expense have helped to keep constant for a decade the number of States which possess them. Now, as was quite foreseeable, political inhibitions are in danger of crumbling. Nuclear catastrophe looms more plausible, whether through design or miscalculation, accident, theft or blackmail.
48.	The world has dealt with the economy as if its constant advance were inexorable. While postwar growth has been uneven and some parts of the world have lagged, our attention has been focused on how to increase participation in a general advance. We continue to deal with economic issues on a national, regional or bloc basis at the precise moment that our interdependence is multiplying. Strains on the fabric and institutions of the world economy threaten to engulf us all in a general depression.
49.	The delicate structure of international cooperation, so laboriously constructed over the last quarter century, can hardly survive, and certainly cannot be strengthened, if it is continually subjected to the shocks of political conflict, war and economic crisis.
50.	The time has come, then, for the nations assembled here to act together in the recognition that continued reliance on old slogans and traditional rivalries will lead us towards a world ever more torn between rich and poor. East and West, producer and consumer; a world where local crises threaten global confrontation and where the spreading atom threatens global peril; a world of rising costs and dwindling supplies, of growing populations and declining production.
51.	There is another course. Last week before this Assembly [2234th meeting] President Ford dedicated our country to a cooperative,, open approach to build a more secure and more prosperous world. The United States will assume the obligations that our values and strength impose upon us. But the building of a cooperative world is beyond the grasp of any one nation. An interdependent world requires not merely the resources but the vision and creativity of us all. Nations cannot simultaneously confront and cooperate with one another.
52.	We must recognize that the common interest is the only valid test of the national interest. It is in the common interest, and thus in the interest of each nation, that local conflicts be resolved short of force and 'heir root causes be removed by political means; that the spread of nuclear technology be achieved without the spread of nuclear weapons; that growing economic interdependence lift all nations and not drag them down together.
53.	We will not solve these problems during this session, or during any one session, of the General Assembly, but we must at least begin to remedy problems, not just manage them; to shape events, rather that endure them; to confront our challenges instead of one another.
54.	The urgent political responsibility of our era is to resolve conflicts without war. History is replete with examples of the tragedy that sweeps nations when ancient enmities and the inertia of habit freeze the scope for decision. Equally, history is marked by brief moments when an old order is giving way to a pattern new and unforeseen. Those are times of potential disorder and danger but also of opportunity for fresh creation.
55.	We face such a moment today. Together let us face its realities. First, a certain momentum towards peace has been created, in EastWest relations and in certain regional conflicts. It must be maintained. But we are only at the beginning of the process. If we do not continue to advance, we will slip back. Second, progress in the negotiation of difficult issues comes only through patience, perseverance and a recognition of the tolerable limits of the other side. Peace is a process, not a condition. It can be reached only in steps. Third, the failure to recognize and grasp the attainable will prevent the achievement of the ideal. Attempts to resolve all issues at one time are a certain prescription for stagnation. Progress towards peace can be thwarted by asking too much as surely as by asking too little. Fourth, the world community can help resolve chronic conflicts, but exaggerated expectations will prevent essential accommodation among the parties. This Assembly can help or hinder the negotiating process. It can seek a scapegoat or a solution. It can offer the parties an excuse to escape reality or sturdy support in search of a compromise. It can decide on propaganda or contribute to realistic approaches responsive to man's yearning for peace.
56.	The Middle East starkly demonstrates those considerations. In the past year we have witnessed both the fourth ArabIsraeli war in a generation and the hopeful beginnings of a political process towards a lasting and just peace. We have achieved the respite of a ceasefire and two disengagement agreements, but the shadow of war remains. The legacy of hatred and suffering, the sense of irreconcilability have begun to yield however haltingly to the process of negotiation. But we still have a long road ahead.
57.	One side seeks the recovery of territory and justice for a displaced people. The other side seeks security and recognition by its neighbors of its legitimacy as a nation. In the end, the common goal of peace surely is broad enough to embrace all these aspirations.
58.	Let us be realistic about what must be done. The art of negotiation is to set goals that can be achieved at a given time and to reach them with determination. Each step forward modifies old perceptions and brings about a new situation that improves the chances of a comprehensive settlement.
59.	Because these principles were followed in the Middle East, agreements have been reached in the past year which many thought impossible. They were achieved, above all, because of the wisdom of the leaders of the Middle East who decided that there had been enough stalemate and war, that more might be gained by testing each other in negotiation than by testing each other on the battlefield.
60.	The Members of this body, both collectively and individually, have a solemn responsibility to encourage and support the parties in the Middle East on their present course. We have as well an obligation to give our support to the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East and elsewhere. The United States applauds their indispensable role, as well as the outstanding contribution of SecretaryGeneral Waldheim in the cause of peace.
61.	During the past year my country has made a major effort to promote peace in the Middle East. President Ford has asked me to reaffirm today that we are determined to press forward with these efforts. We will work closely with the parties and we will cooperate with all interested countries within the framework of the Geneve Conference.
62.	The tormented island of Cyprus is another area where peace requires a spirit of compromise, accommodation and justice. The United States is convinced that the sovereignty, political independence, and territorial integrity of Cyprus must be maintained. It will be up to the parties to decide on the form of government they believe best suited to the particular conditions of Cyprus. They must reach accommodation on the areas to be administered by the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities as well as on the conditions under which refugees can return to their homes and reside in safety. Finally, no lasting peace is possible unless provisions are agreed upon which will lead to the timely and phased reduction of armed forces and armaments and other war material.
63.	The United States is prepared to play an even more active role now than in the past in helping the parties find a solution to the centuries old problem of Cyprus. We will do all we can, but it is those most directly concerned whose effort is most crucial. Third parties should not be asked to produce miraculous outcomes not anchored in reality. Third parties can encourage those directly involved to perceive their broader interests; they can assist in the search for elements of agreement by interpreting each side's views and motives to the other. But no mediator can succeed unless the parties genuinely want mediation and are ready to make the difficult decisions needed for a settlement.
64.	The United States is already making a major contribution to help relieve the human suffering of the people of Cyprus. We urge the international community to continue and, if possible, to increase its own humanitarian relief effort.
65.	The United States notes with particular satisfaction the continuing process of change in Africa. We welcome the positive demonstration of cooperation between old rulers and the new free. The United States shares and pledges its support for the aspiration of Africans to participate in the fruits of freedom and human dignity.
66.	The second new dimension on our agenda concerns the problem of nuclear proliferation.
67.	The world has grown so accustomed to the existence of nuclear weapons that it assumes they will never be used. But today technology is rapidly expanding the number of nuclear weapons in the hands of major Powers and threatens to put nuclear explosive technology at the disposal of. an increasing number of other countries.
68.	In a world where many nations possess nuclear weapons, dangers would be vastly compounded. It would be infinitely more difficult, if not impossible, to maintain stability among a large number of nuclear Powers. Local wars would take on a new dimension. Nuclear weapons would be introduced into regions where political conflict remains intense and the parties consider their vital interests overwhelmingly involved. There would, as well, be a vastly heightened risk of direct involvement by the major nuclear Powers.
69.	This problem does not concern one country, one region, or one bloc alone. No nation can be indifferent to the spread of nuclear technology; every nation's security is directly affected.
70.	The challenge before the world is to realize the peaceful benefits of nuclear technology without contributing to the growth of nuclear weapons or to the number of States possessing them.
71.	As a major nuclear Power, the United States recognizes its special responsibility. We realize that we cannot expect others to show restraint if we do not ourselves practice restraint. Together with the Soviet Union we are seeking to negotiate new quantitative and qualitative limitations on strategic arms. Last week our delegations reconvened in Geneva, and we intend to pursue these negotiations with the seriousness of purpose they deserve. The United States has no higher priority than controlling and reducing the levels of nuclear arms.
72.	Beyond the relations of the nuclear Powers to each other lies the need to curb the spread of nuclear explosives. We must take into account that plutonium is an essential ingredient of nuclear explosives and that in the immediate future the amount of plutonium generated by peaceful nuclear reactors will be multiplied many times. Heretofore the United States and a number of other countries have widely supplied nuclear fuels and other nuclear materials in order to promote the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. This policy cannot continue if it leads to the proliferation of nuclear explosives. Sales of these materials can no longer be treated by anyone as a purely commercial competitive enterprise.
73.	The world community, therefore, must work urgently towards a system of effective international safeguards against the diversion of plutonium or its byproducts. The United States is prepared to join with others in a comprehensive effort.
74.	Let us together agree on the practical steps which must be taken to assure the benefits of nuclear energy free of its terrors. The United States will shortly offer specific proposals to strengthen safeguards to the other principal supplier countries. We shall intensify our efforts to gain the broadest possible acceptance of IAEA safeguards, to establish practical controls on the transfer of nuclear materials, and to ensure the effectiveness of these procedures. The United States will urge IAEA to draft an international convention for enhancing physical security against theft or diversion of nuclear material. Such a convention should set forth specific standards and techniques for protecting materials while in use, storage arid transfer. The Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex], which this Assembly has endorsed, warrants continuing support. The Treaty contains not only a broad commitment to limit the spread of nuclear explosives but specific obligations to accept and implement IAEA safeguards and to control the transfer of nuclear materials.
75.	Whatever advantages seem to accrue from the acquisition of nuclear explosive technology will prove to be ephemeral. When Pandora's box has been opened, no country will be the beneficiary and all mankind will have lost. This is not inevitable.
If we act decisively now, we can still control the future.
76.	Let me now turn to our economic problems.
77.	Lord Keynes wrote:
"The power to become habituated to his surroundings is a marked characteristic of mankind. Very few of us realize with conviction the intensely unusual, unstable, complicated, unreliable, temporary nature of the economic organization."
78.	The economic history of the postwar period has been one of sustained growth, for developing as well as developed nations. The universal expectation of our peoples, the foundation of our political institutions and the assumption underlying the evolving structure of peace are all based on the belief that this growth will continue.
79.	But will it? The increasingly open and cooperation global economic system that we have come to take tor granted is now under unprecedented attack. The world is poised on the brink of a return to the unrestrained economic nationalism which accompanied the collapse of economic order in the 1930s. And, should that occur, all would suffer: poor as well as rich, producer as well as consumer.
80.	So let us so longer fear to confront in public the facts which have come to dominate bur private discussions and concerns.
81.	The early warning signs of a major economic crisis are evident. Rates of inflation unprecedented in the past quarter century are sweeping developing and developed nations alike. The world's financial institutions are staggering under the most massive and rapid movements of reserves in history. And profound questions have arisen about meeting man's most fundamental needs for energy and food.
82.	While the present situation threatens every individual and nation, it is the poor who suffer the most. While the wealthier adjust their living standards, the poor see the hopes of a lifetime collapse around them. While others tighten their belts, the poor starve. While others can hope for a better future, the poor see only despair ahead.
83.	It can be in the interest of no country or group of countries to base policies on a test of strength, for a policy of confrontation would end in disaster for ail. Meeting man's basic needs for energy and food and assuring economic growth while mastering inflation require international cooperation to an unprecedented degree.
84.	Let us apply these principles first to the energy situation. Oil producers seek a better life for their peoples and a just return for their diminishing resources. The developing nations less well endowed by nature face the disintegration of the results of decades of striving for development as the result of a price policy over which they have no control. The developed nations find the industrial civilization built over centuries in jeopardy.
85.	Both producers and consumers have legitimate claims. The problem is to reconcile them for the common good. 
86.	The United States is working closely with several oil producers to help diversify their economies. We have established commissions to facilitate the transfer of technology and to assist with industrialization. We are prepared to accept substantial investments in the United States and we welcome a greater role for the oil producers in the management of international economic institutions.
87.	The investment of surplus oil revenues presents a great challenge. The countries which most need these revenues are generally the least likely to receive them. The world's financial institutions have coped thus far, but ways must be found to assure assistance for those countries most in need of it. And the full brunt of the surplus revenues is yet to come.
88.	Despite our best efforts to meet the oil producers' legitimate needs and to channel their resources into constructive uses, the world cannot sustain even the present level of prices, much less continuing increases. The prices of other commodities will inevitably rise in a never-ending inflationary spiral. Nobody will benefit. The oil producers will be forced to spend more for their own imports. Many nations will not be able to withstand the pace, and the poorer could be overwhelmed. The complex, fragile structure of global economic cooperation required to sustain national economic growth stands in danger of being shattered.
89.	The United States will work with other consumer nations on means of conservation and on ways to cushion the impact of massive investments from abroad. The preliminary agreement on a program of solidarity and cooperation signed a few days ago in Brussels by the major consumer countries is an encouraging first step.
90.	But the long range solution requires a new understanding between consumers and producers. Unlike food prices, the high cost of oil is not the result of economic factors, of an actual shortage of capacity or of the free play of supply and demand. Rather it is caused by deliberate decisions to restrict production and maintain an artificial price level. We recognize that the producers should have a fair share; the fact remains that the present price level even threatens the economic wellbeing of producers. Ultimately they depend upon the vitality of the world economy for the security of their markets and their investments. And it cannot be in the interest of any nation to magnify the despair of the least developed, which are uniquely vulnerable to exorbitant prices and have no recourse .but to pay.
91.	What has gone up by political decision can be reduced by political decision.
92.	Last week President Ford called upon the oil producers to join with consumers in defining a strategy which will meet the world's longterm need for both energy and food at reasonable prices; he set forth the principles which should guide such a policy; and he announced to this Assembly America's determination to meet our responsibilities to help alleviate another grim reality world hunger. At a time of universal concern for justice and in an age of advanced technology, it is intolerable that millions are starving and hundreds of millions remain undernourished.
93.	The magnitude of the longterm problem is clear. At present rates of population growth, world food production must double by the end of this century to maintain even the present inadequate dietary level and an adequate diet for all would require that we triple world production. If we are true to our principles, we have an obligation to strive for an adequate supply of food to every man, woman and child in the world. This is a technical possibility, a political necessity and a moral imperative.
94.	The United States is prepared to join with all nations at the World Food Conference in Rome to launch the truly massive effort which is required. We will present a number of specific proposals: to help developing nations, which have the lowest yields and the largest amounts of unused land and water and whose potential in food production must be made to match their growing need; to increase substantially global fertilizer production, for we must end once and for all the world's chronic fertilizer shortage; to expand international, regional and national research programs because scientific and technical resources mus? hi mobilized now to meet the demands of the year 2030 and beyond; to rebuild the world's food reserves, as our capacity for dealing with famine must be freed from the vagaries of weather; and to provide a substantial level of concessionary food aid. The United States will in the coming year increase the value of our own food aid shipments to countries in need. We make this commitment despite great pressures on our economy and at a time when we are seeking to cut our own Government's budget, because we realize the dimensions of the tragedy with which we are faced. All of us here have a common obligation to prevent the poorest nations from being overwhelmed and to enable them to build the social, economic and political base for self-sufficiency.
95.	The hopes of every nation for a life of peace and plenty rest on an effective international resolution of the crises of inflation, fuel and food. We must act now and we must act together.
96.	Let us never forget that all of our political endeavors are ultimately judged by one standard to translate our actions into human concerns.
97.	The United States will never be satisfied with a world where man's fears overshadow his hopes. We support the United Nations efforts in the fields of international law and human rights. We approve of the activities of the United Nations .in social, economic and humanitarian realms around the world. The United States considers the World Population Conference, held last month, the World Food Conference to be held a month from now and the continuing Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea of fundamental importance to our common future.
98.	In the coming months the United States will make specific proposals for the United Nations to initiate a major international effort to prohibit torture; a concerted campaign to control the disease which afflicts and debilitates over 200 million people in 70 countries schistosomiasis; and a substantial strengthening of the world's capacity to deal with natural disaster, especially the improvement of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator.
99.	We have long lived in a world where the consequences of our failures were manageable a world where local conflicts were contained, nuclear weapons threatened primarily those nations which possessed them, and the cycle of economic growth and decline seemed principally a national concern. But that is no longer the case. It is no longer possible to imagine that conflicts, weapons and recession will not spread.
100.	We must now decide. The problems we face will be with .us the greater part of the century. But will they be with us as challenges to be overcome or as adversaries that have vanquished us?
101.	It is easy to agree to yet another set of principles or to actions other nations should take. But the needs of the poor will not be met by slogans; the needs of an expanding global economy will not be met by new restrictions; the search for peace cannot be conducted on the basis of confrontation. So each nation must ask what it can do, what contribution it is finally prepared to make to the common good.
102.	Beyond peace, beyond prosperity, lie man's deepest aspirations to a life of dignity and justice. And beyond our pride, beyond our concern for the national purpose we are called upon to serve, there must be a concern for the betterment of the human condition. White we cannot, in the brief span allowed to each of us, undo the accumulated problems of centuries, we dare not do less than try. So let us now get on with our tasks.
103.	Let us act in the spirit of Thucydides that "the bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, glory and danger alike, and yet notwithstanding go out to meet it".
