60. Profound changes have taken place in the international situation since the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly. A serious capitalist economic crisis plagues most parts of the world. All the basic contradictions in the world are becoming sharper. The trend of revolution by the people of the world is actively developing. The Asian, African and Latin American peoples have advanced valiantly and won a series of significant victories in their struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism. On the other hand, the contention between the two super-Powers for world hegemony has become more md more intense. The whole world is in greater turbulence and unrest. Rhetoric about detente cannot cover up the stark reality. The danger of war is visibly growing.
61.	First of all, it should be pointed out that the great victory of the three Indo-Chinese peoples has shaken the world. The Cambodian and Vietnamese peoples have thoroughly defeated United States imperialism and its lackeys, thus making an important contribution to the anti-imperialist cause of the people of the world and greatly inspiring all oppressed nations and oppressed people. Their victory is a brilliant example showing that a weak nation can defeat a strong one, and a small nation can defeat a big one.
62.	The peoples of Asia are strongly against superPower interference and control and against the attempt of any country to seek hegemony in any part of Asia. The South-East Asian countries want their region to become a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality, free from any form or manner of interference by outside Powers. This position of theirs has won the recognition and respect of an increasing number of countries. The struggle of the South Asian peoples against expansionism and hegemonism has made new progress. In West Asia, long-standing disputes have been resolved by the countries concerned which excluded foreign influence and conducted consultations on an equal footing, thus creating favorable conditions for friendly co-operation among the countries in the region. The Gulf countries are uniting in the common struggle against super-Power infiltration and control.
63.	In Africa, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and the Comoros have achieved independence, one after another. This is the result of their persistence in protracted struggles, particularly armed struggles. The struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania against racism and white rule is developing in depth. The situation on the African continent is most encouraging.
64.	The struggle of the Latin American peoples to combat imperialism and hegemonism, safeguard State sovereignty and defend their national natural resources and economic rights and interests has continued to surge forward. Those peoples have reinforced their unity in the struggle in various ways.
65.	Furthermore, we are pleased to see that in Oceania Papua New Guinea has recently achieved its national independence.
66.	In order to change the old international economic order and oppose the shifting of economic crises, the third-world countries have, in pursuance of the Declaration and program of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)], adopted by the General Assembly at its sixth special session, advanced many reasonable proposals and waged unremitting struggles at various conferences and achieved marked successes.
67.	The unity and struggle of the third-world countries, extending from the political to the economic sphere, have ushered in a new stage in the revolutionary cause of the people of the world against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism.
68.	The countries of the second world have also heightened their struggle against super-Power, and particularly social-imperialist, control, intervention, subversion and threat of force. The trend among the West European countries to unite against hegemonism has continued to grow. The second world has increased its dialog and contacts with the third world. Such co-operation will doubtless have good prospects for development as long as it is based on mutual respect for sovereignty and equality.
69.	The contention between the two super-Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, extends to all parts of the world. Those Powers are intensifying iheir strife in Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean, the Pacific, the Atlantic, Asia, Africa and Latin America. Strategically, Europe is the focus of their contention. Social- imperialism is making a feint to the East while attacking in the West. This was revealed, rather than covered up, by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The two super-Powers do reach some agreements from time to time, but these only erect a facade, behind which they are engaged in bigger and fiercer contention.
70.	Take, for example, the agreement in principle reached at the United States-Soviet summit meeting last November on the limitation of strategic offensive arms. This agreement only sets a numerical limit on the arms in question, which exceeds the amount each side possesses at the moment, while qualitatively' it sets no limit at all. It is evident, therefore, that such an agreement should more appropriately be called an agreement on strategic arms expansion rather than an agreement on strategic arms limitation. Facts are at hand to prove this. Since the signing of this agreement, the United States and the Soviet Union have both stepped up their development and deployment of new types of strategic arms, each trying hard to overpower the other.
71.	Of late, the Soviet Union has made use of the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to turn out much propaganda alleging that detente has progressed to a new stage. This is sheer deception. We are aware of the eager desire for security on the part of the many small and medium-sized countries which participated in that Conference. We are also aware that such countries have no illusions about its agreements, which have no binding force. What security let alone detente— is there to speak of when Europe remains in the prolonged state of tense armed confrontation? While chanting "peace and security" in the conference hall, the Soviet Union made moves to aggravate tension outside. It not only concentrated massive military forces and carried out unbridled provocations in the seas of northern Europe and the Mediterranean, but it has also brazenly stretched its tentacles to the
Iberian peninsula. Such deeds of expansion coupled with words of detente are a huge mockery of the Conference. From its inception we considered the Conference a European insecurity conference. Now that this Conference has ended, is there greater security in Europe? In our view, no. The Conference has not altered the basis situation in Europe in the least. If one should be so naive as to believe in Soviet propaganda, that would be dangerous indeed.
72.	The Soviet leadership hankers after a so-called "Asian collective security system". Now that the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has been a success, as they say, we Asian countries should learn from its example. What a bright idea! The situation in Asia, however, is different from that in Europe. It was only a short while ago that a super-Power was driven out of Indo-China. So the purpose of the Soviet Union is not the preservation of Asian security; rather, it is to "fill the vacuum" and at the same time divert world attention to Asia to cover up the fact that Europe is the focus of its strategy. As for the principle of the inviolability of existing frontiers that was stressed at the European security Conference, what implications would it have in Asia? Is it that the Soviet Union wants, us to recognize as legal its occupation of the territories of some Asian countries while at the same fame allowing it to reserve the right to support one Asian country in violating the existing frontiers of another, as it did in 1971? To put it bluntly, the idea of a so-called "Asian collective security system" peddled by the Soviet leadership is designed to facilitate its contention with the other super-Power for hegemony in the Asia- Pacific region and serves as a means by which it seeks to divide and control the Asian countries. But the Asian countries, which won their independence after protracted struggles, know well that in order to be masters in their own house they must never "let the tiger in through the back door while expelling the wolf through the front gate". China's attitude towards this stuff of "Asian collective security system" is clear- cut: first, we are against it; second, we despise it.
73.	As Lenin pointed out time and again, imperialism means war. So long as imperialism and social-imperialism exist, war is inevitable. The content of imperialist politics is world domination, and the continuation of this politics is imperialist war. Since both super-Powers are after world domination, the contradiction between them is irreconcilable; one either overpowers the other, or is overpowered. The so- called "balance of power", even if it exists, is only a transient and superficial one. It will not do to depend on a "balance of power" or a so-called "balance of terror" for maintaining peace. Khrushchev's brainchild that peaceful coexistence is the only alternative in this nuclear age is a hypocritical lie. If the Soviet Union took this stuff seriously, why should it frantically develop conventional armed forces in addition to energetically developing nuclear arms and maintain an offensive posture far exceeding its defense needs? With the super-Powers contending so fiercely and expanding their armaments so madly, they are bound to go to war against each other some day. This is independent of man's will. The super-Powers are the source of a new world war, and the danger of war comes mainly from the wildly ambitious social-imperialism. The frequent meetings between the superpowers and their profuse talk about detente precisely prove that there is no detente, let alone lasting peace, in this world. What characterizes the current world situation is decidedly not an irreversible process of detente but the approaching danger of a new world war.
74.	We hope that the people of all countries will heighten their vigilance and get prepared in view of the growing danger of a new world war. It is better to be prepared than unprepared. Without preparations one will suffer. The super-Powers look strong but are inwardly weak and very isolated. The more evils they do, the more thoroughly they will reveal their true features, and the stronger the resistance of the people of the world will become. At present, the factors for both revolution and war are increasing on a world scale. Whether war gives rise to revolution or revolution prevents war, in either case the international situation will develop in a direction favorable to the people. And the future of the world will be bright.
75.	Numerous questions will be considered at the current session of the General Assembly. The Chinese delegation would like to state our views on some of them.
76.	First, there is the question of opposing colonialism. The past year was a year in which the African people continued to win important victories in their straggle for national independence and liberation. With the collapse of the Portuguese colonial system and the glorious birth of a number of newly independent States, the African national liberation movement has advanced to a new stage, and the last strongholds of colonialism in southern Africa are assailed from all sides by the multitude of African people and countries persisting in struggle.
77.	But even before old-line colonialism dies out, the two super-Powers have already stepped in. The United States has long supported colonial race in Africa, and southern Africa in particular. The Soviet Union, flaunting the banner of "socialism", has infiltrated the African national liberation movement to sow discord and stir up trouble in an attempt to bring the movement within its social-imperialist orbit.
78.	All revolutionary peoples of the world are saddened by the civil war in Angola. Differences within a national liberation movement are something normal. The correct attitude is to encourage unity in their common struggle to combat the enemy and drive out the colonialists. That is why the Organization of African Unity has recognized and supported all the three liberation organizations in Angola engaged in armed struggle and has made tireless efforts to promote unity in the Angolan national liberation movement. But the Soviet leadership, which considers itself as the patron of the national liberation movement, disregards the agreement reached among the three Angolan organizations on unity against the enemy and has, through its propaganda media, identified one organization as revolutionary and censured another as reactionary in a deliberate attempt to create division. Furthermore, it has sent large quantities of arms, including heavy arms, to one of the Angolan organizations. That was how t? civil war was provoked in Angola. The other super-Power, on its part, has not lagged behind. The situation in Angola is becoming ever more complicated.
79.	From the very beginning, China has given its support to the national liberation movement in Angola. We gave military aid to all three Angolan liberation organizations to help them fight Portuguese colonialism. Being aware of their differences, we have all along urged them to unite against the enemy. After the agreement on independence was reached between the Angolan national liberation movement and Portugal, we stopped giving new military aid to the three Angolan organizations. Such are the facts, and facts are more eloquent than words. The Soviet slanders against China can in no way cover up the truth; instead, they serve to lay bare the true features of the Soviet Union.
80.	The civil war in Angola instigated by the Soviet Union is a bad thing, but a good thing too. It is good precisely because it serves as teaching material by negative example. All revolutionary movements are bound to go through twists and turns. We believe that the broad masses of the Angolan people, after experiencing setbacks and detours, will certainly uphold unity, persist in struggle, frustrate the super-Power and particularly social-imperialist schemes and achieve their independence and liberation. Their temporary difficulties and sacrifices will not only greatly enhance their own political awareness, but also provide a profound lesson for the liberation movements of the oppressed nations throughout the world.
81.	An excellent situation prevails in Africa. It was because the racists in southern Africa were driven into a corner that Vorster of South Africa prorosed "dialog" between the minority white regime of Southern Rhodesia and the Zimbabwe national liberation organizations. This signifies only the weakness of the racists, not their strength. Through such tactics they intend to disintegrate the national liberation movement and to preserve the reactionary white rule. The recent twelfth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity penetratingly stated that " Vorster's detente manoeuvres on Rhodesia are a transparent trick to frustrate majority rule and to disarm the freedom-fighters". The Assembly stressed the necessity of armed struggle, called on the Zimbabwe' people to intensify immediately their armed struggle and expressed a determination to fight by every means possible the white racist regimes until their complete elimination. We warmly support this correct stand. We have always advocated the use of revolutionary dual tactics against the reactionaries' counter-revolutionary dual tactics. Armed struggle is fundamental; the people's armed forces must be strengthened and not weakened, negotiations or no negotiations. Deviations and detours may sometimes occur in the complicated struggle against counter-revolutionary dual tactics. But the people will sum up their experience, overcome difficulties and continue to advance. Through long and tortuous struggles the people of southern Africa will eventually win the complete liberation of the African continent.
82. Secondly, I take up the Korean question. The independent and peaceful reunification of Korea is the common aspiration of the entire Korean people. Over the years the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has put forward many reasonable proposals and propositions for the peaceful reunification of the fatherland. Thanks to its initiative, an agreement was reached with the South Korean authorities in 1972 on the three principles for independent and peaceful reunification, which were affirmed by the General Assembly in 1973.2 However, Korea remains divided today, because the Chung Hee Park clique, supported by the United States, has abandoned these principles and sabotaged the North-South talks.
83.	Under the impact of the great victory of the Indo-Chinese peoples this year, United States imperialism became panicky and endlessly repeated the myth of a so-called "threat of a southward invasion from the north" concocted by the Chung Hee Park clique, deliberately played up the tension on the Korean peninsula and even declared that it would not hesitate to use nuclear weapons there. Backed and abetted by the United States, the Chung Hee Park clique pursued its policy of national division with greater frenzy, issued a succession of "emergency laws", declared a state of war and intensified its suppression of the people in South Korea. It looked as if a Korean war was an imminent possibility. As a matter of fact, that was much ado about nothing. It is now cigar that the United States and the Chung Hee Park clique have acted in this way merely to create a pretext and deceive the people of the world so that United States troops may hang on in South Korea and the division of Korea may be perpetuated. If there is a danger of war on the Korean peninsula, it can only originate from the South Korean authorities that constantly clamor for "reunification by prevailing over communism", and absolutely not from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea which insists on independent and peaceful reunification.
84.	The draft resolution on Korea submitted by the United States, Japan and other countries this year [A/10142 and Add.1-7] claims a "preparedness" to terminate the United Nations Command. But there is no mention at all of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea. Obviously, its purpose is, under the cover of terminating the United Nations Command, to legalize the presence of United States troops in South Korea and create "two Koreas." The United States attempt to thrust the Chung Hee Park clique into the United Nations is part of this scheme. Clearly, such a draft resolution can by no means lead to a peaceful settlement of the Korean question, no matter how nicely it is worded. It is absolutely unacceptable to us.
85.	We have consistently held that the Korean question should be settled by the Korean people themselves free from any outside interference. The draft resolution on Korea submitted by Algeria, China and other other countries [A! 10191 and Add. 1-3] proposes that the United Nations Command be dissolved and all the foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations be withdrawn, and that the Korean Armistice Agreement be replaced with a peace agreement signed by the real parties to the Armistice Agreement. It also puts forward a series of positive measures to remove tension between North and South Korea, prevent armed conflicts and promote the normalization of the situation. This proposal is entirely just and reasonable.
It not only meets the eager desire of the entire Korean people but is conducive to the fundamental improvement of the situation on the Korean peninsula and in northeast Asia.
86.	The United Nations Command must be dissolved. From the day of its formation it has been illegal and a tool of United States aggression. In fact, it has become a United States command long since.
87.	However, the dissolution of the United Nations Command must be coupled with the withdrawal of all the foreign troops from South Korea. For what would be the point of merely changing the name while keeping everything else intact? Continued presence of United States troops in South Korea under whatever name contravenes the principles of the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and will only aggravate the tension on the Korean peninsula. The question of withdrawal of all the foreign troops from Korea should have been discussed and settled within three months after the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement. This has been delayed for no less than 22 years because of obstructions placed by successive United States administrations. And 17 years have passed since the Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew on their own initiative from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to facilitate a peaceful settlement of the Korean question. Now there are no foreign troops in North Korea, but United States troops still hang on in South Korea. For how much longer does the United States intend to prolong such a state of affairs?
88.	Korea cannot remain forever in a state of armistice. The United States representative's idea for the United States and the South Korean authorities to propose to the parties to the armistice the convening of a conference to discuss ways to preserve the Armistice Agreement is of no avail. The Korean Armistice Agreement has been in existence for 22 years, and how much longer will it be preserved? Moreover, as is known to all, the parties to the Korean Armistice Agreement have in fact changed a great deal. The Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew from Korea long ago. Most components of the United Nations Command have dispersed and evaporated into thin air. So how can such a conference be convened?
89.	As for the exploration at such a conference of the possibility of a larger conference to negotiate a more fundamental arrangement, is it not even more impractical? After the armistice in 1953, under the provisions of the Armistice Agreement a political conference at a higher level should have been held to settle the Korean question. However, owing to sabotage by the United States, even the preliminary talks failed to produce any result. Subsequently in 1954, the Korean and Chinese sides made tremendous efforts at Geneva to urge the convening of a political conference at a higher level in the hope that a peaceful settlement of the Korean question could be realized. At the time, the United States representative, stubbornly and arbitrarily clinging to his own course, went so far as to refuse to reopen any discussions on the Korean question in the future. Thus, the United States single-handedly slammed the door to a political conference on the Korean question. In the actual circumstances at present, the practical way is for the real parties to the Korean Armistice Agreement to negotiate and sign a peace agreement to replace it.
The facts over the past two decades and more prove that United States interference in Korea is the root- cause of constant tensions in Korea. Therefore, the key to a peaceful settlement of the Korean question lies in the conclusion of a peace agreement to replace the Armistice Agreement and in the withdrawal of all United States troops.
90.	The United States asserts that, as there is no normal international boundary between North and South Korea, the Armistice Agreement and the demilitarized zone stipulated therein absolutely must not be changed. We cannot accept this view. Korea is only in a state of temporary division. Between North and South Korea there can be no normal international boundary but only a provisional demarcation line. Since both North and South Korea have agreed on the mutual non-use of force and on reunification by peaceful means, why should it be impossible for some necessary measures to be agreed on to settle this problem pending the peaceful reunification? It is groundless to assert that a war will break out in Korea in the absence of the Armistice Agreement.
91.	The Chinese delegation maintains that the draft resolution on Korea sponsored by Algeria and other countries is one that can solve the problem. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will seriously consider and adopt this draft resolution.
92.	I now come to my third topic, the Middle East question. Since the October war, the Middle East has reverted to a state of "no war, no peace." This is the result of the fierce and many sided contention between the two super-Powers carried on against the will of the Arab and Palestinian peoples.
93.	During this period, disengagement agreements were signed between Egypt and Israel and between Syria and Israel. Recently, a second disengagement agreement has been signed by Egypt and Israel. Nevertheless, the Middle East question is far from being settled.
94.	It is mainly the two super-Powers that are to be held responsible for this state of affairs. In the two years since the October war, one super-Power proposed a "comprehensive solution" and the other a "step-by-step solution" of the Middle East question, each trying hard to boost itself and denigrate the other and masquerade as a friend of the Arab and Palestinian peoples. In fact, while the United States has no intention of bringing about a thorough settlement of the Middle East question, the Soviet Union is still less inclined to do so. It may be recalled that, when the October war in the Middle East was at its most critical juncture and thereafter, the Soviet Union withheld the shipment of arms already promised to Egypt and even pressed for the repayment of debts. How can one expect such a perfidious country to support in earnest the Arab people in their just.struggle for the recovery of the lost territories and the restoration of the Palestinian national rights?
95.	Both super-Powers have the need to maintain a state of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East —brief fighting followed by a period of truce, with both war and peace kept under control. Taking advantage of this state of affairs, they contend for spheres of influence, places of strategic importance and oil resources in the Middle East. Taking advantage of the same, they sell munitions in order to reap fabulous profits and alleviate their own economic difficulties. Again taking advantage of this, they test new weapons in preparation for a new war on a larger scale. All this is done at the expense of the fundamental interests of the people in the Middle East.
96.	Countless agreements on the Middle East have been reached inside and outside the United Nations in the past twenty-odd years. Now, in retrospect, is there any agreement that has been strictly observed by the Israeli aggressors, or that has brought about a basic change in the Middle East situation? None, practically none. In the final analysis, it is not agreements on paper but the struggle of the people that will determine the future of the Middle East. What calls for close attention and vigilance now is that a super-Power is taking advantage of the present situation to sow discord and attempt to undermine Arab unity. The Arab and Palestinian peoples must never be taken in.
97.	The Chinese people have consistently supported the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their just struggle against the Israeli aggressors and have all along opposed super-Power contention in the Middle East. We believe that the Palestinian and Arab peoples will continue to strengthen their unity, persevere in struggle and carry their fight against aggression and hegemonism through to the end.
98.	My fourth theme is the question of disarmament. Disarmament is an old question. At a time when there is a growing danger of a new world war, it is fully understandable that the people of all countries, and those of the third- and second-world countries in particular, should feel more concerned about this question. After the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Soviet leadership has become particularly clamorous for "complementing political detente by military detente", preaching that the most important task now is general and complete disarmament. This is making political profit out of the well- intentioned desire of the people of the world. It is a calculated fraud.
99.	Anyone having respect for realities can see that what exists in Europe is not political detente at all but a fierce and many-sided contention between the two super-Powers. Immediately after the conclusion of the European security Conference the Soviet Union violated Norway's airspace. Is this not another proof that the so-called detente is just empty talk? To advocate in these circumstances the expanding, developing in depth and spreading of detente can only make people laugh.
100.	Exploiting the developing countries' keen desire to improve their national economies, the Soviet Union recently has again trumpeted its proposal for a 10 per cent reduction of the military budgets of the five permanent members of the Security Council and the use of part of-the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries. The Soviet Union deems this proposal its masterstroke, and its representative has tried to sell it to us here for no one knows how many times. But so far he has failed to inform us just how big the real Soviet military budget is. It would probably take several years to get this clear. And who knows how many more before military budgets can truly be reduced as proposed by the Soviet
Union? This magnificent Soviet plan, to use a Chinese saying, is "to draw a pie to satisfy hunger". If the developing countries were made to wait for such assistance, would they not be left helpless like "the stranded fish which is promised water to be fetched from a distant sea"?
101.	China's views on disarmament are known to all: we are for disarmament, but it must be genuine and not phony disarmament. We are against phony disarmament, and still more against the Soviet attempt to use a disarmament conference as a veil to cover up the truth of its arms expansion and war preparations. The two super-Powers are quickening their pace towards a new world war. At this juncture, a disarmament conference in whatever form will only create the illusion of peace, serve to deceive and lull the people of the world and bind the hands of the numerous small and medium-sized countries. This is what we are firmly against.
102.	As regards a world disarmament conference, China keeps to the position it set forth long ago, namely, that such a conference must have a clear aim and fulfill the necessary pre-conditions. The clear aim is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and absolutely not the so-called limitation of strategic arms. The pre-conditions are: all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that they will not be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time and in any circumstances, and in particular will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries or nuclear-free zones, and that they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear-missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. But now the super-Powers even refuse to undertake the minimum obligation not to use nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear countries. How can it be said that conditions are ripe for holding a world disarmament conference?
103.	Historical experience merits attention. The more the imperialists diffuse a smoke-screen of disarmament, the bigger is the danger of war. Before the Second World War, a large-scale international disarmament conference lasting nearly three years was held under the sponsorship of the League of Nations after nearly seven years of preparation, and hundreds of proposals and suggestions were discussed. But what were the results? They were arms expansion instead of disarmament, and war instead of peace. The only effect of that conference was to put many countries off guard and as a result they were caught unprepared by the outbreak of the Second World War and suffered a great deal. We hold that the United Nations should not repeat the mistake of the League of Nations.
104.	Nevertheless, as was expected, the Soviet Union tabled at this session of the General Assembly a proposal for the "complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons tests" [At10241]. This is old ware in new wrappings and another of its tricks for maintaining nuclear monopoly. China's stand on this question is clear to all and we will not repeat it. As regards the Soviet proposal for the prohibition of the manufacture of what it calls new types of weapons even more formidable than nuclear weapons, its aim is none other than to divert people's attention from the immediate issues by talking about remote things. Let it be discussed by those who are prepared to manufacture such weapons. There is no need to bring it up here to scare people.
105.	My fifth point is the question of development. Since the sixth special session of the General Assembly, the third-world countries have waged an effective struggle and have put forward a series of reasonable proposals and ideas for transforming the old international economic order which was based on exploitation. The oil-exporting countries have bravely stood up to super-Power intimidation and threats, and have kept a firm hold on their oil resources and their right to fix oil prices. Many countries have taken measures to curb transnational corporations in order to regain their sovereign rights in varying degrees. Various associations of raw material-producing countries have been set up one after another. The third-world countries have put forward a number of proposals, such as the integrated program for commodities and the indexation of prices, for the transformation of the present irrational international economic order. The situation of the struggle in the economic field against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism is excellent.
106.	There are two conflicting positions on the question of development. The position taken by the third world is for maintaining independence and self-reliance, for transforming the old economic order of exploitation of the third world by a few big Powers and for establishing a new economic order on the principles of sovereignty, equality and mutual benefit. The other position, taken by the super-Powers, stresses "interdependence" or the "international division of labor" between the exploiting and the exploited countries in an attempt to preserve the old economic order. Are the industrially developed countries and the raw material-producing countries interdependent? Yes, they are. This interdependence has been in existence ever since the emergence of a single world market. The point is what kind of interdependence. It may be said that there is an interdependence between the horse and its rider. But, we all know it is the horse that takes the burden and not the rider. As for the "international division of labor", it is in essence one and the same as "interdependence". With the emergence of colonialism and imperialism, a new international division of labor sprang up in the world that converted one part of the globe into an area of chiefly agricultural production serving the other part which was chiefly industrial. But to call such cosmopolitan exploitation internationalism is an idea that could only be engendered in the brains of the social- imperialists. Whether or not there is exploitation in the existing international economic relations and whether or not an end should be put to such exploitation this is a real problem of great importance today.
107.	Towards the demand of the third world for transforming the old international economic order, two differing attitudes are adopted by different industrially developed countries. One is dialog, and the other confrontation. Since the use of oil as a weapon by the oil-exporting countries, one super-Power has kept hurling abuses and waving the big stick at them and even threatened them with armed intervention in an attempt to coerce them into submission. The other super-Power has chimed in, saying that oil prices should not be raised unilaterally and asserting threateningly that the aggravation of the oil problem may cause a new flare-up of international tensions. Both take an out-and-out imperialist attitude. We are firmly against this attitude. Facts show that this attitude, far from subduing the oil-exporting countries, only stimulated them to closer unity and hardened their fighting will. We are in favor of dialog. In the past year and more, many second-world countries have frequently tried dialog with a number of third- world countries, and some of these attempts have yielded positive results. Ties between the second world and the third world have been strengthened. This is a good phenomenon in the international economic life of today.
108.	In the face of the worsening capitalist economic crisis and the shifting of crisis by industrialized countries, the third-world countries have advanced such proposals as the integrated program for commodities, the indexation of prices and the democratization of the international financial institutions in order to improve their trade terms and develop their national economies. These are entirely justifiable and are minimum demands. But they have met with opposition from a few major industrialized countries. For they constitute a violation of the so-called free market system, which is allegedly sacred and inviolable. Instead, those industrialized countries have put forward a series of concrete proposals allegedly designed to "promote economic development". As a matter of fact, the so-called free market of today has never been free ever since the emergence of monopoly capital. This market is free only for monopoly capital and the industrial Powers and not for the developing countries. In the 1960s, for example, the prices of oil and many other raw materials were kept very low. Was that determined by supply and demand? No, it was determined arbitrarily, or "freely" if you like, by big monopoly capital. To transform the old international economic order, it is imperative to touch this free market system of gaining profits at the expense of others. Otherwise, no matter how many concrete proposals the super-Powers may submit or how much money they may promise, these in essence are nothing but a kind of alms and relief which can at best temporarily and slightly mitigate the difficulties of the developing countries but will not help them shake off exploitation and control. The root-cause of their poverty will still be there. The gap between the poor and rich countries will keep widening.
109.	The oil weapon has opened up new vistas for the anti-colonialist, anti-imperialist and anti-hegemonic struggle in the economic field. The key to the victories of the oil struggle lies in upholding unity and daring to touch what the industrial Powers regard as sacred and inviolable. All raw material-producing countries should get organized and fight in defense of their proper interests. Some people accuse the Organization of Petroleum-Exporting Countries of being a monopoly organization, a cartel. Why do they not stop and think that cartels, trust and transnational corporations were inventions of the industrial Powers and that to date they still weigh heavily on the developing countries? Are we to tolerate the injustice of the magistrates being allowed to burn down houses while the common people are forbidden to use fire even to light lamps? All the developing countries should unite more closely. It is true that among the developing countries some are in the greatest need. Other countries should give them more help, and they have already begun to do so. The neediest and other developing countries share common experiences and face common tasks. To call the neediest countries the "fourth world" is groundless or ill-intentioned. There are no saviors in the world. To develop the national economy, a country must persist in independence and self-reliance. Political independence is not won easily, so it is essential to give play to State sovereignty to eliminate gradually but firmly the forces of imperialism and all forces of colonialism and neocolonialism. The old international economic order was evolved over centuries of colonialist and imperialist plunder and exploitation. It is impossible to thoroughly change it at one stroke. The seventh special session of the General Assembly is a continuation of the struggle of the sixth special session. The struggle against exploitation will be a long one. United as one and persisting in our efforts, we developing countries will surely attain our goal.
110. Before concluding my speech, I would like to state briefly our opinions on the review of the Charter of the United Nations. We are in favor of reviewing the Charter and making the necessary amendments. Nothing in the world is immutable. The situation within and outside the United Nations has changed, and it is only natural that the Charter should be amended accordingly so as to suit the changed situation. This is common sense. Basing themselves on the purposes and principles of the Charter, many countries have put forward views in principle on the revision of certain provisions of the Charter, such as expanding the power of the General Assembly, restricting the power of the Security Council, changing the composition of the Council, limiting or abolishing the veto right of the States permanent members of the Council. We think that these views deserve serious consideration. Since the Charter was drawn up by man, why cannot it be revised by man? But the super-Powers are greatly upset by the changed situation within the United Nations. One super-Power describes the democratic voting in the General Assembly as a "tyranny of the majority". The other goes further; at the mere mention of the phrase "review of the United Nations Charter," it flies into a rage and breaks into abuse, calling people in favor of reviewing the Charter "reactionary forces". It mortally fears that it might be deprived of its privilege to abuse the veto power. We would advise this "natural ally of the developing countries" to calm down a bit and not get so exasperated. If you are sure that you have the truth, why are you so afraid of dissenting views? A review of the Charter is the general trend and popular demand. We believe that a rational solu-tion acceptable to all can be found so long as the nations, big and small, carry on patient consultations and repeated discussions on the basis of the principle of equality for all. If anyone still resorts to deliberate obstructions, that can only help people see more clearly who are champions of the special privileges of the minority. Therefore, we submit that the work of the review of the Charter should be continued.

Since the founding of the United Nations a period of time has elapsed which we normally call a generation.
68.	This is a singularly appropriate occasion to consider what the United Nations has accomplished during these past three decades and what remains to be done. I am pleased to see as the President of the General Assembly the Prime Minister of a country which is not only associated with my country in close friendship but whose outward-looking attitude and whose willingness for international co-operation are exemplary. The spirit with which your country and you personally, Mr. President, participate in this co-operation both in Europe and in the world presents an example as well as a challenge, Please accept my warm congratulations on your election to this responsible office.
69.	At the same time I wish to express my thanks to the outgoing President, Mr. Bouteflika, the Foreign Minister of Algeria, who held this office during a very difficult period in the history of the United Nations.
70.	The first 30 years of the life of the United Nations have witnessed fundamental changes in the world from which this Organization has not been excepted. We are all familiar with the graph which depicts the population explosion; a curve which runs almost horizontally for thousands of years, then begins to rise and in the middle of this century suddenly shoots up almost vertically. The graphs depicting the advancement of science and technology, the growth of production and consumption, world trade and communication and, not least, the destructive force of weapons, are no different.
71.	Everywhere developments have been explosive. Within that same period the number of nations has trebled. The original Organization had 51 Members, now it has over 140. The world was then dominated by a rigid regime of bipolar confrontation of two blocs; now it is a complex, multipolar world in which multifarious forces and aspirations are asserting themselves. This process is sharply reflected within the United Nations. Nothing has had a greater influence on its development than the emergence of the third world as a separate independent element of world politics, freed from colonial dependence and vested with the same rights and obligations as all other States.
72.	Over and above their different views and attitudes, the nations which make up our world find themselves forged more and more into a community of destiny. The destructive power of modern weaponry, which has grown to immeasurable proportions, has produced a single, global security interest, and the abrupt expansion of productive power has created a single global economy. Security and economic growth and stability cannot be guaranteed today by any one State alone and in isolation. Whether it is a question of preventing a nuclear catastrophe, of fighting international terrorism, of overcoming inflation and recession, or of preserving ecological and environmental conditions on this planet, the problems that have to be resolved are everywhere beyond the resources of any individual nation and can be met only if all States and all groups of States work together.
73.	The problems have become global. The irresistible trend towards ever greater interdependence is the distinguishing feature of the new age; it is the course of world history. For the first time mankind as a whole is moving towards a common future: either to survive together or to perish together, to prosper together or to decline together. The world as a whole lives under the iron law of interdependence: its parts cannot prosper unless the whole prospers.
74.	Slowly, this development is beginning to be realized and appreciated. This is indicated by the close co-operation among the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development countries in seeking to overcome the consequences of the world economic crisis, by the constructive consensus reached by the General Assembly at its seventh special session, which tried to achieve an equitable balance of interests between industrialized and developing countries, by the reaffirmation of the will for detente and co-operation between East and West as expressed at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, and by the initiation of the European-Arab dialog.
75.	We all know the only alternative to common progress is common chaos. We are called upon resolutely to choose the course of co-operation and consistently to develop the foundations of that cooperation which have so far been laid by the United Nations. The task is to strengthen the awareness of interdependence and, as a consequence, to assert the policy of co-operation once and for all in the face of the powerful forces of traditional doctrines and ideologies, to assert it both externally and internally. Because it is also necessary that the individual citizen, too, should develop an understanding for the new constraints of interdependence and that he should muster the will for international solidarity. For the possibilities open to Governments in pursuing such a policy of solidarity reach only as far as the people themselves appreciate the need for it and are therefore prepared to support it. The present crisis of the world economy gives us a chance to draw the necessary conclusions from these considerations and insights.
76.	It would be wrong if the wealthy countries were to resort to the attitude of "every man for himself'. It would be wrong if the destruction rather than the further elaboration of the international economic system were to be regarded as the way out of the difficulties with which we are confronted in the development process. It would be equally wrong if part of the industrialized countries were to refuse to join in the necessary world-wide solidarity between industrialized and developing countries by referring to the colonial past of others and to their own non-colonial past true or alleged.
77.	Interdependence postulates the common weal universally. This must be the guideline for our action and this goal can be reached only through a policy of an equitable balance of interests.
78.	In spite of all setbacks and catastrophes our century has so far also been one of unparalleled progress for mankind. The challenges facing us in our shrinking world are extraordinary both in terms of their novelty and of their magnitude. But also extra-ordinary and unparalleled in history are the means we have at our disposal to meet those challenges. If we use them rationally and co-operatively and do not squander them in irrational conflict, we shall be able to master those tasks.
79.	The founders of the United Nations set the world the three big tasks laid down in our Charter: to maintain peace, to respect human rights and the right of self-determination, and to promote economic and social progress. What was a vision in 1945 has turned into reality today: the global interdependence of one world.
80.	The three great challenges of our time are: we must proceed from economic egotism to a worldwide reliable regime of co-operation among equals; we must proceed from the proclamation of human rights to their world-wide application and to the implementation of the right of self-determination wherever that right is still being denied; and we must proceed from the management of crises to a just and thereby lasting peace.
81.	Our first goal is to establish a reliable regime of economic co-operation. The seventh special session, which has just concluded, marked a promising beginning in our endeavor to establish a system of economic co-operation which is based on the simple realization that we are all in the same boat. During the very intensive but business-like negotiations the Assembly gave an example of a world-wide spirit of co-operation. This will make it easier to embark on the road towards a just balance of interests. For a number of problems the foundations for solutions have been laid. Some questions still require clarification, while the consequences of others need to be studied. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has joined in the consensus because it is based on the idea of reasonable and necessary reform, but not on revolutionary changes in the international economic order.
82.	The present world-wide recession has made all of us keenly aware of the relationship which I earlier called the iron law of interdependence: the parts cannot prosper unless the whole prospers. The growth rates of national economies have become interdependent. This applies also to the relationship between industrialized and developing countries. Higher growth rates in the industrialized countries mean higher growth rates in the developing countries, and lower growth rates in the industrialized countries mean lower growth rates in the developing countries. The fact that all of us recognized and accepted this interrelationship made the satisfactory result of the seventh special session possible.
83.	It is also in this spirit of co-operation that my country will enter the forthcoming producer-consumer dialog. In a world economy which can only grow and develop through joint efforts all partners have to bear their particular share of responsibility. Thus, because of their economic significance and weight, the industrialized countries have to assume a special responsibility. My Government is conscious of that responsibility and acts accordingly.
84.	In close co-ordination with the other industrialized countries having a free market economy my Government endeavors to set in motion a process of economic upswing without, however, providing inflationary impulses. By opening up markets and intensifying co-operation with the developing countries this economic upswing is especially intended to benefit the developing countries. We are against exporting our difficulties by taking restrictive measures and we consistently uphold a policy of further opening up markets, especially with regard to imports from the developing countries.
85.	As the role of the developing countries on the world economic scene grows, there is an increase in the responsibility which they, too, have to bear in all fields, including commodities and energy. Together we want to break and reverse the trend which in the past has continued to widen the gap between the rich and the poor. One objective is to achieve the general growth of the world economy; the other objective is to overcome inequality. We feel that these aims can best be achieved by basing the economic relations between States on the principles of the market economy, irrespective of their domestic economic systems.
86.	I turn now to the question of self-determination and human rights. In a system of co-operation among equals which our Organization intends to bring about, a central role falls to the application of the right of nations to self-determination. A true world community of States and peoples will emerge only if the nations are integrated within that community on the basis of free self-determination. Only in such a world can the readiness to assume responsibility for the whole fully develop. The right of nations to self-determination is therefore a fundamental principle of our system.
87.	During the first decades of the United Nations the basis for a universal international community was created through the implementation of the right of self-determination of the former colonies. At this year's session of the General Assembly too, three new States have joined our Organization, and 1 wish to take this opportunity to bid Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe a warm welcome to our Organization, which is becoming truly universal.
88.	The process of decolonization is drawing to its close. There are only a few regions left in the world to which the outdated system of colonialism still clings. But that system's days are numbered. We trust that in southern Africa, too, those days will come to an end without violence and devastation. The Federal Government therefore welcomes the decision taken by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, held at Dar es Salaam in April 1975, that in the solution of pending problems preference should be given to negotiations. It welcomes also the efforts made by the leaders of both the black and the white communities in Southern Rhodesia to establish a new and just order through negotiations and thus to avert the danger of a civil war and bloodshed.
89.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany strongly advocates the granting of the right of self-determination to the people of Namibia. The Government of the Republic of South Africa itself has stated that it does not consider Namibia to be South African territory. It must finally and quickly draw the conclusions from this and lead Namibia to independence without delay and more quickly than has so far been envisaged. The Federal Government has repeatedly and urgently brought its attitude to the attention of the Government of the Republic of South Africa and will continue to do so. With no less urgency it advocates the abolition at long last of the inhuman system of apartheid practiced in the Republic of South Africa, a system which we condemn.
90.	That last question leads me to the subject of human rights. The United Nations, which has achieved so much in promoting the application of the right of self-determination, has also been able to lay essential foundations on which to secure respect for human rights. By means of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [resolution 217 A (III)] and the human rights Covenants [see resolution 2200 A (XXI)] based on it, the United Nations has defined the term "human rights" and received acceptance of that definition all over the world. It is now up to us to see to it that human rights are implemented everywhere in practice. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will support all proposals aimed at strengthening the role of the United Nations with regard to the implementation of human rights.
91.	Human rights must apply everywhere; they must apply in all continents. And, as a European, I add that they must apply also in all parts of Europe. The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has drawn the conclusion from this and made the implementation of human rights a major subject,
92.	Freedom of movement is one of the basic rights guaranteed both by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and by the human rights Covenants. And, indeed, if co-operation in Europe is to be extended more and more, people must no longer be prevented from meeting freely. The decisions taken at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe abound with specific promises of improvements in Europe both as regards this right and as regards other human rights. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will gauge the worth of the results of the Conference particularly by the manner in which and when those promises are fulfilled.
93.	I turn now to the safeguarding of peace. Peace is the prerequisite for progress in all other spheres. It therefore remains a primary task of the United Nations to safeguard peace.
In this respect I would refer to the peace policy of the Federal Republic of Germany. Being fully aware of this perspective, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has from the very beginning pursued a policy aimed at the maintenance of peace. This goes for our own national policies as Well as for our co-operation within the European Community, that great and promising union of European States, and for our membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the defense alliance whose purpose it is to safeguard peace. By pursuing a consistent policy of the non-use of force, the Federal Government has promoted detente in Europe and thus laid the foundation for growing and mutually fruitful co-operation with our neighbors in the East. Let me mention here in this connexion the Treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague. The same is true of the Treaty on the Basis of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic done at Berlin on 21 December 1972.
95.	On the occasion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, additional arrangements were concluded in a spirit of mutual understanding with the Polish People's Republic concerning outstanding questions. These arrangements are intended, after a past full of misery and distress, to bring about the reconciliation of the two peoples and to lead to long-term co-operation between partners.
96.	The Federal Government includes in its policy of the non-use of force and detente our most painful problem also: the division of Germany. It is our aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self- determination.
97.	I reaffirm our belief that history has not spoken the last word on the division of the German nation. The nation's will to achieve its unity will preserve its historical strength. The conclusion of the Treaty on the Principles of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic is evidence of our determination to exhaust all possibilities of peaceful co-operation also in the relationship between the two German States.
98.	Building on its bilateral policy of detente and on the treaties it has concluded in this connexion, as well as on the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, signed on 3 September 1971, the Federal Government has played an active part in the work of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, because no nation in Europe senses more keenly than the German people the danger emanating from the division of our continent. The participating States want the results of the Conference to have effect throughout Europe. Indeed, security and co-operation must prove their worth particularly in that city which in the years of the cold war so often was the scene of dangerous tensions which affected the whole world the city of Berlin. Berlin remains the barometer of detente. Detente presupposes mutual confidence.
99.	Distrust and fear will only revive the former state of tension in Europe. This is why the Federal Government has begun, without delay, to implement the confidence-building measures decided upon at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. It was the first Government taking part in that Conference to announce to all other participants military maneuvers in accordance with the provisions of the Final Act of Helsinki, However, the results of the Conference are important not only for Europe. Detente in Europe should, and can, release political and economic energies which have so far been bound up in sterile conflicts. If this happens, we will have added strength to face the big challenge of our time: the reduction of the gap between rich and poor countries.
100.	In the matter of disarmament and the non- proliferation of nuclear weapons, of great importance for the safeguarding of world peace is a persistent policy of arms control and arms reduction. The Federal Government takes an active part in the negotiations in Vienna which are to lead to mutual and balanced force reductions in central Europe. It is our aim to achieve a stable balance of forces since only on the basis of equal security for all concerned will detente and trustful co-operation be possible.
101.	The Federal Government lends the same active support to all measures likely to contain and ultimately to stop the world-wide arms race. Balanced and controlled disarmament is one of our most urgent tasks. The United Nations can and must make a major contribution to its fulfillment.
102.	Likewise, one of the most pressing challenges to this interdependent world is to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The dissemination of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes will quicken considerably in the years ahead. It has been estimated that the number of nuclear reactors available in 1980 will be 15 times greater than the number in use in 1970. The operation of those reactors would make possible the potential production of up to 26,000 kilograms of plutonium in the non-nuclear-weapon States every year as from the early 1980s in other words, enough to make 50 atomic bombs a week. So the task we have to solve is to use the advantages of peaceful nuclear technology without at the same time proliferating nuclear weapons.
103.	As one of the leading producers of nuclear installations for peaceful purposes, the Federal Republic of Germany realizes that it has a special responsibility in helping to find a solution to this problem. Consequently, in every case in which it exports nuclear installations it adheres strictly to the provisions of the non-proliferation Treaty, of which it is a member, and to the safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency. In addition, it subjects itself to the commitments under the Euratom Treaty. It actively supports proposals aimed at further strengthening these safeguards and developing uniform criteria for the export of fissionable material and nuclear equipment.
104.	Let me say a word about regional crises. The policy of detente between East and West helps to consolidate peace in Europe. But in our neighborhood the sources of crisis smolder on, and the most dangerous of them is the Middle East conflict. Nowhere is it more obvious that present-day problems can no longer be resolved by war, that war is no meaningful alternative to a political settlement, that war is no longer an ultima ratio but an ultima irratio.
105.	Four sorrowful wars have failed to hammer out a solution in the Middle East, and a fifth Middle 
142
East war could have disastrous consequences. The Federal Government, therefore, welcomes with great relief the Egyptian-Israeli interim agreement of 4 September. This agreement is the result of statesman-like action on the part of all concerned. Further steps will have to follow if the momentum of this constructive development which has been set in motion is to be maintained. Standing still would mean taking a step backward and would in the end even wipe out the progress made so far.
106.	The Federal Republic of Germany supports all efforts to bring about further steps along the path of negotiations. An informal multilateral discussion of the problems to be solved, as suggested by the Secretary of State of the United States [2355th meeting], could indeed be useful in promoting a subsequent peace conference.
107.	The path towards a just balance of interests in the Middle East has been sketched out by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). This means, among other things, that any peace settlement that is to last must respect Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries; it must give effect to the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people; and it must include the termination of the occupation.
108.	This is the attitude adopted by the Federal Republic of Germany, in full agreement with its partners in the European Community. The Federal Government is most anxious that equitable and lasting peace should prevail in the Middle East, which is a neighboring region to us. It therefore seeks to make every contribution possible, both bilaterally and within the framework of the European Community, towards bringing about such peace.
109.	In Cyprus, too, a negotiated solution must quickly be found. The Federal Government, therefore, regrets that the fourth round of talks between the representatives of the two communities, which was scheduled for 8 and 9 September in New York, had to be postponed because of the lack of concrete proposals. The tragic events of 1974 were the upshot of letting things drag on for years and years without reaching the necessary compromise. Now, at least, a lesson should be drawn from this. The deadlock caused by the fact that each side is waiting for the other to be the first to make concessions must be broken. The Federal Government therefore appeals to all concerned to resume the negotiations as soon as possible. Any solution must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus.
110.	Cyprus needs a federal structure that will accommodate the interests of both communities. Accommodating the interests of both communities also requires correcting the present demarcation line between them. The Federal Government seeks, both bilaterally and together with its partners in the European Community, to give diplomatic assistance in the search for a solution and humanitarian assistance to ease the misery of the refugees.
J11. As in the Middle East, the peace-keeping forces of the United Nations in Cyprus, too, are making an indispensable contribution towards maintaining an atmosphere in which constructive efforts to find a solution can be made. The same applies to the endeavors of the Secretary-General to facilitate discussions between the two communities. I wish to express to the Secretary-General and to his staff the appreciation and the thanks of the Federal Government.
112.	I turn now to the question of strengthening the United Nations. In the efforts to establish a regime of co-operation in the spirit of global interdependence and joint responsibility, the United Nations must play a central role. In the past 30 years the United Nations has made an essential contribution preventing crises and to containing or overcoming existing ones. It has helped to accelerate the process of decolonization. It has spread the demand for the implementation of human rights throughout the world. And it has fully brought home to the public the crucial task of our time, the economic development of the third world, and has evolved a consistent strategy and a coherent strategy for tackling this task.
113.	With the growing awareness of global interdependence, the role of the United Nations, the only universal Organization in this world, must continue to increase. The prerequisite for this will be that we do all we can to achieve and maintain universality. We must continuously adapt the structure of the Organization to the changing situation and tasks in the world. The countries of the European Economic Community [££C], in a declaration of 17 June 1975, have again stressed their support of the United Nations and have spoken out in favor of the strengthening of its role. The President of EEC, the Italian Foreign Minister, Mr. Rumor, reaffirmed this willingness in an impressive way yesterday in this forum [2357th meeting]. The Federal Republic of Germany fully endorses this commitment regarding the United Nations. Only if the nations of the world will join in a spirit of genuine co-operation can the tasks of the United Nations be successfully mastered. Only if we succeed in bringing to bear everywhere that spirit of genuine co-operation within the United Nations will we be able to tackle the tasks confronting us to safeguard international peace; to implement everywhere the right of peoples to self- determination as well as their human rights; and to promote the common weal universally through economic and social progress. The Federal Government is determined to support all efforts towards that end.
1.	 Mr. President, it is with great pleasure that I should first of all like to convey to you my own congratulations and the congratulations of my country. I am personally delighted to see my colleague and friend, Gaston Thorn, preside over the work of the General Assembly. Through its excellent choice the Assembly has not only paid a tribute to a country dedicated to the cause of peace and international co-operation, but it has also secured for itself the talents of an exceptionally experienced, wise statesman who happens also to be one of the great architects of European construction. You, Sir, have continually laid emphasis on the task of opening up a united Europe towards the rest of the world, and particularly towards the developing countries. That concern, as you know, is fully shared by the French Government. Therefore France cannot but be gratified to see such a great European as yourself shouldering the burden and responsibilities that have been entrusted to you by this Assembly.
2.	I must say, too, how much we owe to the outgoing President, Mr. Bouteflika, on whom fell the important task of presiding, at times under difficult conditions, over the previous session of this Assembly and over the seventh special session.
3.	I should like, finally, to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, who presides over the work of our Organization with an authority, a competence and an impartiality that are universally recognized.
4.	The annual meeting of the General Assembly is a particularly privileged moment for all of us who represent our Governments here, but who at the same time also feel responsible, for that very reason, for the higher interests of the emerging world community.
5.	The crisis which we are going through, which perhaps for the first time in history affects the entire world, is the result of a genuine change, a complete breakaway from the old system of balances. The upheavals this crisis brings in its wake, the risks it comprises, pose a real threat to our future. But man's special characteristic is his ability to react to control his destiny.
6.	An example of this healthy reaction was recently seen at the seventh special session, and this is probably the most encouraging feature of the whole of the past year. Faced with increasing dangers, we have all recognized the obvious globalization of the economic and political problems of our age, as well as the need to resolve them by appreciating all the consequences of our indissoluble solidarity.
7.	This realization helps us to realize the importance, the very great importance, of the collective responsibility borne by our Governments. What we have to do is master and control what the President of the French Republic has described as "the crisis of the human race". It is outskirt bring under control the fever for change with which the human race is obsessed and master its course, because ultimately this crisis reflects the growing pains of all mankind. This is the price we have to pay for the tremendous progress we have achieved both in technology and in the political sphere. It is the fruit of persisting inequalities and injustices.
8.	In mankind's long march towards the achievement of the goals of the United Nations, economic justice is still lagging behind political evolution, and the desire of the less privileged States to obtain their fair share of the fruits of economic growth is most certainly justified. However, where this political determination was expressed in ideological terms, and where the rich countries bridled in defense of their privileges, there was a risk of the emergence and exacerbation of disastrous tension.
9.	At the end of 1973 and early in 1974, an infinitely dangerous trend started to divide the world into hostile blocs. France, through its President, underlined the gravity of the danger in time, and indicated the measures needed to avert it.
10.	The President's appeal was heeded, and I like to think that it has contributed to the very favorable developments we have witnessed in recent months. The results already achieved, as regards both the final resolution of the seventh special session [resolution 3362 (S-VII)] and the now forthcoming resumption of the dialog proposed by France between the industrialized and the developing countries, guarantee that we are now taking the right course.
11.	Although the subject is important, I shall not dwell on the results of the seventh special session except to stress once again that the results obtained
A/PV.2364 
complement the work that will be done at the enlarged conference which will follow up the second preparatory meeting in Paris. Let us note in this regard that the very importance of the subjects to be discussed demonstrates the political dimension of the undertaking, which was begun on behalf of our international community and in close liaison with the United Nations.
12.	It is now, therefore, quite clear that we should set as our target the gradual establishment of a political and economic world order based, not on positions of strength, but on dialog, solidarity and respect for the interests of others.
13.	For this we must keep our feet on the ground, but we also must demonstrate imagination and generosity in our response to the expectations of those who are least privileged, and all those whose problems come in the tragically brutal form of famine, death and loss of liberty.
14.	In a world where the spirit of violence, alas, is prevalent, where odious acts of terrorism and the taking of hostages seem to be replacing conventional warfare, let us proclaim that such actions are contrary to human rights; they solve nothing and corrupt the noblest aims. But at the same time let us realize that in order to halt the momentum of violence, the rights of individuals and of peoples must be recognized everywhere.
15. Let us make no mistake about the immensity of the task before us. A great deal remains to be done in order to achieve the tone and specific realization of the aims and objectives of our Organization. Tenacious determination, expressed through effective instruments, is required of us all.
16.	The Charter has given us the framework for our common efforts; hence the importance of the effective-ness of the United Nations.
17.	Our Organization, which is now 30 years old, may have been disappointing to those who forgot that its ability to settle conflicts depended on the cooperation of Member States. It has in fact done some extremely useful work and, as our Secretary-General quite rightly noted in the introduction to his last report on the work of the Organization, it has: "... shown a remarkable capacity to take on new tasks, to adjust to a changing world . . . within the conceptual and organizational framework laid down by the Charter." [A1100011.Add.I, sect. I.]
18.	Both this flexibility and this strength are without . a doubt due to the wisdom with which the founders
of our Organization, in San Francisco, were able to balance ideals and reality, rigorous principles and political realism. This balance, which has enabled it to withstand the test of time, is basic and we believe must be protected from all perfectionism.
19.	It is obvious that, given the current state of affairs, the United Nations is not and cannot be a world government. The present phase in the history of mankind is one of affirmation of independence. It is also one of consultation, more necessary than ever among sovereign States. That observation places in its proper perspective the problem resulting from the emergence of majorities which, by the way, change in international assemblies. This is a natural phenomenon once the law of democracy and thus the law of numbers is agreed to, but it is a phenomenon that should not be allowed to obscure the real mission of these assemblies and above all ours which is to seek compliance with universally accepted rules and intentions. Nor has our Charter set up a world system in which the Assembly holds sway. It provides for permanent adjustment procedures among us; a good example of this is the division of responsibilities between the General Assembly and the Security Council, because it is based on realities that it would be dangerous to forget.
20.	It is also obvious that the United Nations can be true to itself and fulfill its mission only if it respects the cardinal principle of universality, both by admitting any State that meets its requirements and by refusing to reject States whose policies might be unpopular, except for cases strictly defined in the Charter. In either case, the golden rule of universality, towards which decisive progress has been made in the past few years, must not be broken.
21.	We are pleased, in this respect, that a new step has been taken with the admission of three new Members: the Cape Verde Islands, Sao Tome and Principe, and Mozambique.
22.	We for our part were prepared to support also the applications of the two Viet Nams, as well as that of the Republic of South Korea, countries with which we have friendly diplomatic relations and which we should have liked to see join the Organization. We regret that the turn taken by the Security Council deliberations did not allow such a step to be taken this year.
23.	It is because France attaches the greatest importance to this principle of universality that it believes that any measure aimed at suspending or excluding any of our Members would bring into our Organization an element of mistrust and pressure that would be totally alien to the spirit of dialog that should prevail here.
24.	It is by remaining what it is a privileged and universal forum for consultation and dialog that our Organization will be in the best position to translate the ideals of the Charter into reality.
25.	In this attempt to advance towards a better world political and economic order, I shall first of all point out two factors which are sound reasons for having confidence in the future. The first has to do with the successful development of regional groups; the second, with detente in Europe.
26.	World consultation which should prevail in no way precludes, but rather presupposes, the grouping of co-operation efforts along regional lines. These groups of States will be a factor in conciliation and increased international co-operation provided they turn their backs on any tendency to form opposing blocs and follow the rule of openness and dialog. This, as you know, is the byword and raison d'etre of the nine members of the European Community.
27.	I think that as I said last year the task under-taken by six countries of Western Europe following the last world war is exemplary in many respects.
28.	The work begun by those six countries is now being carried forward by the nine. An unequivocal vote by the British people recently confirmed this irreversible commitment to building Europe. This task is being actively pursued with a determination that is both ambitious and pragmatic. Out of this spirit grew last year's decision by the Heads of Government a decision that has now been fully implemented to meet periodically in order to maintain the co-ordination and momentum vital to the internal process of construction as well as to the attitudes and actions of Europe in the international community of nations.
29.	This Europe, contrary to certain assertions, is in no way self-centered or preoccupied with its own future. It has been its intention from the beginning to make its contribution to the world scene as an independent source of decision and initiative, and also as a factor of equilibrium and imagination in a world of interdependence and mutual opening up.
30.	That was the main thrust of the statement by the nine European Heads of State and Government at their meeting on 17 July this year at Brussels.
31.	The current President of the nine countries —Mr. Rumor, our Italian colleague reported on the progress that has already been made [2357th meeting]. I myself shall just mention the important contribution of the ACP-EEC Convention at Lome, which, starting early this year, has opened the way for new forms of co-operation.
32.	Secondly, to stress its political importance, I shall mention the European-Arab dialog that has now been started between the Community and all the countries of the League of Arab States. New ties of solidarity, adapted to the needs of our time, have to be woven between two groups of people, heir to two of the civilizations that shared the ancient world and that history has made enemy and ally in turn.
33.	The Europe of the Community, Mr. President and I know I do not have to convince one of its prime movers of this is a voice speaking for many, making itself heard in favor of greater international co-operation. Thus, Europe is dedicating itself to the service of peace and democracy, while respecting the interests and freedoms of others. The positions that it has taken with regard to the Middle East, Cyprus and Portugal are proof of this.
34.	The strengthening of detente in Europe is another mayor positive factor which should help us to concentrate on the real problems which people will have to face at the end of the twentieth century. France, which provided the initial impetus 10 years ago, took an active part in the work of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, in close collaboration with its Community partners; it helped to see to it that the Final Act of the Conference signed at Helsinki on 1 August not only endorsed the commitment of the participants to exclude all recourse to force but also laid the foundations for the development of entente and co-operation among the signatory States. Of course there remains the task of translating into reality these very specific declarations of intent regarding increased exchanges of people and ideas, thereby giving positive content to detente. It is because France believes in the sincerity of the desire of all its partners for detente that it intends to apply along with them the letter and the spirit of the decisions made at Helsinki. In any case, the curtain has already come down on an era that has ended the era of the cold war. An objective has been jointly set; that objective is entente and cooperation. This result is not insignificant and constitutes a useful precedent for the entire world.
35.	Let us be glad in this respect that in other regions of the globe some progress has been made along the path of conciliation and the settling of conflicts.
36.	I should like to mention the Middle East first. I hardly need restate the three principles on which, in our view, a lasting peace settlement must necessarily be founded: withdrawal from the territories occupied by Israel in June 1967; recognition of the right of the Palestinians to a homeland; the right of all the States of the region to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed frontiers.
37.	France believes that for these three principles to be implemented it is indispensable for the spirit of dialog to prevail over the spirit of confrontation. That is why we welcomed and consider a positive step the disengagement agreement signed in Geneva on 4 September by the representatives of Egypt and Israel. That agreement is to be commended and is encouraging proof of the commitment of the parties concerned to the process of negotiation.
38.	The detente that has thus been brought about, as President El-Sadat of Egypt has noted, and as Mr. Henry Kissinger of the United States underscored a few days ago from this rostrum [.2355th meeting], should now make it possible to embark on an overall settlement which, by attacking the basic problems, is the only possible way of averting the risk of other major crises and establishing a lasting peace between Israel and its neighbors. Without prejudice to what may be done on other fronts, a global approach is called for. My Government has always advocated this; similarly, when there arises the question of over-all guarantees to strengthen peace in the region, France, and I believe Europe, will be ready to take an active part in them.
39.	I should not like to leave the subject of the Middle East without mentioning the current ordeals Lebanon is undergoing. My Government and the European Community wish to stress the vital importance of maintaining the independence, unity and integrity of that friendly country, which is an essential factor for equilibrium in the region. I am convinced that all the groups of the Lebanese community, as well as the parties concerned, aware of the seriousness of the situation, will do everything they can to help the Government in its efforts to maintain public order and to strengthen national unity.
40.	In Asia, peace has finally returned to Viet Nam. But the length of the conflict, the damage inflicted and the suffering caused make it even more urgent and necessary here than elsewhere for genuine cooperation to be established. France, which since 1954 has had official relations with the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam, has begun relations with the new authorities of the Republic of South Viet Nam and remains ready to take an active part in the reconstruction of the country. We hope to have with the Vietnamese people relations based on mutual esteem and trust.
41.	As far as Cambodia is concerned, the French Government, as the Assembly is aware, proposed establishing diplomatic relations with the Cambodian Government on 12 April of this year. Our intentions with regard to that country remain unchanged.
42.	In reviewing the various reasons for hope it would be a serious omission if one did not include a few words on the positive developments on a continent of the future—Latin America, whose political, economic and intellectual influence is being increasingly felt in world affairs. The topic is too vast for me to cover. I shall just point out that France attaches great importance to increasing its co-operation with all the countries of Latin America. In this respect I shall mention my delegation's satisfaction with the resumption of our relations with Peru,
43.	Africa is another continent of the future, one to which France and Europe are linked by ties the strength of which is without a doubt one of the main reasons for our confidence in the future. My country has guided many friendly countries to independence and has maintained with them particularly close relations based on co-operation. France wishes to respect the decision of all Africans freely to determine their own destiny and to assume responsibility for their future under conditions of their own choosing.
44.	Quite recently France consulted the people of the Comoros regarding their future. The great majority favored independence, and, without waiting for completion of the constitutional process, decided through their deputies to take over the management of their own affairs. The French Government took note of this and announced that it was prepared to begin talks immediately regarding the transfer of responsibilities. We still hope there can be agreement among Comorians permitting establishment of a framework within which this new State will begin its future. In this case, as in others, France is true to its continuing policy of respect for the right to self-determination.
45.	I should not like to fail to welcome the resumption of diplomatic relations between my country and Guinea.
46.	Unfortunately there are still some clouds in this picture of the international situation. In Cyprus, in Korea and in southern Africa the international community should spare no efforts to prevent tensions from degenerating into conflicts.
47.	The question of Cyprus, involving States with which my country has traditionally enjoyed friendly relations and a region that is very close to us, remains one of our foremost concerns. We are obliged to note that the situation resulting from the events of the summer of 1974, with the continuing threat it poses to peace and the suffering it inflicts on the people of the island, not only has not changed but has actually deteriorated.
48.	Yet at that time we did unanimously adopt a text defining the framework and principles for a settlement and giving the main outline of a solution, which should be one of reconciliation. Indeed, as everyone is aware, nothing can be done without the agreement of the two communities. Accordingly we have steadily given our encouragement, unilaterally or with other members of the European Community, to the inter-community talks begun last spring, with the unflagging assistance of our Secretary-General. At the same time we called for a solution to the most painful problem, that of refugees, which affects nearly one third of the people of the island. We are not unaware of the difficulties involved, but we should stress here its extreme urgency.
49.	I should therefore like to make another pressing appeal for genuine negotiations to begin without further delay, accompanied by urgent measures which the onset of winter makes necessary from a humanitarian standpoint. Such negotiations should be based on well-defined proposals for an over-all settlement that would provide solutions for all the political and territorial problems confronting Cyprus. Such a settlement should be based on right and justice "right" meaning the independence of Cyprus and the integrity of Cyprus, and "justice" meaning the respective size of the two communities. It is this double condition that will finally enable the Cypriot communities to live in peace. It is not for us to tell them how they should organize their relations. But, as the President of the French Republic said recently in Salonika, France is firmly convinced that nothing lasting can be built on force, nor can right result from faits accomplis.
50.	Of the tensions that may still exist on the vast continent of Asia, I shall mention only the problem of Korea, because of its repercussions upon the United Nations.
51.	It is disturbing that more than 20 years after the cessation of hostilities a situation should still exist in Korea which, were it to worsen, could have consequences dangerous to world peace. The Korean people feel its effects daily, and the international community views this persistent anomaly as an almost anachronistic danger, so we very much hope that the United Nations will at this session be able to find a solution to the question of its commitment in that country, taking into account the need to set up arrangements to preserve the Armistice Agreement. But it will also be necessary for the parties directly concerned, respecting the spirit of the joint communique of 4 July 1972,' to substitute dialog and a spirit of compromise for confrontation and intransigence, In this context France noted with interest the constructive proposal made by the United States Secretary of State.
52.	I should like now to return for a moment to the African continent, where tension still persists, tension to which we should devote particular attention.
53.	Last year, from this rostrum, I spoke on behalf of France and welcomed Portugal's effort to put an end to the futile fighting and the anachronistic situation in the Territories under its sovereignty. We note that in spite of its own difficulties the Portuguese Government has faithfully fulfilled its commitments, However, our satisfaction is tinged with concern over the civil war raging in Angola, a country which seemed destined for prosperity. For its part, my Government hopes that the fighting will cease and that this country will very shortly be able to achieve independence in restored harmony.
54.	But it is particularly southern Africa that remains a major cause for concern.
55.	Of course, in the past year we have been able to note signs which might seem to indicate a change in orientation. We believe in particular that the Government of South Africa can and should play a role conducive to the establishment in Rhodesia, within a reasonable period of time, of a Government based on majority rule.
56.	Concerning Namibia, the South African Government has made statements which, although partially encouraging, remain ambiguous. We shall continually stress the importance we attach to the Namibian people being able to express quickly and freely their views on the political future and constitutional structure of the Territory.
57.	In this reference to the problems of Africa, the French Government cannot forget the distressing problem of apartheid, a doctrine contrary to human rights and one which deeply disturbs our conscience. France's categorical condemnation of discriminatory measures based on race recently prompted the President of the French Republic to define the strict limits of our policy on arms sales to South Africa.
58.	South Africa must respond to the appeal of the international community; it must realize that little time remains for it to satisfy by concrete action the legitimate aspirations expressed both inside and outside that country.
59.	In all these areas, it goes without saying that France will be unflinching in its efforts to ensure that conciliation and consultation prevail.
60.	The settlement of conflicts, the easing of tension and the encouragement of dialog are daily imperatives which the international community can no longer avoid. But we must go further: we must band together to take up the challenges threatening the very existence of mankind.
61.	It is those long-term problems that I should like to mention briefly in conclusion.
62.	In the nuclear age, the first problem is quite obviously the maintenance and strengthening of peace.
63.	Can we put an end to the chronic state of insecurity from which mankind has suffered from the beginning of its history and which, since the emergence of weapons of mass destruction, threatens its survival? If the international community believes, as France does, that this ideal, although distant, is indeed attainable and that in any case for the human race there is no longer any alternative to peace, then we should get down to work.
64.	On the long road ahead, disarmament genuine, universal and controlled disarmament is and remains more necessary than ever.
65.	France, for its part, has supported the idea of a world conference now under consideration by our Organization. That plan, if it were assured of the support of all the military Powers, in particular the five nuclear Powers, would be able to get us out of the ruL in which we have become bogged down.
66.	I should now like to state the view of the French Government with regard to the principal treaties on nuclear arms. The discriminatory nature, in its view, of some of the clauses in those treaties has prevented my country from acceding to them. However, France, as it has stated, intends to act as though it were a signatory. France is fully aware of the responsibilities attaching to the status of a nuclear Power which is our status and believes with the majority of nations that the proliferation of nuclear weapons should be avoided. My Government has already made known its intention to take part in this work. I can confirm this today and state our wish to participate in every genuine effort liable to bring about real and controlled reduction, and relieve mankind of the burden and threat of the arms race.
67.	A world which, thanks to genuine disarmament and the adoption of peaceful means of settling disputes, would finally be freed from those haunting fears would be able to devote its efforts to developing its resources, its production methods and its way of life.
68.	For 30 years we have been living with the obsession of a nuclear nightmare; but is not mankind also in danger of perishing from lack of oxygen or water, packed as we are together on a planet which has become too small for us? Such prospects no longer belong just to the realm of science fiction, because we are entering the age of finite resources and we must realize the present inability of our world community to deal with those fundamental problems. Surely it is time for us to put our heads together and take joint action to remedy this situation.
69.	The excesses and lack of foresight of industrial civilization have other more subtle aspects just as potentially tragic. We are jeopardizing with reckless arrogance the balances established by nature for millions of years. That is just one more worldwide problem that should be considered by the United Nations.
70.	The development of the productive forces of mankind should be placed at the service of all men. We agree on the need for reorganization in order to put an end to intolerable inequalities. Hundreds of millions of people in the world are threatened by hunger; the majority of mankind live in a state of destitution unworthy of human beings. The continued expansion of the world economy is therefore indispensable. Nevertheless, we must not allow ourselves to be swept away by the mystique of production and consumption, nor must we forget our ultimate mission: the spiritual and intellectual development of man. Let us not become the agents and ultimately the slaves of a voracious economy. We must above all tackle the major problem of growth in its two aspects: the means of ensuring balanced expansion and the goals at which the arduous labor of man must be aimed.
71.	The topics for study which I have just suggested are directed to a fundamental concern that is basically the justification of any genuine policy respect for and development of the human personality. This concern has continually guided our Organization, which has achieved much in the field of human rights. But the battle for recognition of and respect for fundamental rights is far from won. We must fight it with determination until victory is ours.
72.	In times of change and crisis one can always distinguish two main trends: towards movement and towards immobility.
73.	Because it is France's tradition, its mission, and because France itself deeply feels the need for change, it is ready to put its resources, its imagination and its generosity to work for the emergence of a more just, more peaceful and more united world.
74.	Our Organization and all its Members can count on the active contribution of my country in this vital task of striving for world solidarity.
Mr. President, I should like to join my colleagues in saying how very pleased I am that we are meeting this year under your distinguished presidency. Those of us who have worked with you in the European Community know your qualities of wise judgment, combined with great insight and cool decision, and we are very glad that this year those qualities of yours are placed at the disposal of the United Nations. We look to your presidency because we believe it will strengthen the United Nations and we hope your term of office will add distinction to an already distinguished career and will do honor to Luxembourg.
58.	Britain extends a welcome to the newly independent countries of Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and Papua New Guinea, which are this session assuming their places as full and equal Members of our Organization. To them I wish all success.
59.	I should like too to thank our Secretary-General for his valuable and balanced report on the work of the Organization. The burdens on the Secretary- General grow no lighter, and I am glad that at this difficult time we have in that vital position a statesman of such proven diligence and dedication.
60.	There is a certain resolute tenacity with which the major problems cling to the agenda of the General Assembly. They are a reminder of the limitations of the machinery of the United Nations in achieving a peaceful settlement of disputes unless the will is present to come to an agreement.
61.	But the thirtieth year has not been barren: in fact, it has been a better than average year for the negotiators, as opposed to the war makers.
62.	At the seventh special session and elsewhere, the Member nations have firmly committed themselves to try to bring about a world in which men and women will be made more equal through constructive policies of co-operation, rather than hurling threats and counter-threats at each other. The special session was an event of great significance, and I pledge that the United Kingdom will co-operate fully in the tasks ahead. While at this General Assembly we discuss the broad political questions that face us, my country will not forget the need to respond with urgency and a sense of justice to the manifest social and economic inequalities in the world today, despite the burdens that the world economic recession is imposing on the inhabitants of the advanced industrial countries. In return we ask the oil-producing countries not to impose additional burdens on our economies, for what the world needs is a period of prolonged expansion. Despite our hopes, it is not yet certain that the expansion will endure, but it will certainly be set at risk if heavier burdens are thrust on to those more advanced countries which must be the pace setters.
63.	In the weeks and months to come, my Government would like to see progress in the military and political fields of potential conflict.
64.	In the Middle East, for the first time, there is a break in the ice. For the first time, Israel and one of its Arab neighbors have concluded an agreement which was not forced upon them by military constraints. For the first time they have jointly stated that the conflict between them shall not be resolved by force, but by peaceful means. I should like to express my admiration for the courage and statesmanship which President El-Sadat of Egypt and Mr. Rabin of Israel have shown in the negotiations which led up to the agreement. I should also like to congratulate the United States Government, and in particular President Ford and Mr. Kissinger, on their perseverance and their skillful diplomacy. I should like here to express our thankfulness that President Ford was spared yesterday, and to say that our thoughts are with Mrs. Ford, too. The agreement which Egypt and Israel have concluded is not only to their mutual benefit; it benefits the rest of the world as well.
65.	The progress that has been made does not mean that peace is around the corner. It is not. The problems which still remain are much larger than those which have been solved. Chief of these is the problem of the Palestinians, which has not yet been touched. What, then, is the way forward? First, in our view, a complementary step on the Golan Heights must be achieved, and achieved soon, to provide the proof that the latest agreement was not an end in itself but part of a continuous process leading to a comprehensive settlement. The commitment to further negotiations that has been spelled out in this newest agreement must be fulfilled. Syria and the other Arab States need to be convinced of the benefits of peace and that will require a further negotiating round. Following that must come the central problem of the Palestinians and the future of the West Bank, and at this point we shall be attacking the problem of a comprehensive settlement, and for this task a comprehensive forum, such as Geneva provides, would seem to be required. But if all the parties show the same resolution, perseverance and, not least, the flexibility that were shown in the recent negotiations, I am convinced that an ultimate solution could be reached that would ensure security for the State of Israel and justice for the Arab people.
66.	The dilemma which faces the parties in the Middle East is a familiar one. On the one hand, any attempt to reach a full settlement all at once is likely to founder because the gap between the positions of the two sides is too wide to be bridged. On the other hand, any partial resolution of the problems may appear to favour one side at the expense of the other in the stages before a full settlement is reached, and therefore arouses opposition.
67.	The new agreement between Israel and Egypt is important, not only in its practical effects though I would not wish to belittle them as in its example. Israel and Egypt have demonstrated to others that mutually beneficial agreements can be reached in the Middle East without sacrificing the interests of either party.
68.	As this agreement matures it will give the Israelis cause to believe that they can put trust in the word of Egypt; and the Egyptians and after them others  will have cause to believe in the goodwill of Israel. This is the lesson and the real achievement of the recent negotiations. It provides a new foundation on which it should be possible to build, and a demonstration of the value of compromise.
69.	We shall need a combination of methods. Problems on which partial steps can be taken should continue to be handled in that way. But the core of the problem, namely, the settlement of the Palestinian people, may well need a wider negotiation leading to a comprehensive solution. We know that it will be very difficult to achieve a peace which fulfills everyone's needs, but history has proved that peace is indivisible and the world cannot afford to settle for an incomplete solution,
70.	As regards Cyprus, I note with regret that the talks that have been pursued intermittently during the last year between the parties have made very little progress despite the patient efforts of Mr. Wald- heim, to whom we extend our grateful thanks. The British Government adheres to resolution 3212 (XXIX) and affirms that its implementation would assist the process of reaching a settlement. If a solution is to be acceptable to both sides it will require to deal with the settlement of the refugees, the constitutional relationships between the parts of the island, the powers of the central Government, and the nature and physical delimitation of whatever zones are agreed upon.
71.	A solution based on such an agenda is difficult, but not impossible; but it does mean that a declaration of independence by any part of the island is ruled out. Such a declaration would perpetuate the conflict and result in continuing tension that could spread wider than the island itself, Therefore we call upon both sides to resume their discussions and to come forward with positive proposals for a solution.
72.	Despite the lack of progress made so far in these direct talks, we are not convinced that any different forum is likely to be more successful. We wish to see the direct talks renewed, together with the continuing presence of a mediator to assist the parties. But in the end the main responsibility for success will rest with the Turkish and Greek Cypriots themselves.
73.	On Namibia we share with the international community a deep concern that the inhabitants of the Territory as a whole should be given the opportunity to express their views freely on their political and constitutional future. All political groups must be allowed to take part peacefully in the process of self- determination, and above all there must be a real sense of urgency.
74.	As a member of the Security Council, we have joined with France and the United States in making formal demarches to the South African Government. 
We observe some signs that the South African Government is taking a new look at its policies towards Namibia, but it is clear that the movement is not taking place quickly enough. We look to South Africa to make clear and positive progress without delay.
75.	For our own part, Britain has contributed to the United Nations Fund for Namibia, to the proposed Institute for Namibia at Lusaka, to a United Nations Children's Fund project for aid to Namibian refugees; and we are one of the largest contributors to the United Nations Educational and Training program for Southern Africa, which includes provision for scholarships for Namibians. We have also provided funds to enable the South West Africa People's Organization to send students to Britain for English-language training, which will enable other forms of educational assistance to be given. In Namibia, as elsewhere in southern Africa, we shall continue in co-operation with other countries to work for self-determination, justice, racial equality, independence and peace.
76.	Turning to Rhodesia, I should like, first, to pay tribute to the efforts which the Presidents of Botswana, the United Republic of Tanzania, Mozambique and Zambia have made during the last year in conjunction with the Prime Minister of South Africa to promote a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. It is a matter for regret that so much effort has not met with greater success, though some progress has been made and a first meeting between the regime and the African National Congress at Victoria Falls did reach agreement on a number of points.
77.	I see two prerequisites for further progress towards a negotiated solution. First, the Europeans, and particularly Mr. Smith, Prime Minister of Rhodesia, should realize that to rely on disunity among their political opponents as a justification for postponing essential changes is to invite disaster as history has frequently demonstrated. Second, there must be a clear and unified leadership on the African side; and that is something which the Congress itself must achieve.
78.	We believe that agreement on the change to majority rule in Rhodesia is essential if peace is to be maintained in the area. If this is not achieved there will be a long slide into armed struggle and irreparable damage will be done to the country and to its neighbors.
79.	To prevent such a disaster I call upon both sides to resume their discussions, and I urge the four Presidents and also the South African Government not to be discouraged by the difficulties which have arisen. I trust they will resume their efforts. We for our part remain ready to play our full part. Meanwhile, until a just settlement is achieved, the United Nations sanctions must continue to be applied effectively as one of the instruments for maintaining pressure on the illegal regime.
80.	. Now I turn to disarmament. The Secretary- General, in his report, has reminded us of our responsibility for disarmament. Every year the nations pile up more and more arms. Every year the arms bill grows larger. Every year the capacity for destruction more frightening. In some parts of the world such as the Middle East, competition for arms is never ceasing. Hardly any continent is exempt from the pressure. No one who cares for the progress of the human race towards decent standards of living can help but be appalled at the enormous waste of resources on weapons of destruction. A number of countries, some of whom are among the poorest, are now spending as much as 10 per cent of their gross national product for military purposes. What a boost it could give to the world's hopes if all of us could agree to limit to a maximum of even 5 per cent the amount of our gross national product we allocate for defense. This would presuppose that countries would move step by step to such a figure and would need to enter into serious multilateral negotiations with one another for reductions in their military establishments. That is indeed what we are doing in the negotiations that are now beginning on force reductions in Central Europe. If these negotiations could be paralleled in other regions of the world it would be a hopeful beginning.
81.	Probably the greatest potential risk that faces us is the nuclear danger. Of course, we welcome the steps that are being taken to control nuclear arms by the United States and the Soviet Union. We believe there should be no insuperable difficulties in bringing the arrangements made at Vladivostok to a successful conclusion. We look forward to a new strategic arms limitation agreement being signed before the end of this year. But that agreement, although important, does no more than put a brake on the present nuclear arms race. It is necessary to move onwards to an actual reduction in the number of nuclear weapons, and we ask both the United States and the Soviet Union to press to a successful conclusion the next round of talks on this subject that is due to take place in 1977.
82.	The Soviet Government has put forward a proposed draft treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests [A! 10241, annex]. The United Kingdom has consistently supported this goal. We wish the initiative well. However, I cannot fail to point out that it will require the adherence of all the nuclear-weapon States and provision for verification, and that so far it has not been possible to meet these conditions completely.
83.	We should also examine with care the proposal made by the representative of the Soviet Union at the preceding meeting [A/10243, annex] in the document that was circulated among us.
84.	But even before we solve these problems a new danger is coming to view that I now wish to discuss. It arises from the overlap between the desire of certain countries to use nuclear material for civil purposes and the increasing risk that such material may be employed for military purposes. The metals uranium and plutonium are used not solely in nuclear reactors to produce power for civil purposes, for highly enriched uranium and plutonium can also be used to make nuclear weapons. Those who possess a nuclear reactor have already taken the first step to being able to pro-duce a nuclear weapon. If they then move from that to the second step and acquire plants to enrich their uranium and to reprocess the fuels that have already been used in their nuclear reactors, then they will be a long way down the road to producing nuclear weapons. Up to the present, it is the nuclear-weapon States that alone possess such plants, namely, the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, France and China. But other countries are now beginning to consider whether they, too, should order reprocessing and enriching plants. If and when they do so, and the plants are in working order, they will be able to produce weapons material at a rate which would enable several thousand nuclear weapons a year to be produced. To give a comparison, the present nuclear programs will accumulate more than 1 million 1 million kilograms of plutonium within the next 10 years; and by contrast, the bomb which fell on Nagasaki and created such havoc and such destruction was the equivalent of no more than about 10 kilograms. A million kilograms within the next 10 years  and 10 kilograms destroyed Nagasaki. The spread of these plants would enable the whole of mankind on this planet to destroy itself. Clearly, the statesmen of the world assembled here have a moral duty to act before it is too late.
85.	The United Nations should concern itself with this problem immediately and add vigor and impetus to the work that is being done in the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA],
86.	I put forward five points for consideration, to try to contain this problem. First, the Members of the United Nations should solemnly affirm that each and all of them will not convert nuclear materials from civil use to military use. Secondly, this solemn declaration should be reinforced by an agreement to accept a common system of international inspection through the IAEA. There should be one set of rules for all countries in the world. Thirdly, all civil nuclear materials and facilities should be brought within the common inspection system. Fourthly, the IAEA should assume responsibility for inspection of enrichment and processing plants, in addition to its present task of safeguarding nuclear reactors. Fifthly, the new set of common rules should be based on monitoring nuclear material and accounting for its use at all stages through the life of the fuel.
87.	Britain intends to make a specific proposal along these lines to the IAEA. In this way we shall follow up the intentions of the recent conference on non- proliferation, although our proposals are not based on that Treaty and have a wider purpose. They are intended to give practical expression to the pledges that have already been made by many Governments that they will not convert nuclear material from civil to military purposes, and I hope that the General Assembly will give support to them.
88.	Thirty years ago at the very first session of the General Assembly in London my great predecessor Ernest Bevin pledged that the British Government would use to the full every instrument created by the United Nations and give it its whole-hearted support. I was present when he made that speech. Looking back, I believe my country, as a permanent member of the Security Council during the whole of that period, has faithfully redeemed the pledge that Ernest Bevin gave. Now, today, I repeat that undertaking at a time when the potential dangers facing the world are at least as great as they were when the United Nations was founded. None of us expects the United Nations miraculously to solve all the world's problems. But patient effort, understanding of each other, a consciousness that we are all citizens of the same world, and that none of us can escape the consequences of each other's actions this, I believe, will enable mankind of all colors and all creeds to do as the founders of the United Nations did, and as our forefathers did, to rise to the challenge of our times.




81.	 It is my privilege and pleasure, on behalf of my delegation and myself, to extend to you, Mr. President, our warm congratulations and good wishes on your election as President of the thirtieth regular session of the General Assembly. You have assumed this high office at a very significant moment in the history of this world Organization, when we are at a turning-point in the thirtieth year of its life. We are fortunate indeed to have the benefit of your outstanding ability, wide experience and dynamism in directing our deliberations during this important session. Your election is also a tribute to your country and its people and to its traditional policy of conciliation and co-operation. I assure you of my delegation's full support in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities.
182.	Your predecessor, the Foreign Minister of Algeria, Mr. Bouteflika, will be long remembered both for his able direction of the twenty-ninth session and for the constructive achievements of the seventh special session. Under his leadership we were able to accomplish much that is valuable and of lasting significance.
183.	To the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, we should like to express our appreciation for his ceaseless energy and total dedication to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. His wise counsel and his gentle persistence in drawing attention to the fundamental problems facing mankind have enhanced the prestige of the United Nations. We extend to him our continued support.
184.	Anyone who has the privilege of standing at this rostrum to address the General Assembly must be keenly aware of a special sense of responsibility, because the United Nations is an instrument for shaping the destiny of mankind. How we fulfill this responsibility will depend upon the perception of our common mission and our firm resolve to implement our decisions. Our mission, as expressed in the Charter of our Organization, is to secure peace and justice for all mankind. Our duty is to the peoples of all nations and our objective is the molding of a world based on peace and co-operation, not on its division into three or more worlds separated by conflict and inequality. The growing awareness of interdependence between peoples and nations, each conscious and responsive to the basic needs and legitimate aspirations of the other, marks the hopeful beginning of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
185.	Three decades ago our founding fathers conceived of this Organization as a means for harmonizing the views and actions of States in a common effort "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war" and "to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom". An embittered world, shattered by the destructive fury of war, was soon enmeshed in the hostile confrontation of opposing military alliances. The cold war threatened to nullify the hopes enshrined in our Charter. Vast numbers of people still lived under colonial subjugation  and for them the Charter could have no meaning until they were freed from foreign domination.
186.	Many old empires have since been dismantled and colonial rule has been ended in most parts of the world, signifying the victory of the forces of national liberation. The United Nations has made its own contribution to expediting this process. More than half of the delegations present here represent countries liberated from colonial rule. We have watched with profound satisfaction the Organization move steadily closer to its goal of full universality. We are happy to welcome among us this year delegations from the sovereign States of Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe. We are confident that their participation in our work will add to the strength of our Organization. We look forward to welcoming Papua New Guinea in the very near future.
187.	We have before us a heavy agenda, which illustrates the principal problems facing the world today. Some items have remained on the agenda year after year, testifying to their complexity and intractability. Other items are relatively new, which is an indication of the growing awareness of a rapidly changing world. It is not my intention on this occasion to express our views on all these problems. My delegation will have other opportunities for making our views known during this session. The very fact that these global problems are before us is evidence of the reality of the interdependence of peoples and nations, and a recognition that the United Nations constitutes the appropriate forum for their solution through our collective efforts. Mere recognition of this fact is not enough, however, and, in the words of the Secretary-General in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization "... we must now go forward from deliberation to action, from confrontation to co-operation and from eloquently expressed allegiance to principles to the far more difficult task of making those principles a reality." [AllOOOIIAdd.l, sect. XXI.]
188.	Many newly independent nations of the world, including my own, repudiated the concept of the cold war and chose the path of non-alignment and peaceful coexistence. Today there is widespread understanding and acceptance of the policy of non-alignment and its relevance and importance. In the United Nations the non-aligned countries have consistently worked to democratize international relations and to move from confrontation and deadlock into new fields of co-operative endeavor. The foreign ministers of the non-aligned countries, meeting in Lima last month, pledged themselves afresh to continue their efforts to achieve a new world order based on justice and equality.
189.	The maintenance of peace must be our first objective, and problems related to this question must continue to occupy our minds with a sense of urgency. Peace reigns today in Indo-China after many years of war, and this is indeed a matter of great satisfaction for all of us. However, the legacy of the past seems to cloud the vision of some. The rejection by the Security Council of the requests of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam to join the United Nations adds to the sorry record of United Nations inertia on Viet Nam. There is no doubt about the eligibility of those States for admission; we should welcome them to this Organization, which will benefit from their co-operation. The international community should do all it can to heal the wounds of war and assist in the reconstruction of the shattered economies of the countries of Indo-China. India is willing and prepared to make its contribution to this effort.
190.	The situation in the Middle East remains critical. There can be no enduring peace in the region until Israel vacates all the Arab territories it occupied by aggression and until the national rights of the Arab people of Palestine are restored. Meanwhile, an agreement has been reached between Egypt and Israel for a limited further Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai. This will be an important and positive development, provided it contributes to the reduction of tensions in that area and leads to the speedy resolution of the basic problems. However, the intransigent and obstructive attitude of Israel, which is receiving a considerable amount of sophisticated military hardware, gives cause for serious concern. It is the clear duty of the United Nations, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, to explore all avenues open to it for securing the removal of the Israeli presence from Arab territories. It is also our duty to continue our efforts to restore to the Palestinian people their national rights. We firmly believe that the unity of the Arab countries, together with the continued supporting action of the international community, would enable them to regain their lost territories and secure the restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people.
191.	In Cyprus, too, there is still an uneasy stalemate the continuance of which may well endanger its territorial integrity. Prolonged neglect of the underlying causes of inter-communal differences has led to external interventions and the virtual partition of the country, resulting in thousands of people leaving their homes in search of safety. At the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly last year, we unanimously adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX), which established an agreed framework for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from the island and the settlement of the problems between the two communities. Progress in its implementation, however, has been slow, even though the leaders of the two communities have held talks under the auspices of the Secretary-General. Given good will and practical good sense, the problem can be resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the two communities and without prejudice to the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment of Cyprus. We have every confidence that the Secretary-General will persevere in his efforts to bring the two communities together to seek a mutually acceptable solution.
192.	The continuance of multilateral military alliances conceived in the context of great-Power rivalry and the induction of vast quantities of military hardware into countries belonging to these alliances is a source of continuing tension and instability in the Indian Ocean area. The expansion of the Diego Garcia base, against the declared wishes of the littoral States of the Indian Ocean, is of serious concern. We urge the great Powers and other major maritime users to respect the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace, in conformity with the Declaration adopted by the United Nations in 1971 [resolution 2832 (XXVI)]. We also call for the early dissolution of the military pacts conceived in the context of great-Power rivalry and the dismantling of foreign military bases established in that context.
193.	We have continued to make every effort to strengthen our friendship and understanding with the countries of our region. India is ready, within the limits of its means, to contribute to the development of our region through trade and closer economic links. We have .continued to implement the Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972-'' both in spirit and in letter. It is our earnest hope that we shall achieve in the near future the objective of peace and co-operation among the States in the subcontinent.
194.	The decolonization of the Portuguese empire has proceeded with commendable rapidity. We rejoice in the notable successes achieved by the national liberation movements. However, the process of national liberation is as yet incomplete, and we must address ourselves to the problems in the remaining Territories whose people are still living under colonial and foreign domination.
195.	The transition of Angola to independence has been marked by violent clashes between liberation movements. We have followed these developments with concern, because in the last analysis it is the people of Angola who will be the victims of the struggle for power between political parties. We hope that the Organization of African Unity will find it possible to establish a basis for peace and co-operation among the different liberation groups.
196.	In southern Africa we are nowhere near a solution of the triple problem of securing the independence of Namibia, the rule of the majority in Zimbabwe and the eradication of the policy of apartheid. These are all interrelated questions and they have to be tackled together. The presence in Namibia of the administration of the white racist regime of South Africa has been declared illegal. The United Nations has been standing ready to take over temporarily the administration of Namibia pending transfer of power to the people. And yet the South African Government flagrantly continues to defy the United Nations. There is no clearer case for intervention by the United Nations and we would call for effective and resolute United Nations action against South Africa.
197.	The illegal minority regime of Smith in Zimbabwe evidently continues to be bolstered by the support of the South African Government. There is no honorable way out for this regime except to release all political prisoners, convene a constitutional conference of the legitimate leaders of the people and make arrangements for the inevitable transition to majority rule. The United Kingdom has a special responsibility in this regard and we hope that it will play an effective role. Unfortunately, even the imposition of sanctions by the Security Council has not brought about the desired result, although they may have had some impact. There are reports that the Smith regime is arranging meetings with national political leaders with the purpose of dividing them and compelling them to agree to unacceptable settlements. It is clear that the United Nations should continue to lend all support to the liberation movement in Zimbabwe.
198.	The question of apartheid has been before the United Nations in one form or another since 1946, and the appeals of the General Assembly have had no effect whatsoever on the racist regime in South Africa. This regime has remained indifferent to the diplomatic isolation in which it finds itself. We deplore that the trade boycott and arms embargo imposed by the United Nations have been ineffective. As a result, South Africa continues to pursue its pernicious policy of segregating the tribal people in separate bantustans, forcibly removing them from their homes and subjecting them to humiliating restrictions. South Africa's continued enforcement of the apartheid system in total disregard of United Nations resolutions led to the rejection of the credentials of its representatives and their consequent exclusion from the current session of the General Assembly. Even this has had little effect on the white racist regime in Pretoria, or indeed on its supporters. There is no alternative but to strengthen the hands of the fighters for freedom and liberation from this iniquitous regime.
199.	I have referred to matters that are at present, the focus of international tension where critical situations prevail. Certain hopeful developments in Europe may also be noted. We welcome the signature on 1 August by 35 Governments at Helsinki of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which establishes the basis for the preservation of peace and future co-operation in that continent. Since Europe has been the historical spawning ground for world wars in the past, this agreement has great significance. However, detente in Europe can have real meaning for the rest of the world only if this process is extended to other continents, and particularly to the crisis situations of today.
200.	The full potential of detente cannot be realized until there is a transfer of real resources from military expenditure to areas that are of vital concern for the general well-being of mankind. The very first resolution adopted by the first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations concerned disarmament. That was only natural, as the question of disarmament was an important preoccupation of the League of Nations and it was inevitable that its successor, the United Nations, established in the wake of the last world war, should as a matter of first priority concern itself with disarmament. In the 30 years since the creation of this Organization and despite the regular annual appeals for disarmament, especially nuclear disarmament, there has been virtually no progress. Instead, we have been witness to an incredible arms race involving the stockpiling of nuclear weapons and other means of mass destruction on a scale that brings into question the sanity of such measures. The global expenditure on the arms race is on the order of $300,000 million per annum, when the world is crying out for resources to relieve hunger, poverty and social injustice. We are nowhere near even considering any serious measures concerning nuclear disarmament, which clearly deserve the highest priority. We have had world conferences on food, population, the environment, industrialization, the law of the sea, the role of women and so forth, but we have not yet been able to agree on a world conference on disarmament. This is truly a tragic commentary on the state of the world, which has lost its awareness of and sensitivity to the dangers facing it.
201.	Peace is the foundation for progress. At the same time, an enduring peace cannot be achieved until the growing economic disparities in the world have been overcome. We are now in the middle of the Second United Nations Development Decade, and, despite the various measures recommended by the United Nations, the vast majority of developing countries are still facing unfavorable trade patterns and extremely heavy debt burdens. Such inequalities among nations are the cause of our present discontent. These have to be reversed if we are to move on to true interdependence as between equals, which is the compelling need of today. It is true that the reality of the interdependence of all nations is coming to be recognized more and more, but the problems it poses are only just beginning to be appreciated. The Declaration and Program of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, adopted at the sixth special session [resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S- VI)], and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, adopted at the twenty-ninth session [resolution 3281 {XXIX)), are important milestones in our journey towards the goal of interdependence. They call for measures of unprecedented scope, the most important of which, if I may say so, is bridging the gap between the minds of the developed and the developing countries.
202.	The seventh special session has made a serious attempt to identify problems in detail, to locate some available resources, to pursue further studies of important questions and above all to engage in negotiations with a view to exploring whether a meeting of minds is possible. The achievements of that session should neither be overestimated nor underestimated. Developing countries cannot look upon the final document of the seventh special session [resolution 3362 (S-VII)] with unmixed satisfaction. However, it is an opening, and if the decisions are implemented in good faith and speedily, further fruitful dialog can be continued on the outstanding issues so that the world economic imbalance can be redressed and the terms of trade for developing countries can be really improved. The status quo should change in the direction of a new and equitable economic order, and proof of this has surely to come from the concrete actions of the developed countries.
203.	The problem of under-development is as important in the economic and social field as decolonization is in the political field and constitutes a challenge facing the United Nations in the years to come. The United Nations is a unique instrument for fostering co-operation based on equality, and its structures and procedures need to be adapted with wisdom and vision to meet the unprecedented challenges of the future.
204.	I should like to conclude by recalling the words of my Prime Minister in her address to this Assembly on 23 October 1970, when she emphasized India's profound commitment to peace and the evolution of a new world order. She said:
"We have always affirmed that the way of the world should be not power but peace, not confrontation but co-operation. The world is not for destruction; it is for development. . . .
"The irony is that we have the means and we see the vision, but we lack the will and the trust to take the one big step forward. . . .
"In the years to come let the United Nations strive to bring about an era of international transformation by consent, a new era of justice and peace."4



33.	 Mr. President, it is with pleasure that I join the many representatives who have spoken before me in congratulating you most warmly on your election to the presidency of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly. You bring to this high office qualities of integrity, intellect and experience which have already carried you to the summit of political responsibility in your own country as well as on the wider European stage. The General Assembly is indeed fortunate that its leader for the coming 12 months will be a statesman deeply loyal to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
34.	The annual general debates at the General Assembly provide an occasion for a survey of the working of the international system during the preceding year, and for the public expression of the hopes and fears, the expectations and anxieties, of the Governments representing almost the totality of the population of the world. The present debate seems to me an appropriate opportunity to go a little further to look back at the 30 years of the life of the United Nations, and to try to appraise its achievements against the standards set by the founders of the Organization when they adopted the Charter in San Francisco on 26 June 1945.
35.	The United Nations was born amidst the ruin and devastation of the most terrible war experienced in the recorded history of mankind, a holocaust in' which tens of millions of men, women and children lost their lives, among them one third of the Jewish people. Its primary purposes, therefore, were to save succeeding generations from similar catastrophe and to build a better society in which fundamental human rights, equal justice before the law and economic and social advancement would be universally assured.
36 As is inevitable in human affairs, the record is uneven The most spectacular achievement of this period is unquestionably the virtual disappearance of the classic colonial system. More than half of the present Members of the United Nations, including Israel were colonial dependencies before 1945; four Cape Verde, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, and Papua New Guinea achieved independence in 1975 and have been or are being admitted to membership at this session. On behalf of the people and the Government of Israel, I am happy to wish them well.
37.	The United Nations system, through the United Nations Development program and its forerunners and through the specialized agencies, has also registered noteworthy achievements in many branches of economic development, in agriculture, health, labor, transport and other practical fields. The new impetus in the development and codification of international law would hardly have been possible outside the United Nations framework; while the financial and economic organs of the United Nations family, among which one might include the recent seventh special session of the General Assembly which may well presage a new era of international economic co-operation, have become almost indispensable for the proper conduct of the world's business. Those are all positive contributions to the welfare of mankind, even though it is clear that there is still a long way to go.
38.	This is unfortunately not the case in other areas. The United Nations has manifestly not saved this generation from the scourge of war. The graves of the millions of victims of armed conflicts in Asia, in Africa, in the Middle East and even in Europe bear anguished testimony to this massive failure; while the lofty sentiments and exhortations of a multitude of conventions, declarations and resolutions have had little impact on the flagrant abuse of fundamental human rights and freedoms in vast areas of the globe.
39.	It is common form to claim that the fault does not lie in the United Nations system, but in its Members; that the world Organization merely reflects the frailties, the stupidities, the lethargy and the evils of the world itself. This is, of course, true, but it is equally true that a system that encourages contention rather than compromise, extremism rather than tolerance and confrontation rather than negotiation is hardly suited to a world as diverse in race, religion, tradition, geographical circumstances, and social and political practices as is ours.
40.	The experience of Israel is a valid example. We belong to no bloc and no alliance. We can count on little support in this Assembly, not because our cause is unjust, not because our views do not meet with sympathy, but because of considerations of unprincipled expediency. We are assaulted every year in language so venomous and vile as to defy all canons of civilized behavior. In Assembly session after Assembly session in recent years, in conference after conference, resolutions are adopted by automatic majorities, demanding that we submit to this abusive tyranny, that we, in effect, dismantle our State, and that we commit national suicide. No regard whatsoever is paid in these resolutions to truth or to reality.
41.	Israel is a democratic State, where, in accordance with our ancient tradition, all individuals and communities enjoy equality before the law and the plenitude of their human rights; yet a resolution of a United Nations body will assert the very opposite as an incontrovertible fact and condemn Israel on the basis of that falsehood.
42.	When a World Health Organization expert finds that the medical services provided for the population in the territories under Israeli administration since 1967 are as good as those of any other civilized country and that the people are healthy, a resolution of the General Conference of that specialized agency will declare that they are ridden with disease and bereft of medical attention. When a certified lunatic, not a Jew and a foreigner to boot, sets fire to part of a mosque in Jerusalem, a resolution of the Security Council condemns Israel for the deliberate desecration of that Holy Place. When highly qualified United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization experts establish that Israeli archaeological research in Jerusalem represents a notable contribution to the cultural heritage of mankind, including that of a glorious period of Islamic history, does not contravene the applicable international law and does not endanger other monuments and sites, resolutions adopted by that organization simply ignore those findings and for good measure add sanctions to the routine condemnation. And when Israel, rightly and inevitably, refuses to take notice of these fantasies, as any other Member State would do in its place, it is once again condemned for being awkward and recalcitrant and for flouting the will of the international community.
43.	Surely there is something seriously wrong with a United Nations system which is so easily subverted for political blackmail; which, instead of being a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the objectives of the Charter, has become a propaganda battlefield; and where abuse and not reason has become the language of debate. It is surely not beyond the wit of man to arrest this hypocritical and dangerous course before it is too late.
44.	In the course of my address to the General Assembly last year, I dwelt on the positive features of the separation of forces agreements which had been concluded earlier that year between Israel and Egypt and Israel and Syria in the wake of the Yom Kippur war of October 1973.1 I expressed the view that those two agreements represented the first steps, small and hesitant though they may have been, away from the triple negatives adopted by the Conference of Arab Heads of State or Government, held at Khartoum, on 1 September 1967: no peace with Israel, no recognition, no negotiations.
45.	Those who sincerely seek peace in the Middle East will surely find cause for satisfaction in the new agreement between Egypt and Israel which was negotiated through the good offices of the President and the Secretary of State of the United States and concluded in Geneva last week. That agreement marks an important step forward. It has much greater political significance than its predecessor.
46.	I should like to draw the attention of the Assembly to some of the major provisions of this agreement:
"The Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Government of Israel have agreed that:
"The conflict between them and in the Middle East shall not be resolved by military force but by
peaceful means. 
"The parties hereby undertake not to resort to the threat or use of force or military blockade against each other. 11
"This agreement is regarded by the parties as a significant step toward a just and lasting peace. It is not a final peace agreement.
"The parties shall continue their efforts to negotiate a final peace agreement within the framework of the Geneva Peace Conference in accordance with Security Council resolution 338 (1973).
"This agreement shall enter into force upon signature of the protocol and remain in force until superseded by a new agreement."
47.	The significance of the agreement does not lie only in the pledge of the parties to continue to observe the cease-fire and to refrain from all military or paramilitary action, or in their undertaking not to resort to the threat or use of force or military blockade, or in their recognition of the essential role of the United Nations Emergency Force and the necessity that it continue its functions, or in the provision concerning the passage of non-military cargoes to and from Israel through the Suez Canal, or even in the renunciation of war as a means to settle the differences between them; rather its significance lies in the belief that it opens a new chapter in the relations between the two countries. Israel for its part will do all it can to ensure that this new chapter will indeed be one of peace. And beyond that we hope that this agreement will pave the way to better relations and peace with all our neighbors.
48.	It is a proper opportunity to stress here that the agreement, in all its particulars, was concluded, in response to the free will of two sovereign States. If Egypt and Israel consider that the agreement is advantageous to them and, moreover, it is a step not directed against any other party nobody in this General Assembly has the right to censure it or to set himself up as an arbiter of the interests of the parties directly concerned.
49.	As I have already stated, both parties to the agreement have recognized the essential role played by the United Nations Emergency Force and I wish to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the officers and men of the Force, who are performing a difficult and delicate task in an exemplary manner; to Lieutenant General Ensio Siilasvuo, who has been identified with the peace-keeping efforts of the United Nations in the Middle East for many years and who has gained the respect and regard of all parties; and to the Secretary-General, who is ultimately responsible for this successful United Nations enterprise. I wish to include in this tribute the commanders, officers and men of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, who also play an important role in the area, and to the Governments which have contributed their personnel to all three United Nations forces.
50.	As far as we are concerned, the new agreement is not an end, but the beginning of a process of peacemaking. We do not delude ourselves that this will be a simple undertaking, for the making of peace after
so many years of hostility and 
suspicion will call for qualities of moral courage, understanding and tenacity far greater than those needed for the waging of war But the beginning must be made-for the sake of this generation and for the sake of the Israeli and Arab children who were surely born to live and create and not to die on the battlefield.
51.	Security Council resolution 338 (1973) calls for "negotiations . . . between the parties concerned aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in 'the Middle East". From this rostrum I declare that Israel is ready to enter into such negotiations with each and every one of the neighboring States. I note with regret repeated statements made by the leaders of Syria which reject the whole concept of a genuine peace treaty with Israel. Nevertheless, I should like to hope that this is not their last word. And for our part I solemnly reiterate that the Government of Israel is ready and willing to enter into peace negotiations with Syria without prior conditions, as called for by Security Council resolution 338 (1973), at any place and at any time.
52.	In this connexion I wish to emphasize that as far as Israel is concerned the Geneva Peace Conference can be reconvened whenever the parties are ready for it, following adequate preparation. Moreover, in principle, Israel is in favor of any mechanism which will advance the process of negotiation between the parties to the conflict. It will therefore give the idea put forward by the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger, for an informal multilateral consultation most earnest consideration.
53.	As I emphasized in my statement at the General Assembly last year, it is self-evident that genuine peace in the Middle East must include a just and constructive solution for the Palestine Arab problem, Israel is fully alive to this problem, probably more so than the majority of those who pronounce freely upon it, and we do not require persuasion of the need to solve it peacefully and honorably. Indeed we insist that this be done. For far too long now the Palestinian Arabs have been used as a pawn on the chess-board of inter-Arab politics; throughout the years they have been the victims of Arab extremism. The solution to their problem therefore demands a change of attitude in the Arab world. The Palestine Arab problem should and can be solved in the context of a peace agreement between Israel and Jordan, which constitutes the major part of the area of historic Palestine on both sides of the river as well as being the homeland of the great majority of the Palestine Arabs.
54.	Thus if the matter at issue is a fair and constructive solution for the problem of Palestine Arab identity. Israel's response is emphatically positive. But it is categorically negative about the absurd pretensions of the so-called Palestine Liberation Organization to speak in the name of the Palestine Arabs. This congeries of feuding terrorist gangs, whose principal victims are the Arabs of Palestine themselves and whose primary aim is the annihilation of the State of Israel and the genocide of its people, is neither a valid representative of the Palestine Arab community nor a valid interlocutor for Israel.
55.	It should cause no surprise that at the spearhead of the frenzied efforts of the extreme regimes in the Arab world to prevent a political settlement of
the Middle East dispute, and to disrupt the recent agreement between Egypt and Israel, is precisely the PLO.
56.	There is nothing more fraudulent than the scheme of this faction to establish, naturally on the ruins of Israel, a so-called democratic secular State in which Moslems, Christians and Jews would, as it were, live in amity and equality. This facile slogan, this transparent propaganda gimmick, has somehow found support among naive and well-meaning people. What is the pattern which the progenitors and supporters of this idea propose to follow? For lack of anything more promising they themselves have put forward the example of Lebanon: Lebanon, which since April of this year has been torn apart by a vicious, sectarian civil war between its Moslem and Christian communities. The latest published estimate of the casualties during these past six months is more than 5,000 killed and nearly 18,000 injured. The material damage is estimated at $2,500 million. The PLO knows what it means when it talks about the democratic and secular State of Palestine. So do we. We have only to look at the more than 800,000 Jews who have left, or have been driven out of, the Arab countries of the Middle East and North Africa since 1948, or at the tortured existence of the 4,500-odd Jewish hostages left in Syria today, to know what the fate of the Jews of Israel would be if the PLO nightmare were realized. But we know and they know that this will never be.
57.	It is one of the anomalies of our times that Israel, which is rigorously excluded from the Middle East region in all that concerns the civilian pursuits of the United Nations and its specialized agencies such as health, education, meteorology, trade and civil aviation is emphatically held to be a part of the Middle East region when the discussion turns to military matters, including the supply of arms. If one were cynical one might almost suspect that the reason, in both cases, is to weaken Israel in one case by boycott, and in the other by depriving it of the means of defense.
58.	Be that as it may, the problem of arms control in the Middle East is real and urgent. The area is being swamped by a flood of new and sophisticated military hardware, such as it has never known in all its long history. Each month that passes raises the level of technology, and the price. Tens of billions of dollars which might otherwise be spent on economic and social development and it must be realized that the population of large parts of the Middle East is among the poorest in the world are drained off to pay for these instruments of human destruction.
59.	Israel is forced to take part in this senseless competition because, given the circumstances in the area, if it did not it would invite immediate aggression. But Israel is ready at any time, even before peace is made, to consult with its neighbors on measures to limit the arms race, with all its dangerous consequences, without materially affecting the relative defensive capacity of any of the parties to the consultation.
60.	Israel supports the proposal for a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East and will be ready to enter into negotiations with all States concerned in order to attain that objective. By negotiations we mean a process of
intergovernmental consultation similar to that which preceded the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and other international instruments of like character. We do not think that so grave a matter can be settled by correspondence through the Secretary-General.
61.	Israel welcomes the signature of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which gave formal expression to the spirit of detente. Only the future will tell if this instrument will serve as a guide for the conduct of the nations in the years to come, or whether it will remain a compilation of pious hopes, like so many international instruments which have been adopted since the end of the Second World War.
62.	In this connexion we have of course noted the following passage in the address of the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union to this Assembly on 23 September: "Assessing highly the results of the Conference, the Soviet Union believes that the main task now is to translate the understandings reached into deeds . . .". [2357th meeting, para. 128.]
63.	As far as Israel is concerned, we have two criteria for judgment: one, that detente must apply to the Middle East no less than to Europe and to other areas of the world and so far we have seen no evidence of this; two, that the humanitarian provisions of the Final Act signed at Helsinki must be scrupulously applied. The United Kingdom Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Wilson, expressed this eloquently in his address to the Conference in these words:
"Our work here will be judged not only by the spirit of 'live and let live' which this Conference asserts. It will be judged by how that spirit is reflected in the lives of ordinary families, by such issues as the reunification of families ... I hope that what we have each today committed ourselves to within Europe can apply also to those within our countries who want to go to start a new life outside Europe, whether in the Middle East or elsewhere."
64.	None of the noble provisions of the Final Act have yet been applied to the Jewish national minority in the Soviet Union. For them the Helsinki agreement is still a piece of paper, and detente is still far over the horizon. I hope that the Soviet Union will live up to the spirit of this historic agreement and will enable the Jews who aspire to be reunited with their brethren in their ancient homeland to do so without hindrance. For us this is the touchstone.
65.	Finally, in addressing the General Assembly I cannot ignore a grave development which affects the Jewish people wherever they may be. This is the mounting of a despicable attack on Zionism by associating it with abhorrent political concepts.
66.	Let me state categorically that anti-Zionism is but a euphemism for anti-Semitism. Subscribing to a resolution condemning Zionism means an endorsement of anti-Semitism and the legitimization of aggression against Israel. Let me state with equal emphasis that, on this the thirtieth anniversary of the liberation of the survivors of the gas chambers and the concentration camps, the Jewish people will not tolerate a revival of the cancer of anti-Semitism. One cannot
here escape a tragic reflection how many of the 6 million victims of the Nazis would be alive today if it had been given to the Zionist movement to create the State of Israel before that catastrophe?
67.	It is painful to me to see a group of nations, many of which were recently liberated from colonial rule, deriding one of the most noble liberation movements in this century a movement which not only gave an example of encouragement and determination to the peoples struggling for independence but also actively aided many of them during their period of preparation for independence and immediately thereafter.
68.	What is the essence of Zionism? Zionism, in a nutshell, is the modern expression of the ancient Jewish heritage. Zionism is the national liberation movement of a people exiled from its historic homeland and dispersed among the nations of the world. Zionism is the redemption of an ancient nation from a tragic lot and the redemption of a land neglected for centuries. Zionism is the revival of an ancient language and culture, in which the vision of universal peace has been a central theme. Zionism is the embodiment of a unique pioneering spirit, of the dignity of labor and of enduring human values. Zionism means creating a society, however imperfect it may still be, which tries to implement the highest ideals of democracy political, social and cultural for all the inhabitants of Israel, irrespective of religious belief, race or sex. Zionism is, in sum, the constant and unrelenting effort to realize the national and universal vision of the prophets of Israel.




 I am glad indeed to have this early opportunity to congratulate Mr. Thorn on behalf of New Zealand on his election as President. New Zealand's relationship with Western Europe is of great importance historically and because of our close trade links, which we intend to preserve. We have been involved in negotiations with the European Economic Community which are basic to the well-being of our people. For the spirit of friendly understanding in which these negotiations have been conducted, New Zealand owes a great deal to him personally. We are confident that the same competence and understanding will distinguish Mr. Thorn's present term of high office. He can be assured of our fullest co-operation in his difficult task.
216.	This thirtieth year of the existence of the United Nations has been a year of unprecedented economic and social activity. It has been a year when more than half of the world's population, that half which consists of women, has been reasserting its unanswerable claim to equal status and opportunity with men. For far too long women have been forced to carry an undue burden of the world's poverty and prejudice. And for them, quite rightly, words are no longer enough.
217.	It has been a year also in which the poorer developing nations have been pursuing with great
vigor their unanswerable claims to fairer terms of trade to enable them to earn a better life for their own people. And for them, quite rightly also, words are no longer enough.
218.	The shocks and economic pains of the last two years have shown as never before the urgent necessity for practical steps to achieve change, Nations which for long have called for a new economic order are now at last being joined by others which are realizing that change is in their interests also. The growing interdependence of all nations is more apparent. We welcomed the general political commitment to change firmly and unanimously adopted at the seventh special session. We welcomed the new spirit of conciliation and compromise. Even more, we welcomed the obvious strong determination to go beyond words and votes and get down to practical action. The effectiveness of the United Nations will be judged not by its words, votes or hopes, but by its practical achievements in helping to bring about a better life. The record of words and resolutions of 30 years of United Nations existence would fill many warehouses; but the practical achievements can be quickly listed. So we must achieve a better balance, a balance that would provide new life to the United Nations and justifiable new hope to the peoples of the world,
219.	The next steps are crucial. We now have a map showing the possible roads to the objective of a new world economic order. But the new rules of the road must be worked out and agreed upon to ensure that fast travelers do not monopolize the highways. Those who started late and those who wish to travel more slowly must have their fair share of the road also. They must be given the right of way at times so that they, too, can reach the destination that they desire for themselves. Difficult economic and political decisions will have to be made by developing and developed countries alike. It will take a new political will assisted by popular backing for the measures that are necessary in the wider interest. A task as far-reaching as this will never be easy; it never has been, nor will it ever be so. But, at least, we are committed to try.
220.	Last year, on behalf of my Government, I stressed the folly of squandering vast resources on the armaments race, which is now estimated to cost $300,000 million a year over $75 for every man, woman and child living on this earth. This is a frightening thought, when we know that over 1,000 million people have less than $200 a year to live on. It is an appalling waste of resources considering the desperate need to use all the skill and capital investment available for developing new sources of energy to help provide the increasing supply of food that is urgently needed to prevent much of the world's population growing, up with stunted bodies and minds.
221.	The ever-growing trade in arms is another intensely disturbing development. Arms must not be treated as a normal means of earning money for the export trade. Those nations which contribute to the $20,000 million total of the world's arms trade surely bear a heavy responsibility to review their arms sales policies. This needs to be done on a joint basis for at present we find countries sheltering behind the sad argument that if they do not supply arms some competitor will.
222.	My country views with special concern the constant growth of nuclear weaponry, with all its unthinkable consequences. And now as never before we require urgent agreement on a comprehensive test-ban treaty, a treaty that will put an end for all time to the further development and testing of new and even more terrible methods of mass destruction. But, beyond that, we need measures that will actually stop and reverse the build-up of nuclear weapons.
223.	The New Zealand Government acknowledges with satisfaction the decision taken by the French Government a year ago to end its Program of testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, of which due note was taken by the International Court of Justice in its decision last year. We, the Government of New Zealand, acknowledge with satisfaction the decision of the French Government at that time. At the same time, let it be clear that New Zealand regrets that all nuclear-weapon States continue to test nuclear weapons, whether in the atmosphere or underground.
224.	We regret that a number of States with the capacity to develop nuclear weapons have not yet signed the non-proliferation Treaty. We regret the unwillingness of some countries to agree to international control and supervision of peaceful nuclear explosions.
225.	We believe we must have a comprehensive test- ban treaty. We believe that all countries must ratify and carry out the non-proliferation Treaty. Each day that passes when those steps are not achieved, more and more people view the continued piling up of nuclear arms with fear and horror. But if those steps were taken, it would help create the confidence on which greater measures of disarmament would be built.
226.	As long as there is no comprehensive test-ban agreement, as long as there is no visible sign of progress towards such an agreement, it is natural that groups of like-minded neighboring States should try to reduce the legitimate anxieties of their peoples. New Zealand is attempting to do this by approaching the problem of nuclear disarmament on a partial and regional basis.
227.	A remarkable feature of the disarmament debate at the twenty-ninth session was the upsurge of interest in nuclear-free zones. At the Review Conference to the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons held at Geneva last May the value of this approach was fully recognized in the Conference's Final Declaration [A IC. 111068, annex /}. The Secretary-General, in an important passage in the introduction to his report this year, emphasized that nuclear-weapon free zones provide the best and easiest means by which those States which neither possess nor want to possess these weapons can, by their own initiative, interest and effort, ensure the total absence of nuclear weapons from their territories and enhance their mutual security [Aj 10001 lAikl.I, sect. VIII].
228.	As the Secretary-General pointed out, the Latin American countries have already made substantial progress towards this objective in a large and populated part of the globe [ibid.]. For some years my Government has believed that the independent and self-governing nations of the South Pacific might emulate the example of their Latin American neighbors in an adjoining area. Although the South Pacific contains a vast expanse of ocean, it also comprises many islands and the inhabitants of these islands are deeply concerned about the nuclear threat. Last July, the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free zone was discussed further at the South Pacific Forum by the Heads of Government of Australia, the Cook Islands, Fiji, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Tonga, Western Samoa and Papua New Guinea, whose independence and forthcoming membership in this Organization we greatly welcome. These nine South Pacific countries agreed unanimously that the concept of a nuclear- free zone in the South Pacific should be studied further and that, as a first step, the General Assembly should be asked to endorse the concept of such a zone. Accordingly, two members of the Forum which are also Members of the United Nations, Fiji and New Zealand, have proposed for this session an item on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Pacific [item 120], We appreciate that it is a complex question, and we are, of course, anxious to consult all countries which might be affected by the proposal. This process of consultation has already begun.
229.	We hope that Members will recognize this proposal as a positive response to a widespread desire to extend the application of the nuclear-weapon-free zone concept, and we ask you to accept this action as contribution to nuclear disarmament and the strengthening of peace. It is on that basis that I ask with confidence for the support of all Members of this Organization .
230.	The house of peace will be constructed from many building blocks. The great Powers have offered us no final blueprint. Sometimes we have no choice but to start building, setting some blocks in place without knowing precisely what the final structure will look like. But we do believe that all who can must start building those blocks now, in the knowledge that they will ultimately be used to build the house of peace that we all seek. My Government, for its part, will support any constructive proposal which offers the prospect of early progress towards disarmament.
231.	My Government regrets that the question of the admission of new Members to the United Nations has again become a matter of controversy. The early history of this matter was an unhappy one: for many years, well qualified applicants were denied admission through the use or, rather, the abuse of the veto power. Eventually, a large number of longstanding applicants were admitted together, in what was described at the time as a "package deal". What was done then strained the provisions of the Charter, but my country actively worked for a positive result, believing that it was intolerable to exclude qualified applicants indefinitely and that exceptional measures were required to solve the problem.
232.	After the log-jam was broken in 1955, applications, for the most part, were dealt with promptly and on their individual merits; a large number of new Members were admitted without difficulty. The divided States Germany, Korea and Viet Nam  were the main exceptions, and they were recognized as a special problem. Then, just two years ago, the two Germanys were admitted simultaneously. We hoped that this welcome development would be followed by agreed solutions in respect of Korea and, following a peace settlement, in respect of Viet Nam. Unhappily, this has not proved possible. On the contrary, a situation has arisen which seems likely to provoke more controversy and bitterness and which could delay for a long time the admission of several countries which should be Members.
233.	I wish therefore to describe my Government's general attitude towards the question of membership in the present situation. We believe that applications should be dealt with in accordance with the principle of universality. It is true that the present membership provisions of the Charter do not reflect that principle as clearly as we believe they should. In our view, membership in the United Nations is primarily a duty. Membership imposes important obligations, and no sovereign, independent State should be prevented from assuming them.
234.	That is not the only consideration. Membership also exposes countries to the cross-currents of international opinion; it can help to reconcile different views, or at least moderate them; and the benefits of all this can not be lightly disregarded.
235.	My Government therefore favors the admission of North Viet Nam, South Viet Nam, North Korea and South Korea, even though reunification may remain the ultimate objective or even a priority objective in those countries. We recognize that North Korea is not at present pressing its application, which it first submitted some 25 years ago. But that is not a valid reason, we believe, for not admitting South Korea. There has been criticism of one of the permanent members of the Security Council for linking the application of South Korea with those of North and South Viet Nam. But if that approach is to be deprecated, then equally so is the attitude of those who insist that an application from South Korea can be considered only in conjunction with an application from North Korea in other words, that both States must apply together. If linking is wrong in the one case, it is equally wrong in the other. My Government regrets that the Security Council did not approve the applications of North and South Viet Nam. We hope it will reconsider their applications and consider that of South Korea as well at an early date.
236.	My Government believes that in order to bring about universality the Charter provisions concerning admission should be simplified. In our view, the unanimity rule should not be applicable to membership applications in the Security Council and should be replaced by a suitable qualified majority. The criteria for admission should be the generally accepted criteria of independent statehood.
237.	There is a further consequence of our philosophy of universality, and this concerns Members which do not live up to their Charter obligations. In my country's view, the philosophy of universality is opposed to the tendency which has recently become evident to invoke the expulsion provision in Article 6 of the Charter. We regard expulsion as a last resort, and one of doubtful practical value. It would be a substantial improvement if provision could be made for a variety of sanctions against a Member which persistently violated the Charter, including suspension from the exercise of some or all of the rights and privileges of 
membership. The Member wh.ch is subjected to these measures should not, however, be relieved of the obligations of membership. In our view, that is a serious drawback to the present expulsion provision.
238.	New Zealand is a firm supporter of the process of decolonization and of the principles of racial equality enshrined in the Charter. During the past year we have followed the developments in southern Atrica with close concern. My Prime Minister welcomed the opportunity to discuss the situation in southern Africa with the Heads of Government of the African countries which are members of the Commonwealth when the Commonwealth Heads of Government met in Kingston in May. New Zealand fully subscribed to the views expressed by Commonwealth Prime Ministers, including those relating to sanctions against the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia and on the question of aid to the many indigenous peoples of southern Africa.
239.	In southern Africa there has been since last year's session of the Assembly encouraging progress in some areas, but disquieting developments in other areas, and in still other areas a disheartening lack of forward movement.
240.	Following the admission to the United Nations a year ago of the first Portuguese colony to be liberated, Guinea-Bissau, three more newly independent African States which were formerly under Portuguese rule have now taken their place among us. I take this opportunity to say a special word of welcome to the representatives of those countries. My country is conscious of the special problems which these new Governments face after a long period of struggle for their freedom and independence.
241.	The decolonization of Portugal's African colonies has brought about a fundamental shift in the balance of forces in southern Africa. With this change has come new hope for a solution of the problems of southern Rhodesia and Namibia. In Southern Rhodesia the goal of independence on the basis of majority rule has at times during the year seemed closer. It remains the earnest hope of my Government that this goal will be achieved quickly and peacefully. We trust that the Smith regime will take full advantage of what may well be the last opportunity to achieve a negotiated settlement. As the Commonwealth Heads of Government pointed out at Kingston, if peaceful avenues are blocked by the Smith regime, a stepping-up of armed struggle seems inevitable.
242.	Towards the end of 1974 the Prime Minister of South Africa asked that his Government be given six months to demonstrate its determination to make progress on the issues which caused the Assembly to reject the credentials of the South African delegation at the twenty-ninth session. Those six months have elapsed, and the United Nations is entitled to ask what progress has in fact been made. On the positive side, let us acknowledge that the South African Government played a constructive role in bringing Mr. Smith to the conference table with the leaders of the liberation movements in Southern Rhodesia. On the negative side, I think we must acknowledge that there has been little indication of any intention on the part of the South African Government to abandon its intolerable policy of apartheid. For the non-white majority of its people, South Africa continues to be a police State in which racial discrimination is not simply a matter of ignorance and prejudice but a fundamental doctrine embedded in the basic political and legal system.
243.	South Africa's position in regard to Namibia is equally indefensible. South Africa has no legal claim to the Territory. The situation is a simple one, where the people of Namibia as a whole should be given the opportunity to exercise the right of self-determination as soon as possible under United Nations supervision. In the absence of a change of heart on these issues, South Africa cannot expect to resume its rightful place in the international community.
244.	Since east and south-east Asia is an area of prime concern to New Zealand, I cannot conclude without commenting briefly on some of the important events that have taken place in this region during the past year.
245.	In Indo-China the prolonged military struggle is over. Political power there is in new hands, and whatever views we may hold about this we must all be grateful that the conflict has ended. There are lessons to be learned from the Indo-China experience if we, the international community, are prepared to heed them. It is not recrimination which is called for now, but a spirit of reconciliation and a readiness to help with the task of reconstruction. Some of the international agencies have already been engaged in this task, and their support has been invaluable. My Government is playing its part. We are willing, if so requested, to help with development Programs here as elsewhere without considerations of ideology.
246.	Elsewhere in South-East Asia the changes may not have been as dramatic as they have been in IndoChina. But developments are under way which promise to be just as significant for the region's future. We have been heartened above all by the growth of a genuine regional spirit. This is best seen in the progress of the Association of South-East Asian Nations. The five members of the Association have displayed a sense of cohesion and common purpose in seeking new solutions to old problems. New Zealand has been pleased to offer support, in practical ways, for their collective efforts. We look forward to the day when with them, and with the countries of Indo-China we will work together as a partnership in a wider scheme of regional co-operation, for this is the way ahead.
247.	My Government finds the trends in Asia encouraging. The situation in Korea, however, remains a source of serious concern. The continuing tension there, to which accusation and counter-accusation, threat and counter-threat, contribute, is a relic of another era.
248.	The Korean question has been on the Assembly's agenda for a quarter century. Korea may seem remote to some countries and the history of events there may be growing dim. But in considering this item it would be folly to forget that the interests of many Powers are involved. It has been the scene of a terrible war. With irresponsible handling it could be the scene of another. The supreme interest of the United Nations is peace. It is our duty to make decisions that contribute to peace and reconciliation rather than to insecurity and continued bitterness. It is my Government's earnest hope that this year a solution will be found that is acceptable to all parties and particularly, of course, to the two Korean States. If such a solution requires that the United Nations Command be dissolved, then we have a responsibility to ensure that adequate arrangements remain to safeguard peace and the well-being of the Korean people.
249.	In conclusion, the general debate with which we open each session of the General Assembly gives each Member small or large, poor or rich an equal opportunity to speak out honestly and frankly on matters it regards of vital concern. Indeed, it is more than an opportunity; it is a right and a responsibility. Each Member equally has a responsibility to help solve the problems facing the United Nations, and to contribute a share of the needed resources in proportion to its means. New Zealand has spoken out on the issues of most concern to us. I renew our pledge to play our part in finding fair and constructive solutions.


104.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to the high position of President of the General Assembly for its thirtieth session and I wish you full success in the discharge of this most important function.
105.	For three decades now, regular sessions of the General Assembly have been held towards the end of each year. And each session becomes a significant event in international life. Indeed, the United Nations activities are focused on the most important and acute problems.
106.	If we try to visualize with our mind's eye the work of our Organization over all these years, we shall see a vivid picture of the concerns and anxieties, aspirations and hopes of mankind, permeated by a desire, common to all peoples, for peace and for material, social and spiritual progress.
107.	Whether or not international developments are in line with that desire, this should be, above all, the starting-point in analyzing the state of affairs in the world. It is from this angle that the Soviet Union views the situation in which representatives of States have gathered for the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
108.	The main feature of the situation is that the process of relaxation of international tensions is gaining in scope, and detente itself is increasingly gaining substance. This finds its expression, in particular, in the conclusion of a whole number of agreements between States, including the well-known Soviet- American agreements, which are ot great importance for the cause of peace and international security.
109.	And though the process of improving the political climate is still being influenced by various, sometimes conflicting, factors, it can be definitely stated that in the past year a new significant step has been taken along the path leading, towards a more durable peace.
110.	The peaceful foreign policy of the USSR, a policy of socialism, is aimed at those objectives, at the strengthening of international security. Those objectives were set forth by the great Lenin himself, back in the early years of the existence of the Soviet State, and our country has been invariably guided by them throughout its historical march.
111.	Following this course, a course embodied in the Peace Program adopted by the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the USSR is an active participant in, and in many instances a sponsor of, efforts radically to improve the international situation.
112.	In present-day conditions, we believe it feasible, though not at all easy, to carry out a restructuring of relations among States such as would leave no room for wars between them and would secure respect for the rights of all peoples, large or small, to free and independent development.
113.	The principled foreign policy line of the USSR will, no doubt, be reaffirmed and expanded in the decisions of the forthcoming Twenty-Fifth Congress of the Party of Soviet communists early next year. All those who fight for the peace, national independence and social progress of peoples can continue to count on our solidarity and active support.
114.	In pursuing its policy of peace, the Soviet Union acts in the world arena in close unity with the fraternal socialist countries. And we are proud that the peaceful policies of the socialist countries are in keeping with ti.s aspirations of all peoples.
115.	This yea.' will remain in the memory of the peoples as the year of the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The Final Act of the Conference, to which the signatures of top leaders of 33 European countries, the United States of America and Canada were affixed in Helsinki, in one of the most outstanding documents of our times.
116.	The peoples of Europe to a very large extent pinned on the Conference the hope that the European continent would be able, at last, to break out of the vicious circle of its history where every post-war period turned into a pre-war period, to be followed by a war unleashed by aggressors. The peoples of Europe expected that the Conference would work out and adopt important decisions in the interests of ensuring their security and agree on the main directions for equal and versatile co-operation. Everywhere in Europe people wished the Conference to succeed.
117.	The participants in the Conference succeeded through intense collective efforts in achieving important results, which have been clearly recorded in the Final Act.
118.	This concerns, above all, the political sphere —the working out of principles governing relations among the participating States. Provided they are strictly observed by all States, the threat of war will be excluded from the life of the peoples of Europe and an atmosphere of trust in the peaceful development of each country will come into being on the continent.
119.	This is also true and applicable with regard to the stability and confidence measures agreed on at the Conference, which are designed to promote a reduction of the risk of armed conflicts in Europe.
120.	A positive role is to be played by the understandings reached at the Conference on co-operation in the fields of trade, large-scale industrial projects, science and technology, and the protection of the environment.
121.	A substantial contribution to the development of co-operation between the States participating in the Conference are the understandings reached on questions of co-operation in the fields of culture, information, contacts and education, and their significance will be ever increasingly felt as detente deepens and develops.
122.	It is not without a sense of satisfaction that I note that the success of the Conference was largely facilitated by the efforts of the socialist countries, which invariably seek to switch international relations on to the track of peaceful coexistence. This success became possible also because in Western countries the well-founded conviction is gaining strength that it is necessary to adopt a constructive approach to the solution of problems that arise in Europe instead of aggravating and inflaming the situation, which in the past often reached dangerous levels.
123.	The understandings reached as a result of the Conference are based on the recognition by all its participants of the absolute truth that respect for the sovereign equality of States, the non-use of force, the inviolability of frontiers, territorial integrity, nonintervention from outside in the internal affairs of States as well as other basic principles are laws which no one may transgress.
124.	What are the implications of the result of this joint work of 35 States for the peoples of Europe and indeed of the entire world?
125.	The answer is provided by the experience of the past, when a desire to seize others' territories and brute force raised to the level of State policy acquired the character of criminal claims to world domination and developed into the brown plague of fascism, racism, direct aggression and the tragedy of world wars. Now 35 States which took part in the Conference have assumed, jointly and before the whole world, the obligation to build their relations on the principles of peace, and peace alone, and of deeper co-operation.
126.	The results of the Conference constitute a carefully weighed balance of the interests of all its participants, and they reflect generally acceptable understandings and well-founded compromises. We have every reason to state that the experience of the Conference should be used most extensively for the settlement in general of the pressing problems of today.
127.	In short, as was stressed by L. I. Brezhnev in his speech at Helsinki:
"The results of the prolonged negotiations are such that there are neither victors nor vanquished, neither winners nor losers. This is a victory for reason. Everyone has won the countries of the East and of the West , the peoples of socialist and capitalist States, parties to alliances and neutrals, large and small. This is a gain for all people who hold dear the cause of peace and security on our planet.
128.	Assessing highly the results of the Conference, the Soviet Union believes that the main task now is to translate the understandings reached into deeds, and to advance towards new milestones in the struggle for a lasting peace. This is the course the Soviet Union follows and will continue to follow, and this is what we also expect others to do.
129.	Who would contest that the year 1975 will go down in history as the year of the triumph of the just cause of the peoples of Indo-China? Triumph crowned their liberation struggle that had been carried on for almost 30 years against colonialists and aggression.
130.	Those people sustained tremendous losses, but their will for freedom was never broken. The victory won by the peoples of Indo-China is above all the result of their own efforts. At the same time, it is also a major and common success of all the peace-loving and progressive: forces which invariably demonstrated their solidarity with the struggle of the patriots of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia, and provided them with moral and material support.
131.	The Soviet Union as the whole world knows has fulfilled its internationalist duty to the Vietnamese people. It has sought persistently the elimination in
Indo-China of one of the most dangerous hot-beds of war which troubled international relations.
132.	Understandably, the removal of that hot-bed was welcomed everywhere with a sense of relief. Now that freedom and peace have dawned over the whole of Indo-China, favorable prospects are opening up for its peoples to begin healing the wounds of war and building a new life, which they are doing with the dedication and heroism so characteristic of them.
133.	Having defended their sovereignty and independence in the long struggle, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam now express their willingness to participate within the framework of this world Organization also in efforts to develop international co-operation. We are convinced that the admission to the United Nations of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam would be fully in keeping with the lofty purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter; and the Soviet Union supports the request of their Governments to that effect. No one who stands for peace should fear such a decision of the United Nations.
134.	The lessons of Indo-China are simple and obvious. The struggle of peoples for freedom, national independence and social progress is invincible. It cannot be destroyed by bullets or fire. The outcome of many years of conflict in Indo-China is a convincing case in point. It is also clear that any attempt to dictate or to impose one's will on other peoples by force of arms is untenable and in the final account doomed to failure.
135.	This is a good lesson, in the sense that the policy of acting from "positions of strength", which has now been rejected also at the conference table in Helsinki, should be relegated to the archives of history, never to be revived.
136.	The radical change in the state of affairs in Indo-China creates more favorable prerequisites for establishing peaceful co-operation in Asia as a whole. Practical steps in this direction would serve the interests of the settlement of urgent problems and the strengthening of security throughout the continent of Asia which of course requires, as in Europe, collective efforts by all States concerned, both large and small. And it is through such efforts, and subject to strict compliance with the principles of equality and non- use of force in any guise in resolving disputes between States, that a most effective solution of the problem of Asian security can be found. Let no one think that the Soviet Union would benefit from such a turn of events in Asia to a greater extent than some other States. Not at all; objectively all countries of Asia are equally interested in this.
137.	The entire course of world events in recent times confirms the conclusion reached a long time ago by all those who stand on the ground of reality, that only the policy of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems can have a future and is in keeping with the interests of the peoples.
138.	Our country, the Soviet Union, which is faithful to the legacy of Lenin, carries on a tireless struggle for the further establishment of these principles as a generally recognized rule of international relations. In our relationships with countries of different social systems 'here are a good many positive elements which serve both our interests and those of our partners in corresponding agreements and understandings. This finds its expression in particular in the development of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America in recent years, primarily as a result of Soviet-American summit meetings, which favorably influences the situation in the world as a whole.
139.	A joint search for solutions of urgent problems, including their consideration at the very highest level, the development of political contacts, the expansion of economic, scientific, technological and cultural exchanges have already yielded tangible results which have a positive impact on the general state of international relations and strengthen the spirit of trust in them, without which relations among States cannot be built on a solid basis.
140.	The Soviet Union continues to consolidate friendly relations with developing countries with which we are united by a common desire for peace and progress. We have invariably rendered and will continue to render support to the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America and to the movement of non- aligned States in their struggle to consolidate their national sovereignty and economic independence, to overcome the grim legacy of the colonial past, and against intrigues aimed at undermining their independence and infringing upon their legitimate rights.
141.	Step by step the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are freeing themselves of the consequences of the "cold war" and its distortions in politics. In this respect the decision by Latin American States to put an end to the policy of boycotting socialist Cuba, a policy imposed upon them, was an important event.
142.	It is quite natural that it should be precisely in the present-day situation that the last pillars of colonialism, built up over centuries, are falling down. Quite recently, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, the Comoros and Papua New Guinea have joined the ranks of independent States. Our country welcomes the victory of the just cause of their peoples.
143.	We congratulate the representatives present in this Hall of the Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, and the People's Republic of Mozambique, which have become full-fledged Members of our Organization.
144.	Of course, the completion of the process of decolonization is not proceeding without difficulties. The events in Angola, for example, testify to this. The forces hostile to the liberation struggle of peoples do not surrender their positions without fighting. They sometimes find accomplices also among those who like to pose as zealous champions of the good of oppressed peoples while in practice they are in collusion with the oppressors.
145.	But in spite of all difficulties, the struggle for the elimination of the vestiges of colonialism, for the uprooting of racism, is now closer to final victory than ever before.
146.	The States of Asia, Africa and Latin America constitute a great and active force in world politics, and this imposes on them a grave responsibility for the state of affairs in the world. We view with understanding the fact that these countries, still suffering from the consequences of exploitation, discrimination and economic coercion, are today participating in the work of putting forward and elaborating proposals to establish such international economic relations as would be based on equality and justice.
147.	The solution of those questions, too, is inseparably connected with the further relaxation of political tensions in the world. The Soviet Union is fully aware of the legitimate interests and demands of the developing countries, and it based itself precisely upon such positions in the course of the recently concluded seventh special session of the General Assembly, the results of which we assess positively, although it is quite clear to everyone that much has still to be done before the relevant problems are actually solved.
148.	Thus, the past was marked by significant inter-national events of a positive nature. It is not for us, the socialist States, to underestimate the significance of successes in the international arena. Their contribution to the struggle for those successes is common knowledge.
149.	At the same time, one should be clearly conscious of the fact that detente is not a process which develops by its own momentum. For detente to move ahead, ever new impulses must be given it. A continuous day-to-day struggle must be conducted for it in international forums and from parliamentary rostrums. Each State, each Government, should realize that it can and should make its own contribution to detente.
150.	We deem it necessary to state this from the rostrum of the United Nations because, as facts prove, it would be wrong to underestimate the resistance of the enemies of detente.
151.	Designs dangerous to the cause of international co-operation continue to originate in their camp. And in this connexion no small arsenal of means is put into action, ranging from the direct use of force against other countries and peoples to demagoguery which exploits the tenacity of the "cold-war" dogmas and sows doubts as to the benefits of detente for all peoples.
152.	The same forces which once in the past sought to thwart the convening of the all-European Conference, and later on tried to prevent it from succeeding, attempt to question the effectiveness of its results.
153.	However the problem does not only lie in tendentious propaganda campaigns against detente and international actions aimed at deepening it; what is even more dangerous is the continuous policy of interference which endangers the independence of States, even though such a policy may be camouflaged words in defense of the ideals of freedom and democracy. Two years ago, this policy paved the way for the bloody Fascist coup in Chile. Today, almost the same methods are used to exacerbate the situation concerning some other countries.
154.	The world is deeply concerned over the blatant attempts to bring outside pressure to bear on Portugal, clearly made with the intent to compel the Portuguese people to abandon their chosen road of free development.
155.	The interests of solving the complex political and economic problems faced by Portugal require that a calm situation be ensured with regard to that country. No one can be allowed to flout the inalienable right of the Portuguese people to determine its destiny independently and without outside interference. Such is the position on which the Soviet Union has proceeded and will continue to proceed.
156.	Opponents of the process of detente will try to slow it down. But if we ask all those who, overtly or semi-overtly, today come out against the line of lessening international tensions what alternative they offer, they cannot come up with anything intelligible. In reality, their policy has but one answer, an answer which would tend to reserve this process and bring it back to the times of the "cold war".
157.	Herein lies the watershed between those who in practice stand for peace, for the improvement of relations between States and for the development of peaceful co-operation in all fields and they are backed by the peoples and those who reject this course in the development of world affairs, who would rather push the world towards the old path of tension, clashes between States, and an unrestrained arms race with all the ensuing dangers.
158.	All participants in this world forum of States would probably agree that one of the main tasks in the international sphere remains the elimination of the hot-beds of armed conflict. One need not dwell on the gravity of the threat when in this or that hot-bed the conflict suddenly flares up and again produces a crisis. The world has repeatedly faced such a turn of events and knows full well how hard it is to put out the flames of war.
159.	This, above all, concerns the Middle East, where a dangerous situation has persisted for many years.
160.	The essence of the conflict, its origins and causes are well knwon. What is required for the solution of the problem is no secret either. Only those do not see it who do not wish to. To establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle East in the interests of all States of the area and peoples inhabiting it, it is necessary that Israeli forces be withdrawn from all the Arab territories occupied by them in 1967; to ensure the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their right to establish their own State; to guarantee the rights of all the countries of the Middle East to independent development. I repeat, "all" the countries of the Middle East.
161.	A Middle East settlement cannot make headway if those crucial problems are left unsolved. Without their solution a settlement in the Middle East can only be delayed indefinitely, with increasing dangers for the situation. No palliative measures or camouflaging can change the substance of the matter.
162.	The problem of the Middle East must be free from an approach based on momentary considerations and publicity. It can be solved in the interests of the security and independence of all the countries of the region only in conditions of a serious and responsible approach to its solution.
163.	From all appearances, the circles which determine the political course of Israel have not yet realized that it is impossible to ensure the security of the country while trampling upon the legitimate rights of other countries which are jits neighbors. That policy naturally meets with broad condemnation. The Soviet Union, too, decisively condemns it.
164.	The main problems of the Middle East are still awaiting solution. There is appropriate machinery for their examination the Geneva Peace Conference. The Soviet Union stands for the reconvening of the Conference with the participation of all—and I stress "all"—parties concerned, including representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization. It will be recalled that the General Assembly at its twenty- ninth session reaffirmed by an overwhelming majority the right of the Arab people of Palestine to self-determination and national sovereignty [resolution 3236 (XXIX)\. The solution of the Palestine problem is an integral part of an over-all settlement in the Middle East. Today this is axiomatic and politicians cannot pretend that they do not see it.
165.	The main thing with which the participants should come to the Conference is a firm desire jointly to seek acceptable solutions. The Soviet Union, for its part, is ready to continue to do everything so that the Middle East may become an area of lasting and durable peace. That is what we mainly want to see in the Middle East, an area adjacent to the southern borders of our country.
166.	The Soviet Union consistently pursues a policy of friendship with the Arab countries, which are defending their just cause. This friendship is deeply ingrained and we do not believe that anyone will succeed in undermining it. The Soviet Union will continue to do everything in its power to consolidate this friendship on a basis of justice and principle.
167.	The situation in and around Cyprus still remains complicated. To satisfy interests alien to Cyprus the sovereignty of that small country and the inalienable rights of its people have been trampled upon for more than a year.
168.	The Soviet Union has consistently come out in defence of the independence and the territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the island, and for the settlement of the internal matters of their State by the two communities, Greek and Turkish, themselves. In other words, we are for the implementation of the well-known United Nations decisions on Cyprus. It is only on such a basis that a just settlement of the Cyprus problem and the elimination of this hotbed of tension will be possible.
169.	The precarious state of armistice obviously does not ensure the stabilization of the state of affairs on the Korean peninsula. The need to create conditions for establishing durable peace on the Korean peninsula and speeding up the peaceful reunification of Korea has long been pressing.
170.	Those goals would be served by a cessation of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people and, in the first place, the withdrawal from South Korea of all foreign troops stationed there under the United Nations flag, as well as by the conclusion of a peace treaty. It is the duty of the United Nations to assist in every possible way in taking such steps. This can be done on the basis of the proposals put forward at the current session of the General
Assembly by a large group of States, including the Soviet Union.
171.	The process of lessening tensions in the world, the very logic of its development, pose most acutely the question of the need to curb the arms race. The measures taken in this direction in recent years are to be commended. We attach great importance also to the negotiations now under way aimed at working out a new long-term agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States of America on the limitation of strategic offensive weapons. Its conclusion will be a new and major step forward, not only in bilateral Soviet-American relations, but in a wider international context as well.
172.	Hardly anyone would dispute the fact that everything that has been achieved in the field of disarm-ament so far represents but the first steps. Indeed, mankind so far has been unable to check the arms race or even substantially to slow down its pace. It goes on in the direction both of developing ever more destructive means of warfare and of building up the total volume of armaments.
173.	The Soviet Union is convinced that in the conditions of a relaxation of tensions in the world the prerequisites have been created for the implementation of effective measures which would end the arms race. In other words, it is now not only necessary but also possible to supplement political detente with military detente. The States participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe unanimously pronounced themselves in favor of this in the Final Act.
174.	The Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held last May at Geneva, came out for the implementation of broad measures for the limitation of the arms race ana fcr disarmament. It is precisely such specific steps towards easing the burden of armaments that become the touchstone for testing the genuine readiness of States and Governments to pursue the course of peace.
175.	The struggle for disarmament has always been and continues to be an integral part of the foreign policy line of the Soviet Union. The USSR is a permanent and active participant in negotiations on various aspects of the disarmament problem.
176.	We attach great importance to the lessening of military confrontation in areas where it is especially dangerous. Now, following the conclusion of the all- European Conference, one of the primary tasks is to find ways towards agreement on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe, without infringing the security of anyone. The Soviet Union will contribute in every way to the success of the talks on this problem currently under way in Vienna.
177.	Within the framework of the United Nations we have on more than one occasion already stated in detail our position on disarmament questions. And we have not merely stated it. The Soviet Union has put forward a large number of specific proposals many of which have formed the basis of important decisions adopted by the United Nations. We have consistently supported their implementation. This applies in particular to the resolution of the twenty- seventh session of the General Assembly on the non-use of force in international relations and the simultaneous permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)].
178.	Another question raised by the Soviet Union the reduction of the military budgets of States permanent members of the United Nations Security Council also retains the utmost importance..
179.	We consider it important speedily to conclude an international convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of techniques to influence the environment. The conclusion of such a convention would be not only a means of limiting the sphere of the arms race, but also an important means of preserving the environment, which would meet the vital interests of all States and peoples. We would like to express the hope that agreement will be reached on this matter in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, where a relevant draft is under consideration.
180.	In the field of disarmament, as in other matters, the Soviet Union adopts a realistic approach. It is constantly seeking areas of disarmament and arms- race limitation in which it is feasible to find commonly acceptable agreements.
181.	At the same time, we have never overlooked the main objective general and complete disarmament. We are of the view that this problem should be in the forefront of the attention of the World Disarmament Conference. The United Nations has already approved the idea of convening it. In that forum all countries of the world could, on an equal footing and freely, set out and compare their positions and outline ways and means of limiting and arresting the arms race.
182.	It is high time that efforts were made to complete preparations for the conference and to convene it. As is well known, this is something in which the Soviet Union will not be, and has not been, found wanting.
183.	The Soviet delegation would like to draw your attention to two aspects of the disarmament problem on which, in our view, decisions are required and can be taken in practice at the earliest possible date.
184.	We all realize the importance of scientific and technological progress. The mission of science is noble and humane in essence. It expands the horizons of human knowledge, makes knowledge a powerful force of economic development, of raising the well- being of peoples and their cultural levels, and links countries together by bonds of peaceful co-operation.
185.	Quite recently the entire world was given new proof of this. We are referring to the outstanding international experiment in outer space, the docking and joint flight of the Soviet and American space craft, "Soyuz" and "Apollo". The • handshake in orbit, as this experiment is now known, has rightfully become a symbol of the fruitful union of scientific achievements and the policy of peaceful coexistence.
186.	The USSR is a consistent champion of the use of science exclusively for peaceful purposes and in the interest of mankind, and is prepared for wide, large-scale co-operation in the sphere of science and technology with all States interested in this.
187.	However, the experience of the past shows that achievements in science and technology can be used for dangerous, even criminal purposes.
188.	With today's rapid development of science and technology in various countries new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction could emerge in various places. One can assume with a high degree of certainty that they would be even more ominous than those existing at present.
189.	None of this can be ignored. Further, it is well known how difficult it is to withdraw any weapon that has already been developed from the arsenals of States, and consequently how much safer and more reasonable it is to prevent its emergence in advance. If things are viewed from that angle, the need for, the urgency of, effective measures to prohibit the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction should become absolutely evident.
190.	Proceeding from this, aware of its responsibility as a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly as an important and urgent matter of item 126 entitled "Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons".
191.	We propose that States, and first of all the major Powers, conclude an agreement based on an undertaking neither to develop nor to manufacture new types and new systems of such weapons and not to assist in or encourage any activities in that direction.
192.	The need may arise to be more specific as to the categories of weapons which should be covered by the ban. The Soviet Union is prepared to take part in a detailed examination of this question in the course of appropriate negotiations. It is ready to speak out on the substance of this matter and to put forward most concrete proposals.
193.	The draft agreement which we submit to the General Assembly [see A/10243, annex] is worded in such a way that, while banning the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction, the agreement would not at the same time impede the economic, scientific and technical development of States parties and would not infringe their right to make use of scientific research and discoveries for peaceful purposes, for the benefit of people and without any discrimination.
194.	Such an international agreement would make a major contribution to the cause of limiting the arms race and to the cause of further easing international tensions. We should like to express our hope that our proposal will find support from the participants in this session and that other countries will join us in our initiative.
195.	In submitting^ our second proposal we were moved by the same concern, that of delivering mankind from the danger of war; by the desire to curb the race in the most pernicious weapons at present in the arsenals of States, nuclear weapons. Its purpose is to end completely nuclear weapon tests and thus radically to limit the practical possibilities for perfecting it further.
196.	Major steps have already been taken towards this aim: the 1963 Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water," and the 1974 Treaty between the USSR and the United States of America on the limitation of underground nuclear weapons tests.2
197.	_ In our view, conditions are ripe at present for the final step along this road: to conclude a broad international agreement imposing a ban on all nuclear weapon tests without exception.
198.	In line with this approach, the Soviet Union has already proposed the inclusion in the agenda of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Conclusion of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests" [item 122].
199.	In accordance with the draft treaty which is submitted for the consideration of Member States [see AH0241, annex], its adherents would undertake from now on not to manufacture nuclear weapons and to prohibit and prevent any test explosions of nuclear weapons in any environment, including the underground environment. Such an obligation must, of course, be assumed by all States, including all nuclear Powers.
200.	While outlawing all nuclear weapon tests, the treaty must not at the same time deny access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear explosions for both nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon countries.
201.	We hope that the General Assembly will support our initiative for the conclusion of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests.
202.	The implementation of the proposals submitted by the Soviet Union for consideration at the present session is in our view an integral part of the fulfillment of the general task which life itself has today made the corner-stone of all United Nations activities. The essence of the task is to promote the further development of the positive processes taking place in the world and to make them irreversible.
203.	We are convinced that the United Nations is equal to that task. Our world Organization has accumulated enormous experience in the multilateral co-operation of States. That valuable asset can and must be constantly employed for the benefit of peace.
204.	The successful fulfillment of its lofty mission by the United Nations as an important instrument for consolidating international security, particularly in the present-day most responsible period, presupposes constant enhancement of the effectiveness of its work. That need is ever greater, since some useful decisions of the United Nations still remain unimplemented, and that plays into the hands of those who would like to maintain hotbeds of the danger of war, colonial domination and remnants of racism.
205.	It would do no harm to recall once again from this rostrum that, as regards the obligation to comply strictly with the provisions of the United Nations Charter, there can be no exceptions for any of its Members. The Charter is the foundation of the entire structure of the United Nations. It has stood the test of time, and fully retains its significance for the future.
It is in the strict observance of the Charter, rather than in its revision, that one should look for resources for the further enhancement of the effectiveness of the United Nations and the strengthening of its authority.
206.	The lofty purposes and principles proclaimed in the Charter are an embodiment of the collective quest of the peoples for peace and progress. They were born out of the flames of the greatest tragedy that has ever befallen mankind. Celebrating this year the thirtieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War, the peoples look to the future with hope.
207.	The greatness of the exploits performed in the struggle against fascism and aggression by the peoples of the Soviet Union and the peoples of all countries who, during the years of war, combined their efforts in the name of victory and founded the United Nations, setting themselves the task of saving present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war, will never fade.
208.	In the three decades since the end of the Second World War a great distance has been covered in the struggle for international security. Particularly impressive are the successes achieved in recent years, which graphically prove that the prevention of wars between States is not a Utopian but an attainable goal. However, that must not be a source of complacency. There is still much to be done to achieve a truly stable peace on earth.
209.	As for the Soviet Union, we wish to see no stops on this road, no zigzags and, above all, no reversals. Substantial steps in that direction can be made here, at this General Assembly, and we are willing to take a most active part in this common endeavor.



At the outset, let me say how pleased we are that our deliberations this year take place under the presidency of the Prime Minister of Luxembourg. His contribution to European co-operation, his diplomatic skills,
' his devotion to democracy, give us confidence that this thirtieth session will be marked by a constructive and creative spirit.
63.	I want also to pay a tribute to the Secretary- General, whose fairness, leadership and tireless efforts are dedicated to carrying this Organization forward into a new era of co-operation for world peace.
64.	This century has seen war and cataclysm on an unprecedented scale. It has witnessed the breakdown of established patterns of order and practices of international conduct. It has suffered global economic depression and cycles of famine. It has experienced the birth of thermonuclear weapons, and the proliferation of armaments around the planet.
65.	But this century has also seen the triumph of the principle of self-determination and national independence. A truly global community has begun to evolve, and this development is reflected in a multitude of institutions of international co-operation. We have shaped new methods of peaceful settlement and of arms limitation, and new institutions to promote economic development and to combat hunger and disease world-wide.
66.	As we deliberate the future, an event of potentially vast implications has just been achieved in this Organization: the unanimous agreement produced by the seventh special session of the General Assembly on measures to improve the economic condition of mankind [resolution 3362 (S-VII)].
67.	Despite differences of ideology and of approaches to economic development, the nations assembled here began the move towards the recognition that our interdependence spells either common progress or common disaster; that in our age no nation or group of nations can achieve its aims by pressure or by confrontation and that the attempt to do so would damage everyone. They agreed to transcend the stereotypes of the past in the search for a co-operative future. The seventh special session forged a sense of common purpose based on the equality and co-operation of States. Now we must dedicate ourselves to the implementation of this consensus.
68.	Let us carry forward the spirit of conciliation into the deliberaDigitiZed by Dag HammarSkjoid LibraryLet us address the issues of world peace the foundation of all we do on this planet with this same consciousness of our common destiny. It is our duty to avoid empty slogans and endless recrimination.
69.	Only in a structure of co-operation can disputes be settled and clashes contained. Only in an atmosphere of conciliation can the insecurity of nations, out of which so much conflict arises, be eased, and habits of compromise and accommodation be nurtured. Social progress, justice and human rights can thrive only in an atmosphere of reduced international tension.
70.	The United States stands ready to dedicate itself to co-operative efforts to harmonize the different perspectives of the world community in creating a new sense of security and well-being. We do so, not out of fear, for we are better able to sustain ourselves in situations of confrontation than most other nations. Nor do we do so out of a sense of guilt, for we believe that on the whole we have used our power for constructive ends.
71.	We affirm our common destiny because of our recognition of global interdependence and because global peace requires it. Indeed there is no realistic alternative to shared responsibility in dealing with the international agenda of peace, security, economic well-being and justice.
72.	Let me set forth the views of the United States on the work we face in each of these areas.
73.	Our first and transcendent concern is for peace in the world. Peace is never automatic. It is more than the absence of war. And it is inseparable from security, A world in which the survival of nations is at the mercy of a few would spell oppression and injustice and fear. There can be no security without equilibrium and no safety without restraint.
74.	Only when the rights of nations are respected, when accommodation supplants force, can man's energies be devoted to the realization of his deepest aspirations.
75.	The United States will pursue the cause of peace with patience and an attitude of conciliation in many spheres. We shall nurture and deepen the ties of co-operation with our friends and allies. We shall strive to improve relations with countries of different ideology or political conviction. We shall always stand ready to assist in the settlement of regional disputes. We shall intensify our efforts to halt the spiral of nuclear armaments. We shall strive to improve man's economic and social condition and to strengthen the collaboration between developed and developing nations. And we shall struggle for the realization of fundamental human rights.
76.	America's close ties with the industrial democracies of North America, Western Europe and Japan have been the corner-stone of world stability and peace for three decades. Today, looking beyond immediate security and defence, we are working together on a range of new issues. Through our consultations, we have begun joint efforts to ease inter-national tensions; to co-ordinate our national policies for economic recovery; to work together on common challenges such as energy and the environment; and to address the great issues that concern the developing countries.
77.	In the same spirit, the United States has opened a new dialog with its neighbors in Central and Latin America. We have taken important steps towards resolving major political problems; we have begun close consultations for co-operation in promoting economic and social development. Alliance relations in the Western Hemisphere have a long history and great promise for the future. With imagination and dedication, we can make inter-American co-operation on the tasks of development an example to and a pillar of the global community.
78.	Peace, to be secure, must place on a more durable and reliable basis the relations between the nations possessing the means to destroy our planet.
79.	In recent years, the bipolar confrontation of the last generation has given way to the beginning of dialog and an easing of direct conflict. In this body, of all organizations, there is surely an appreciation of the global importance of lessened tension between the nuclear super-Powers. All nations have a stake in its success. When weapons of mass destruction can span continents in minutes, nuclear conflict threatens the survival of all mankind.
80.	We recognize that the suspicion and rivalry of a generation will not be swept away with a document or a conference. Real ideological and political differences exist. We shall firmly defend our vital interests and those of our friends. But we shall also never lose sight of the fact that in our age peace is a practical necessity and a moral imperative. We shall pursue the relaxation of tensions on the basis of strict reciprocity. We know the difference between posturing and policy; we will not encourage the belief that anyone can benefit from artificial tensions. We are deeply conscious that we owe it to future generations not to be swayed by momentary passions.
81.	The state of United States-Soviet relations today and just a decade ago presents a dramatic contrast. The world is no longer continually shaken by chronic and bitter confrontations. Periodic consultations including those held at the highest level encourage restraint and amplify areas of mutual interest. The forthcoming meeting between the President of the United States, Mr. Ford, and the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, should strengthen this process.
82.	Principles of mutual restraint have been enunciated at various summit meetings; they were reaffirmed by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe two months ago. These principles provide a standard of behavior by which our actions will be tested. If they are observed as we insist and if neither side seeks unilateral advantage, the specter of general war will be lifted not only from our own peoples but from all nations. There can be no more important task before us.
83.	We have likewise pursued more constructive and beneficial relationships with the countries of Eastern Europe. The United States has many traditional and deep-rooted bonds of friendship with the proud peoples of that region. We see widening possibilities for practical co-operation as the barriers between East and West in Europe diminish.

84.	There is no relationship to which the United States assigns greater significance than its new ties with the People's Republic of China. We believe that the well-being and progress of a quarter of humanity is an important element in global stability. The hostility of decades between our two nations has been replaced by a relationship of mutual respect which is now a durable feature of the world scene. It serves not only the interest of our two countries but also the broader interests of peace and stability in Asia and around the world. President Ford plans to visit the People's Republic of China later this year to confirm the vitality of our relationship and to advance the ties between us on the basis of the strict implementation of the Shanghai Communique. We take seriously the process of normalizing our relationship. We are dedicated to pursuing it.
85.	The world community must find a way to contain or resolve regional conflicts before they spread into global confrontation. Nowhere has the danger been greater than in the Middle East. Nowhere has the need for persistent and imaginative negotiation between suspicious rivals been more evident. Nowhere is there greater promise of moving from perennial crisis towards peace. Nowhere has the Security Council established a clearer framework than in its resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
86.	The road towards a lasting peace stretches long and hard before us. The Middle East has seen more than its share of dashed hopes and disappointment. But the conclusion of the recent Sinai agreement1 marks a major step forward. It is the first agreement in the long and tragic history of the Arab-Israeli conflict which is not the immediate consequence of hostilities. It could mark a turning-point.
87.	The agreement deserves the support of all the countries assembled here because every nation here has an interest in progress towards peace in the Middle East. It is another step in the process launched by Security Council resolution 338 (1973). The alternative was a continuing stalemate which would have led over time to another war creating a serious threat to world peace and the prospect of global economic confrontations.
88.	Neither fear of the future nor pride should obscure the fact that an unusual opportunity for further progress on all issues now exists. But opportunities must be seized or they will disappear. I want to emphasize that the United States did not help negotiate this agreement in order to put an end to the process of peace, but to give it new impetus.
89.	President Ford has stated that we will not accept stalemate or stagnation in the Middle East. That was true before the Sinai agreement was signed; it remains true today. The objective of our policy is not merely to create another temporary truce but to sustain the momentum of negotiations. The United States is determined to take every feasible step to help promote further practical progress towards final peace.
90.	As a first step, it is essential that the Sinai agreement be carried out impeccably, within the terms and the time-frame that are stipulated.
91.	In the improved atmosphere thus created, the United States stands ready to participate in any promising initiative towards peace at the request of the parties concerned.
92.	We have made clear that we are prepared to make a serious effort to encourage negotiations between Syria and Israel.
93.	We also intend to consult over the coming weeks with all concerned regarding the reopening of the Geneva Conference which met at an early crucial phase. As co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference together with the Soviet Union, our two countries have special responsibilities in this regard.
94.	We are prepared also to explore possibilities for perhaps a more informal multilateral meeting to assess conditions and to discuss the future.
95.	The United States seeks no special benefit; we do not attempt to exclude any country. We will cooperate with any nation that is willing to make a contribution. We have no preference for any particular procedure. We will support whatever process seems most promising. Our approach will continue to be both flexible and determined.
96.	The search for final peace must be conducted on a wide basis. We are in frequent touch with Governments in the Middle East. We have begun discussions with the Soviet Union with a view to assessing the current situation and weighing possible diplomatic approaches to bring about a just and durable peace in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). While we have had important differences with the Soviet Union, our two countries have held parallel views that the situation in the Middle East poses grave dangers and that partial steps must be part of and contribute to progress towards a comprehensive settlement.
97.	The role of the world Organization remains essential. If this Organization had no other accomplishment than its effective peace-keeping role in this troubled area, it would have well justified itself. These soldiers of peace, wearing the blue beret of the United Nations, as members of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine, the United Nations Emergency Force, and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force have become indispensable to the maintenance of the two 1974 disengagement accords as well as the Sinai agreement. I want to take this occasion to salute the Secretary- General, Mr. Waldheim, and his staff, and General Siilasvuo, the Chief Coordinator of the United Nations peace-keeping missions in the Middle East, and all the men and women from many countries who have served in these forces which have no enemy.
98.	The deliberations of this Assembly regarding the Middle East also play a central role. They can encourage progress or exacerbate tensions. Procedural decisions can be based on the recognition that dialog requires universality of membership, or they can fuel a futile, self-defeating effort to discriminate in violation of the Charter against a Member State whose participation is vital for a solution.
99.	The Middle East will continue to be an area of anguish, turmoil, and peril until a just and durable peace is achieved. Such a peace must meet the principal concerns and interests of all in the area; among and security and the legitimate interests of the Palestinians.
100.	In the Middle East today here is a yearning for peace surpassing any known for three decades. Let us not doom the region to another generation of futile struggle. Instead, let the world community seize the historic opportunity before it. The suffering of all the peoples of the Middle East cry out for it; the hopes and interests of all the world's peoples demand it. The United States promises its full dedication to further progress towards peace.
101.	The contribution of the United Nations to the process of peace is essential in Cyprus as well. The Secretary-General has the responsibilities of organizing the peace-keeping forces on the island and of facilitating the talks between the leaders of the Greek and Turkish communities.
102.	Strict maintenance of the cease-fire is imperative. For this we look to the restraint of the parties and the efficacy of the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
103.	We know that the world community shares our sense of urgency that the negotiating process be resumed and that the parties demonstrate flexibility and statesmanship. The status quo on the island must not become permanent; a rapid and equitable solution is essential. The Secretary-General has worked tirelessly and imaginatively under the most difficult circumstances to narrow the differences. He deserves the full support of the parties and of every nation here.
104.	The details of a Cyprus settlement are for the two communities themselves to decide. However, in keeping with United Nations resolutions which the United States has fully supported, the following principles are believed by my Government to be essential:
(a)	A settlement must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It must ensure that both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot communities can live in freedom and have a large voice in their own affairs.
(b)	The present dividing lines cannot be permanent. There must be movement from these lines to agreed territorial arrangements which reflect the economic requirements of the Greek Cypriot community and take account of its self-respect.
(t ) There must be provision for the withdrawal of foreign military forces other than those present under the authority of international agreements.
(id) There must be security for all Cypriots; the needs and wishes of the refugees who have been the principal victims and whose tragic plight touches us all must be dealt with speedily and with compassion.
105.	Another area where this Organization will be called upon to take responsible actions is the Korean peninsula. This requires, above all, maintenance of the armistice, pending agreement by all of the parties most directly concerned to replace it with a new arrangement. The existing Armistice Agreement is the only legal instrument committing the parties to maintain the peace. It is a carefully designed structure for monitoring and policing the military demarcation line.
106.	The United Nations Commander-in-Chief is a signatory to that Agreement. The armistice machinery functions daily. None of the signatories has repudiated it. Nor could they do so without serious risks to the peace of the world.
107.	Since 1972, South and North Korea have pledged themselves to enter into a dialog and to seek unification without resort to arms. This Assembly in 1973 and 1974 encouraged this process first in a consensus supporting talks between the two sides, then in a resolution [resolution 3333 (XXIX)] which looked towards termination of the United Nations Command. The United States agrees that 20 years after the end of the Korean war it is timely to terminate the United Nations Command. We have, in fact, sponsored a draft resolution to that effect which is now before you.
108.	It would be foolhardy, however, to terminate the United Nations Command without new arrangements to preserve the integrity of the Armistice Agreement. In the interest of peace, the United States cannot accept any solution which fails to provide for the continuing validity of the Armistice Agreement.
109.	The Republic of Korea and the United States have stated their general readiness to meet with representatives of the other side and with other members of the Security Council to discuss the termination of the United Nations Command while preserving the Armistice Agreement.
110.	Today I can be more specific. The United States and the Republic of Korea, looking forward to the time when a lasting solution of the Korean problem can be achieved, are herewith proposing to the parties to the Armistice Agreement the convening of a conference to discuss ways to preserve it. At such a meeting we would also be prepared to explore other measures to reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula, including the possibility of a larger conference to negotiate a more fundamental arrangement.
111.	It would be in keeping with this spirit of dialog for this body to open its doors to full membership for the two Korean Governments. The United States supports the dual entry of both South and North Korea into the United Nations without prejudice to their eventual reunification. For our part, if North Korea and its allies would move to improve their relations with the Republic of Korea we would be prepared to take similar reciprocal action. It goes without saying that no proposal for security arrangements on the Korean peninsula which attempts to exclude the Republic of Korea from the discussions can be accepted by the United States.
112.	The United Nations can contribute significantly to the process of peace on the Korean peninsula by supporting a responsible approach.
113.	Over the past year the United States has followed carefully and with great sympathy the efforts to reach peaceful settlements in southern Africa.
114.	We welcome the statesmanlike efforts of both black and white African leader: who are seeking to prevent violence and bloodshed and to promote a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. The differences between the two communities in that country, while substantial, have been narrowed in the last decade. Both sides in Rhodesia, and Rhodesia's neighbors,
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
war. The United States will support all efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement.
115.	In underlining our goal of peaceful change for southern Africa, I want to emphasize the importance of an early settlement in Namibia. My Government's opposition to South Africa's continuing occupation of Namibia and our rejection of South Africa's apartheid system are well known. The United States has consistently conveyed our position on this subject to South Africa. We will continue to do so.
116.	We believe that the people of Namibia should be given the opportunity, within a short time, to express their views on the political future and constitutional structure of their country, freely and under United Nations supervision.
117.	Peace in the world will be fragile and tenuous without a curb and, eventually, an end to the arms race. This is why the United States has embarked, with the Soviet Union, upon the difficult and complex negotiation to limit strategic arms. Our objectives are to prevent unchecked destabilizing competition in strategic armaments; to achieve reduction of these arms; to lessen further the likelihood of hasty decisions in times of crisis; and to ease the economic burden of the nuclear arms race.
118.	The Vladivostok accord of last autumn marked a major step towards achieving these goals. When this agreement in principle is translated into a treaty, agreed ceilings will be placed on strategic force levels for a 10-year period. This unprecedented step will slow the pace of new arms programs, especially those driven by fear of major deployments by the other side.
119.	The United States is actively engaged in other amis control negotiations. Together with the Soviet Union, we have made progress towards establishing a regime for peaceful nuclear explosions, and we have agreed to set a threshold on the underground testing of nuclear weapons. These are significant steps towards a. verifiable comprehensive test ban.
120.	In addition, the United States and the Soviet Union have presented to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament identical drafts of a convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques [A/10027, annex II, documents CCDI47I and CCD/472]. Misuse of this knowledge might open new avenues of military competition and wreak untold and irreversible harm upon all humanity. We urge the Conference to complete its consideration rapidly.
121.	Another urgent task is a substantia] reduction in the high levels of military forces now confronting each other in various parts of the world. The United States believes that the time has come to give new impetus to the negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions in central Europe. The significance of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe depends to an important extent on whether we can achieve progress in this area. An agreement that enhances mutual security in central Europe is feasible and essential. We will work towards that goal.
122.	The world faces a paradox with respect to the proliferation of nuclear energy. Men have fashioned from the atom weapons which can in minuter end the civilization of centuries. Simultaneously, the atom is fast becoming a more and more essential source of energy. It is clear that the cost and eventual scarcity of oil and other fossil fuels will increasingly spread nuclear power around the world in the decades ahead.
123.	But the spreading of nuclear power poses starkly the danger of proliferating nuclear weapons capabilities and the related risks of the theft of nuclear materials, blackmail by terrorists, accidents or the injection of the nuclear threat into regional political conflicts. Now is the time to act. If we fail to restrain nuclear proliferation, future generations will live on a planet shadowed by nuclear catastrophe.
124.	Over the past year the United States has repeatedly urged new efforts among the supplier States to strengthen and standardize safeguards and controls on the export of nuclear materials. We must not allow these safeguards to be eroded by commercial competition. We must ensure the broad availability of peaceful nuclear energy under safe, economical and reliable conditions.
125.	The United States has intensified its efforts within the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA ] and with other nations to broaden and strengthen international standards and safeguards, and has proposed an international convention setting standards to protect the physical security of nuclear materials in use, storage and transfer.
126.	The United States continues to urge the widest possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] and the associated safeguard measures of the IAEA.
127.	The greatest single danger of unrestrained nuclear proliferation resides in the spread, under national control, of reprocessing facilities for the atomic materials in nuclear power plants. The United States therefore proposes, as a major step to reinforce all other measures, the establishment of multinational regional nuclear fuel-cycle centers. These centers would serve energy needs on a commercially sound basis and encourage regional energy co-operation. Their existence would reduce the incentive for small and inefficient reprocessing facilities, limit the possibility of diverting peaceful nuclear materials to national military use, and create a better framework for applying effective international safeguards.
128.	We urge that groups of nations begin now to explore this concept and that all States support the work of the IAEA in this field.
129.	In the last two years the world community has been reminded dramatically to what extent economic relations are an essential foundation of the economic order. It would be one of history's most tragic ironies if, at a time when .. i are putting behind us the tensions of the cold war, we were to enter a new period of conflict between North and South, rich and poor. At the recently concluded seventh special session, the United States called for an end to the sterile confrontations of the past. We stated that, when the ancient dream of mankind, a world without poverty, becomes a possibility, our moral convictions also make it a duty. And we emphasized that only co-operation, not extortion, can achieve gives us ground for hope that, at least for the immediate future, a choice has been made to turn away from confrontation towards co-operation. The United States is proud to support the final document [resolution 3362 (S-VII)], which is the product of the arduous effort and dedication of so many in this chamber.
130.	The United States considers the achievements of the seventh special session a beginning, not an end. As recommended in the final report, we must now move forward in available forums to give reality and content to the objectives on which we have agreed. In the difficult negotiations ahead my Government will participate energetically, in a co-operative and conciliatory spirit.
131.	Beyond peace, security and prosperity lies a deeper universal aspiration to dignity and equal opportunity. Mankind will never be spared all the tragedies inherent in the cycle of life and death. But we do have it in our power to eliminate or to ease the burden of social tragedy and of organized injustice.
132.	The United States has traditionally been an advocate of extending the reach of international law in international affairs. We have offered our help to the victims of disease and natural disaster. There is no longer any dispute that international human rights are on the agenda of international diplomacy.
133.	The reach of international law must extend to the last frontiers of our planet, the oceans. They are the common heritage of mankind, but they can turn into arenas of conflict unless governed by law. They hold untapped sources of energy, minerals and proteins; their environmental integrity is crucial to our survival.
134.	The United States welcomes the United Nations mandate for a comprehensive treaty governing the use of the oceans and their resources. Last month at Montreal I set forth our approach to this negotiation and urged that next year's session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea move matters to a rapid and successful conclusion. No international negotiation is more vital for long-term political and economic stability and the prosperity of our globe.
135.	International law must also come to grips with international terrorism. Innumerable innocent lives have been lost as a consequence of the lack of internationally accepted standards specifically designed to avert unlawful and dangerous interference with civil aviation. The hijacking of aircraft, the kidnapping and murder of innocent civilian victims for presumed political gain remain a plague on civilized man. This remains one of the under-developed areas of international law which merits the most urgent attention of this Organization.
136.	Compassion for our fellow men requires also that we mobilize international resources to combat the age-old scourges of mankind: disease, famine and natural disaster.
137.	The great human rights must be recognized, respected and given reality in the affairs of nations. The earliest United Nations declarations and the recent Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe leave no doubt that these are matters of international concern. The United States will support these principles. Throughout the world, in all continents, violations of human rights must be opposed whether they are inflicted by one race upon another or upon members of the same race. Human rights must be cherished regardless of race, sex or religion. There can be no double standard.
138.	The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has taken its first steps against gross violations of human rights where serious and reliable allegations are submitted by individuals. We support those steps. The organized concern of the world community can be a potent weapon in the war against degradation of human values.
139.	One of the most persistent and serious problems is torture, a practice which all nations should abhor. It is an absolute debasement of the function of government with  its overwhelming power is used not for people's welfare but as an instrument of their suffering.
140.	The United States urges this Assembly to adopt the draft Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, recommended for adoption by the Assembly by the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Geneva recently.4 In addition, we propose that this General Assembly establish a group of experts, to be appointed by the Secretary-General, to study the nature and extent of torture in the world today and to report back to the next session of our Assembly.
141.	This Organization was created in the belief that the universality of the human race can be reflected in the conduct of international affairs. This Chamber symbolizes the hope that mankind places in the force of nations working together in the common interest, with reason, responsibility and mutual respect.
142.	The problems we face are complex and perilous. The sterile slogans of yesterday, the solutions of the past, the dwelling upon old resentments, can only widen the gaps between us and allow the dangers to peace and the well-being of our peoples to fester and to grow.
143.	We have it in our power to prove to future generations that the last quarter of the twentieth century was not an era of violence and conflict, but one of the creative epochs of world history.
144.	My country's history tells us that it is possible to fashion unity while cherishing diversity; that common action is possible despite the variety of races, interests and beliefs we see here in this Chamber. Progress and peace and justice are attainable.
145.	So we say to all peoples and all Governments: let us fashion together a new world order. Let its arrangements be just. Let the new nations help shape it and feel it is theirs. Let the old nations use their strengths and skills for the benefit of all mankind. Let us all work together to enrich the spirit and to ennoble mankind.
60. Profound changes have taken place in the international situation since the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly. A serious capitalist economic crisis plagues most parts of the world. All the basic contradictions in the world are becoming sharper. The trend of revolution by the people of the world is actively developing. The Asian, African and Latin American peoples have advanced valiantly and won a series of significant victories in their struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism. On the other hand, the contention between the two super-Powers for world hegemony has become more md more intense. The whole world is in greater turbulence and unrest. Rhetoric about detente cannot cover up the stark reality. The danger of war is visibly growing.
61.	First of all, it should be pointed out that the great victory of the three Indo-Chinese peoples has shaken the world. The Cambodian and Vietnamese peoples have thoroughly defeated United States imperialism and its lackeys, thus making an important contribution to the anti-imperialist cause of the people of the world and greatly inspiring all oppressed nations and oppressed people. Their victory is a brilliant example showing that a weak nation can defeat a strong one, and a small nation can defeat a big one.
62.	The peoples of Asia are strongly against superPower interference and control and against the attempt of any country to seek hegemony in any part of Asia. The South-East Asian countries want their region to become a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality, free from any form or manner of interference by outside Powers. This position of theirs has won the recognition and respect of an increasing number of countries. The struggle of the South Asian peoples against expansionism and hegemonism has made new progress. In West Asia, long-standing disputes have been resolved by the countries concerned which excluded foreign influence and conducted consultations on an equal footing, thus creating favorable conditions for friendly co-operation among the countries in the region. The Gulf countries are uniting in the common struggle against super-Power infiltration and control.
63.	In Africa, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and the Comoros have achieved independence, one after another. This is the result of their persistence in protracted struggles, particularly armed struggles. The struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania against racism and white rule is developing in depth. The situation on the African continent is most encouraging.
64.	The struggle of the Latin American peoples to combat imperialism and hegemonism, safeguard State sovereignty and defend their national natural resources and economic rights and interests has continued to surge forward. Those peoples have reinforced their unity in the struggle in various ways.
65.	Furthermore, we are pleased to see that in Oceania Papua New Guinea has recently achieved its national independence.
66.	In order to change the old international economic order and oppose the shifting of economic crises, the third-world countries have, in pursuance of the Declaration and program of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)], adopted by the General Assembly at its sixth special session, advanced many reasonable proposals and waged unremitting struggles at various conferences and achieved marked successes.
67.	The unity and struggle of the third-world countries, extending from the political to the economic sphere, have ushered in a new stage in the revolutionary cause of the people of the world against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism.
68.	The countries of the second world have also heightened their struggle against super-Power, and particularly social-imperialist, control, intervention, subversion and threat of force. The trend among the West European countries to unite against hegemonism has continued to grow. The second world has increased its dialog and contacts with the third world. Such co-operation will doubtless have good prospects for development as long as it is based on mutual respect for sovereignty and equality.
69.	The contention between the two super-Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, extends to all parts of the world. Those Powers are intensifying iheir strife in Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean, the Pacific, the Atlantic, Asia, Africa and Latin America. Strategically, Europe is the focus of their contention. Social- imperialism is making a feint to the East while attacking in the West. This was revealed, rather than covered up, by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The two super-Powers do reach some agreements from time to time, but these only erect a facade, behind which they are engaged in bigger and fiercer contention.
70.	Take, for example, the agreement in principle reached at the United States-Soviet summit meeting last November on the limitation of strategic offensive arms. This agreement only sets a numerical limit on the arms in question, which exceeds the amount each side possesses at the moment, while qualitatively' it sets no limit at all. It is evident, therefore, that such an agreement should more appropriately be called an agreement on strategic arms expansion rather than an agreement on strategic arms limitation. Facts are at hand to prove this. Since the signing of this agreement, the United States and the Soviet Union have both stepped up their development and deployment of new types of strategic arms, each trying hard to overpower the other.
71.	Of late, the Soviet Union has made use of the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to turn out much propaganda alleging that detente has progressed to a new stage. This is sheer deception. We are aware of the eager desire for security on the part of the many small and medium-sized countries which participated in that Conference. We are also aware that such countries have no illusions about its agreements, which have no binding force. What security let alone detente— is there to speak of when Europe remains in the prolonged state of tense armed confrontation? While chanting "peace and security" in the conference hall, the Soviet Union made moves to aggravate tension outside. It not only concentrated massive military forces and carried out unbridled provocations in the seas of northern Europe and the Mediterranean, but it has also brazenly stretched its tentacles to the
Iberian peninsula. Such deeds of expansion coupled with words of detente are a huge mockery of the Conference. From its inception we considered the Conference a European insecurity conference. Now that this Conference has ended, is there greater security in Europe? In our view, no. The Conference has not altered the basis situation in Europe in the least. If one should be so naive as to believe in Soviet propaganda, that would be dangerous indeed.
72.	The Soviet leadership hankers after a so-called "Asian collective security system". Now that the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has been a success, as they say, we Asian countries should learn from its example. What a bright idea! The situation in Asia, however, is different from that in Europe. It was only a short while ago that a super-Power was driven out of Indo-China. So the purpose of the Soviet Union is not the preservation of Asian security; rather, it is to "fill the vacuum" and at the same time divert world attention to Asia to cover up the fact that Europe is the focus of its strategy. As for the principle of the inviolability of existing frontiers that was stressed at the European security Conference, what implications would it have in Asia? Is it that the Soviet Union wants, us to recognize as legal its occupation of the territories of some Asian countries while at the same fame allowing it to reserve the right to support one Asian country in violating the existing frontiers of another, as it did in 1971? To put it bluntly, the idea of a so-called "Asian collective security system" peddled by the Soviet leadership is designed to facilitate its contention with the other super-Power for hegemony in the Asia- Pacific region and serves as a means by which it seeks to divide and control the Asian countries. But the Asian countries, which won their independence after protracted struggles, know well that in order to be masters in their own house they must never "let the tiger in through the back door while expelling the wolf through the front gate". China's attitude towards this stuff of "Asian collective security system" is clear- cut: first, we are against it; second, we despise it.
73.	As Lenin pointed out time and again, imperialism means war. So long as imperialism and social-imperialism exist, war is inevitable. The content of imperialist politics is world domination, and the continuation of this politics is imperialist war. Since both super-Powers are after world domination, the contradiction between them is irreconcilable; one either overpowers the other, or is overpowered. The so- called "balance of power", even if it exists, is only a transient and superficial one. It will not do to depend on a "balance of power" or a so-called "balance of terror" for maintaining peace. Khrushchev's brainchild that peaceful coexistence is the only alternative in this nuclear age is a hypocritical lie. If the Soviet Union took this stuff seriously, why should it frantically develop conventional armed forces in addition to energetically developing nuclear arms and maintain an offensive posture far exceeding its defense needs? With the super-Powers contending so fiercely and expanding their armaments so madly, they are bound to go to war against each other some day. This is independent of man's will. The super-Powers are the source of a new world war, and the danger of war comes mainly from the wildly ambitious social-imperialism. The frequent meetings between the superpowers and their profuse talk about detente precisely prove that there is no detente, let alone lasting peace, in this world. What characterizes the current world situation is decidedly not an irreversible process of detente but the approaching danger of a new world war.
74.	We hope that the people of all countries will heighten their vigilance and get prepared in view of the growing danger of a new world war. It is better to be prepared than unprepared. Without preparations one will suffer. The super-Powers look strong but are inwardly weak and very isolated. The more evils they do, the more thoroughly they will reveal their true features, and the stronger the resistance of the people of the world will become. At present, the factors for both revolution and war are increasing on a world scale. Whether war gives rise to revolution or revolution prevents war, in either case the international situation will develop in a direction favorable to the people. And the future of the world will be bright.
75.	Numerous questions will be considered at the current session of the General Assembly. The Chinese delegation would like to state our views on some of them.
76.	First, there is the question of opposing colonialism. The past year was a year in which the African people continued to win important victories in their straggle for national independence and liberation. With the collapse of the Portuguese colonial system and the glorious birth of a number of newly independent States, the African national liberation movement has advanced to a new stage, and the last strongholds of colonialism in southern Africa are assailed from all sides by the multitude of African people and countries persisting in struggle.
77.	But even before old-line colonialism dies out, the two super-Powers have already stepped in. The United States has long supported colonial race in Africa, and southern Africa in particular. The Soviet Union, flaunting the banner of "socialism", has infiltrated the African national liberation movement to sow discord and stir up trouble in an attempt to bring the movement within its social-imperialist orbit.
78.	All revolutionary peoples of the world are saddened by the civil war in Angola. Differences within a national liberation movement are something normal. The correct attitude is to encourage unity in their common struggle to combat the enemy and drive out the colonialists. That is why the Organization of African Unity has recognized and supported all the three liberation organizations in Angola engaged in armed struggle and has made tireless efforts to promote unity in the Angolan national liberation movement. But the Soviet leadership, which considers itself as the patron of the national liberation movement, disregards the agreement reached among the three Angolan organizations on unity against the enemy and has, through its propaganda media, identified one organization as revolutionary and censured another as reactionary in a deliberate attempt to create division. Furthermore, it has sent large quantities of arms, including heavy arms, to one of the Angolan organizations. That was how t? civil war was provoked in Angola. The other super-Power, on its part, has not lagged behind. The situation in Angola is becoming ever more complicated.
79.	From the very beginning, China has given its support to the national liberation movement in Angola. We gave military aid to all three Angolan liberation organizations to help them fight Portuguese colonialism. Being aware of their differences, we have all along urged them to unite against the enemy. After the agreement on independence was reached between the Angolan national liberation movement and Portugal, we stopped giving new military aid to the three Angolan organizations. Such are the facts, and facts are more eloquent than words. The Soviet slanders against China can in no way cover up the truth; instead, they serve to lay bare the true features of the Soviet Union.
80.	The civil war in Angola instigated by the Soviet Union is a bad thing, but a good thing too. It is good precisely because it serves as teaching material by negative example. All revolutionary movements are bound to go through twists and turns. We believe that the broad masses of the Angolan people, after experiencing setbacks and detours, will certainly uphold unity, persist in struggle, frustrate the super-Power and particularly social-imperialist schemes and achieve their independence and liberation. Their temporary difficulties and sacrifices will not only greatly enhance their own political awareness, but also provide a profound lesson for the liberation movements of the oppressed nations throughout the world.
81.	An excellent situation prevails in Africa. It was because the racists in southern Africa were driven into a corner that Vorster of South Africa prorosed "dialog" between the minority white regime of Southern Rhodesia and the Zimbabwe national liberation organizations. This signifies only the weakness of the racists, not their strength. Through such tactics they intend to disintegrate the national liberation movement and to preserve the reactionary white rule. The recent twelfth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity penetratingly stated that " Vorster's detente manoeuvres on Rhodesia are a transparent trick to frustrate majority rule and to disarm the freedom-fighters". The Assembly stressed the necessity of armed struggle, called on the Zimbabwe' people to intensify immediately their armed struggle and expressed a determination to fight by every means possible the white racist regimes until their complete elimination. We warmly support this correct stand. We have always advocated the use of revolutionary dual tactics against the reactionaries' counter-revolutionary dual tactics. Armed struggle is fundamental; the people's armed forces must be strengthened and not weakened, negotiations or no negotiations. Deviations and detours may sometimes occur in the complicated struggle against counter-revolutionary dual tactics. But the people will sum up their experience, overcome difficulties and continue to advance. Through long and tortuous struggles the people of southern Africa will eventually win the complete liberation of the African continent.
82. Secondly, I take up the Korean question. The independent and peaceful reunification of Korea is the common aspiration of the entire Korean people. Over the years the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has put forward many reasonable proposals and propositions for the peaceful reunification of the fatherland. Thanks to its initiative, an agreement was reached with the South Korean authorities in 1972 on the three principles for independent and peaceful reunification, which were affirmed by the General Assembly in 1973.2 However, Korea remains divided today, because the Chung Hee Park clique, supported by the United States, has abandoned these principles and sabotaged the North-South talks.
83.	Under the impact of the great victory of the Indo-Chinese peoples this year, United States imperialism became panicky and endlessly repeated the myth of a so-called "threat of a southward invasion from the north" concocted by the Chung Hee Park clique, deliberately played up the tension on the Korean peninsula and even declared that it would not hesitate to use nuclear weapons there. Backed and abetted by the United States, the Chung Hee Park clique pursued its policy of national division with greater frenzy, issued a succession of "emergency laws", declared a state of war and intensified its suppression of the people in South Korea. It looked as if a Korean war was an imminent possibility. As a matter of fact, that was much ado about nothing. It is now cigar that the United States and the Chung Hee Park clique have acted in this way merely to create a pretext and deceive the people of the world so that United States troops may hang on in South Korea and the division of Korea may be perpetuated. If there is a danger of war on the Korean peninsula, it can only originate from the South Korean authorities that constantly clamor for "reunification by prevailing over communism", and absolutely not from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea which insists on independent and peaceful reunification.
84.	The draft resolution on Korea submitted by the United States, Japan and other countries this year [A/10142 and Add.1-7] claims a "preparedness" to terminate the United Nations Command. But there is no mention at all of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea. Obviously, its purpose is, under the cover of terminating the United Nations Command, to legalize the presence of United States troops in South Korea and create "two Koreas." The United States attempt to thrust the Chung Hee Park clique into the United Nations is part of this scheme. Clearly, such a draft resolution can by no means lead to a peaceful settlement of the Korean question, no matter how nicely it is worded. It is absolutely unacceptable to us.
85.	We have consistently held that the Korean question should be settled by the Korean people themselves free from any outside interference. The draft resolution on Korea submitted by Algeria, China and other other countries [A! 10191 and Add. 1-3] proposes that the United Nations Command be dissolved and all the foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations be withdrawn, and that the Korean Armistice Agreement be replaced with a peace agreement signed by the real parties to the Armistice Agreement. It also puts forward a series of positive measures to remove tension between North and South Korea, prevent armed conflicts and promote the normalization of the situation. This proposal is entirely just and reasonable.
It not only meets the eager desire of the entire Korean people but is conducive to the fundamental improvement of the situation on the Korean peninsula and in northeast Asia.
86.	The United Nations Command must be dissolved. From the day of its formation it has been illegal and a tool of United States aggression. In fact, it has become a United States command long since.
87.	However, the dissolution of the United Nations Command must be coupled with the withdrawal of all the foreign troops from South Korea. For what would be the point of merely changing the name while keeping everything else intact? Continued presence of United States troops in South Korea under whatever name contravenes the principles of the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and will only aggravate the tension on the Korean peninsula. The question of withdrawal of all the foreign troops from Korea should have been discussed and settled within three months after the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement. This has been delayed for no less than 22 years because of obstructions placed by successive United States administrations. And 17 years have passed since the Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew on their own initiative from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to facilitate a peaceful settlement of the Korean question. Now there are no foreign troops in North Korea, but United States troops still hang on in South Korea. For how much longer does the United States intend to prolong such a state of affairs?
88.	Korea cannot remain forever in a state of armistice. The United States representative's idea for the United States and the South Korean authorities to propose to the parties to the armistice the convening of a conference to discuss ways to preserve the Armistice Agreement is of no avail. The Korean Armistice Agreement has been in existence for 22 years, and how much longer will it be preserved? Moreover, as is known to all, the parties to the Korean Armistice Agreement have in fact changed a great deal. The Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew from Korea long ago. Most components of the United Nations Command have dispersed and evaporated into thin air. So how can such a conference be convened?
89.	As for the exploration at such a conference of the possibility of a larger conference to negotiate a more fundamental arrangement, is it not even more impractical? After the armistice in 1953, under the provisions of the Armistice Agreement a political conference at a higher level should have been held to settle the Korean question. However, owing to sabotage by the United States, even the preliminary talks failed to produce any result. Subsequently in 1954, the Korean and Chinese sides made tremendous efforts at Geneva to urge the convening of a political conference at a higher level in the hope that a peaceful settlement of the Korean question could be realized. At the time, the United States representative, stubbornly and arbitrarily clinging to his own course, went so far as to refuse to reopen any discussions on the Korean question in the future. Thus, the United States single-handedly slammed the door to a political conference on the Korean question. In the actual circumstances at present, the practical way is for the real parties to the Korean Armistice Agreement to negotiate and sign a peace agreement to replace it.
The facts over the past two decades and more prove that United States interference in Korea is the root- cause of constant tensions in Korea. Therefore, the key to a peaceful settlement of the Korean question lies in the conclusion of a peace agreement to replace the Armistice Agreement and in the withdrawal of all United States troops.
90.	The United States asserts that, as there is no normal international boundary between North and South Korea, the Armistice Agreement and the demilitarized zone stipulated therein absolutely must not be changed. We cannot accept this view. Korea is only in a state of temporary division. Between North and South Korea there can be no normal international boundary but only a provisional demarcation line. Since both North and South Korea have agreed on the mutual non-use of force and on reunification by peaceful means, why should it be impossible for some necessary measures to be agreed on to settle this problem pending the peaceful reunification? It is groundless to assert that a war will break out in Korea in the absence of the Armistice Agreement.
91.	The Chinese delegation maintains that the draft resolution on Korea sponsored by Algeria and other countries is one that can solve the problem. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will seriously consider and adopt this draft resolution.
92.	I now come to my third topic, the Middle East question. Since the October war, the Middle East has reverted to a state of "no war, no peace." This is the result of the fierce and many sided contention between the two super-Powers carried on against the will of the Arab and Palestinian peoples.
93.	During this period, disengagement agreements were signed between Egypt and Israel and between Syria and Israel. Recently, a second disengagement agreement has been signed by Egypt and Israel. Nevertheless, the Middle East question is far from being settled.
94.	It is mainly the two super-Powers that are to be held responsible for this state of affairs. In the two years since the October war, one super-Power proposed a "comprehensive solution" and the other a "step-by-step solution" of the Middle East question, each trying hard to boost itself and denigrate the other and masquerade as a friend of the Arab and Palestinian peoples. In fact, while the United States has no intention of bringing about a thorough settlement of the Middle East question, the Soviet Union is still less inclined to do so. It may be recalled that, when the October war in the Middle East was at its most critical juncture and thereafter, the Soviet Union withheld the shipment of arms already promised to Egypt and even pressed for the repayment of debts. How can one expect such a perfidious country to support in earnest the Arab people in their just.struggle for the recovery of the lost territories and the restoration of the Palestinian national rights?
95.	Both super-Powers have the need to maintain a state of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East —brief fighting followed by a period of truce, with both war and peace kept under control. Taking advantage of this state of affairs, they contend for spheres of influence, places of strategic importance and oil resources in the Middle East. Taking advantage of the same, they sell munitions in order to reap fabulous profits and alleviate their own economic difficulties. Again taking advantage of this, they test new weapons in preparation for a new war on a larger scale. All this is done at the expense of the fundamental interests of the people in the Middle East.
96.	Countless agreements on the Middle East have been reached inside and outside the United Nations in the past twenty-odd years. Now, in retrospect, is there any agreement that has been strictly observed by the Israeli aggressors, or that has brought about a basic change in the Middle East situation? None, practically none. In the final analysis, it is not agreements on paper but the struggle of the people that will determine the future of the Middle East. What calls for close attention and vigilance now is that a super-Power is taking advantage of the present situation to sow discord and attempt to undermine Arab unity. The Arab and Palestinian peoples must never be taken in.
97.	The Chinese people have consistently supported the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their just struggle against the Israeli aggressors and have all along opposed super-Power contention in the Middle East. We believe that the Palestinian and Arab peoples will continue to strengthen their unity, persevere in struggle and carry their fight against aggression and hegemonism through to the end.
98.	My fourth theme is the question of disarmament. Disarmament is an old question. At a time when there is a growing danger of a new world war, it is fully understandable that the people of all countries, and those of the third- and second-world countries in particular, should feel more concerned about this question. After the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Soviet leadership has become particularly clamorous for "complementing political detente by military detente", preaching that the most important task now is general and complete disarmament. This is making political profit out of the well- intentioned desire of the people of the world. It is a calculated fraud.
99.	Anyone having respect for realities can see that what exists in Europe is not political detente at all but a fierce and many-sided contention between the two super-Powers. Immediately after the conclusion of the European security Conference the Soviet Union violated Norway's airspace. Is this not another proof that the so-called detente is just empty talk? To advocate in these circumstances the expanding, developing in depth and spreading of detente can only make people laugh.
100.	Exploiting the developing countries' keen desire to improve their national economies, the Soviet Union recently has again trumpeted its proposal for a 10 per cent reduction of the military budgets of the five permanent members of the Security Council and the use of part of-the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries. The Soviet Union deems this proposal its masterstroke, and its representative has tried to sell it to us here for no one knows how many times. But so far he has failed to inform us just how big the real Soviet military budget is. It would probably take several years to get this clear. And who knows how many more before military budgets can truly be reduced as proposed by the Soviet
Union? This magnificent Soviet plan, to use a Chinese saying, is "to draw a pie to satisfy hunger". If the developing countries were made to wait for such assistance, would they not be left helpless like "the stranded fish which is promised water to be fetched from a distant sea"?
101.	China's views on disarmament are known to all: we are for disarmament, but it must be genuine and not phony disarmament. We are against phony disarmament, and still more against the Soviet attempt to use a disarmament conference as a veil to cover up the truth of its arms expansion and war preparations. The two super-Powers are quickening their pace towards a new world war. At this juncture, a disarmament conference in whatever form will only create the illusion of peace, serve to deceive and lull the people of the world and bind the hands of the numerous small and medium-sized countries. This is what we are firmly against.
102.	As regards a world disarmament conference, China keeps to the position it set forth long ago, namely, that such a conference must have a clear aim and fulfill the necessary pre-conditions. The clear aim is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and absolutely not the so-called limitation of strategic arms. The pre-conditions are: all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that they will not be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time and in any circumstances, and in particular will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries or nuclear-free zones, and that they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear-missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. But now the super-Powers even refuse to undertake the minimum obligation not to use nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear countries. How can it be said that conditions are ripe for holding a world disarmament conference?
103.	Historical experience merits attention. The more the imperialists diffuse a smoke-screen of disarmament, the bigger is the danger of war. Before the Second World War, a large-scale international disarmament conference lasting nearly three years was held under the sponsorship of the League of Nations after nearly seven years of preparation, and hundreds of proposals and suggestions were discussed. But what were the results? They were arms expansion instead of disarmament, and war instead of peace. The only effect of that conference was to put many countries off guard and as a result they were caught unprepared by the outbreak of the Second World War and suffered a great deal. We hold that the United Nations should not repeat the mistake of the League of Nations.
104.	Nevertheless, as was expected, the Soviet Union tabled at this session of the General Assembly a proposal for the "complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons tests" [At10241]. This is old ware in new wrappings and another of its tricks for maintaining nuclear monopoly. China's stand on this question is clear to all and we will not repeat it. As regards the Soviet proposal for the prohibition of the manufacture of what it calls new types of weapons even more formidable than nuclear weapons, its aim is none other than to divert people's attention from the immediate issues by talking about remote things. Let it be discussed by those who are prepared to manufacture such weapons. There is no need to bring it up here to scare people.
105.	My fifth point is the question of development. Since the sixth special session of the General Assembly, the third-world countries have waged an effective struggle and have put forward a series of reasonable proposals and ideas for transforming the old international economic order which was based on exploitation. The oil-exporting countries have bravely stood up to super-Power intimidation and threats, and have kept a firm hold on their oil resources and their right to fix oil prices. Many countries have taken measures to curb transnational corporations in order to regain their sovereign rights in varying degrees. Various associations of raw material-producing countries have been set up one after another. The third-world countries have put forward a number of proposals, such as the integrated program for commodities and the indexation of prices, for the transformation of the present irrational international economic order. The situation of the struggle in the economic field against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism is excellent.
106.	There are two conflicting positions on the question of development. The position taken by the third world is for maintaining independence and self-reliance, for transforming the old economic order of exploitation of the third world by a few big Powers and for establishing a new economic order on the principles of sovereignty, equality and mutual benefit. The other position, taken by the super-Powers, stresses "interdependence" or the "international division of labor" between the exploiting and the exploited countries in an attempt to preserve the old economic order. Are the industrially developed countries and the raw material-producing countries interdependent? Yes, they are. This interdependence has been in existence ever since the emergence of a single world market. The point is what kind of interdependence. It may be said that there is an interdependence between the horse and its rider. But, we all know it is the horse that takes the burden and not the rider. As for the "international division of labor", it is in essence one and the same as "interdependence". With the emergence of colonialism and imperialism, a new international division of labor sprang up in the world that converted one part of the globe into an area of chiefly agricultural production serving the other part which was chiefly industrial. But to call such cosmopolitan exploitation internationalism is an idea that could only be engendered in the brains of the social- imperialists. Whether or not there is exploitation in the existing international economic relations and whether or not an end should be put to such exploitation this is a real problem of great importance today.
107.	Towards the demand of the third world for transforming the old international economic order, two differing attitudes are adopted by different industrially developed countries. One is dialog, and the other confrontation. Since the use of oil as a weapon by the oil-exporting countries, one super-Power has kept hurling abuses and waving the big stick at them and even threatened them with armed intervention in an attempt to coerce them into submission. The other super-Power has chimed in, saying that oil prices should not be raised unilaterally and asserting threateningly that the aggravation of the oil problem may cause a new flare-up of international tensions. Both take an out-and-out imperialist attitude. We are firmly against this attitude. Facts show that this attitude, far from subduing the oil-exporting countries, only stimulated them to closer unity and hardened their fighting will. We are in favor of dialog. In the past year and more, many second-world countries have frequently tried dialog with a number of third- world countries, and some of these attempts have yielded positive results. Ties between the second world and the third world have been strengthened. This is a good phenomenon in the international economic life of today.
108.	In the face of the worsening capitalist economic crisis and the shifting of crisis by industrialized countries, the third-world countries have advanced such proposals as the integrated program for commodities, the indexation of prices and the democratization of the international financial institutions in order to improve their trade terms and develop their national economies. These are entirely justifiable and are minimum demands. But they have met with opposition from a few major industrialized countries. For they constitute a violation of the so-called free market system, which is allegedly sacred and inviolable. Instead, those industrialized countries have put forward a series of concrete proposals allegedly designed to "promote economic development". As a matter of fact, the so-called free market of today has never been free ever since the emergence of monopoly capital. This market is free only for monopoly capital and the industrial Powers and not for the developing countries. In the 1960s, for example, the prices of oil and many other raw materials were kept very low. Was that determined by supply and demand? No, it was determined arbitrarily, or "freely" if you like, by big monopoly capital. To transform the old international economic order, it is imperative to touch this free market system of gaining profits at the expense of others. Otherwise, no matter how many concrete proposals the super-Powers may submit or how much money they may promise, these in essence are nothing but a kind of alms and relief which can at best temporarily and slightly mitigate the difficulties of the developing countries but will not help them shake off exploitation and control. The root-cause of their poverty will still be there. The gap between the poor and rich countries will keep widening.
109.	The oil weapon has opened up new vistas for the anti-colonialist, anti-imperialist and anti-hegemonic struggle in the economic field. The key to the victories of the oil struggle lies in upholding unity and daring to touch what the industrial Powers regard as sacred and inviolable. All raw material-producing countries should get organized and fight in defense of their proper interests. Some people accuse the Organization of Petroleum-Exporting Countries of being a monopoly organization, a cartel. Why do they not stop and think that cartels, trust and transnational corporations were inventions of the industrial Powers and that to date they still weigh heavily on the developing countries? Are we to tolerate the injustice of the magistrates being allowed to burn down houses while the common people are forbidden to use fire even to light lamps? All the developing countries should unite more closely. It is true that among the developing countries some are in the greatest need. Other countries should give them more help, and they have already begun to do so. The neediest and other developing countries share common experiences and face common tasks. To call the neediest countries the "fourth world" is groundless or ill-intentioned. There are no saviors in the world. To develop the national economy, a country must persist in independence and self-reliance. Political independence is not won easily, so it is essential to give play to State sovereignty to eliminate gradually but firmly the forces of imperialism and all forces of colonialism and neocolonialism. The old international economic order was evolved over centuries of colonialist and imperialist plunder and exploitation. It is impossible to thoroughly change it at one stroke. The seventh special session of the General Assembly is a continuation of the struggle of the sixth special session. The struggle against exploitation will be a long one. United as one and persisting in our efforts, we developing countries will surely attain our goal.
110. Before concluding my speech, I would like to state briefly our opinions on the review of the Charter of the United Nations. We are in favor of reviewing the Charter and making the necessary amendments. Nothing in the world is immutable. The situation within and outside the United Nations has changed, and it is only natural that the Charter should be amended accordingly so as to suit the changed situation. This is common sense. Basing themselves on the purposes and principles of the Charter, many countries have put forward views in principle on the revision of certain provisions of the Charter, such as expanding the power of the General Assembly, restricting the power of the Security Council, changing the composition of the Council, limiting or abolishing the veto right of the States permanent members of the Council. We think that these views deserve serious consideration. Since the Charter was drawn up by man, why cannot it be revised by man? But the super-Powers are greatly upset by the changed situation within the United Nations. One super-Power describes the democratic voting in the General Assembly as a "tyranny of the majority". The other goes further; at the mere mention of the phrase "review of the United Nations Charter," it flies into a rage and breaks into abuse, calling people in favor of reviewing the Charter "reactionary forces". It mortally fears that it might be deprived of its privilege to abuse the veto power. We would advise this "natural ally of the developing countries" to calm down a bit and not get so exasperated. If you are sure that you have the truth, why are you so afraid of dissenting views? A review of the Charter is the general trend and popular demand. We believe that a rational solu-tion acceptable to all can be found so long as the nations, big and small, carry on patient consultations and repeated discussions on the basis of the principle of equality for all. If anyone still resorts to deliberate obstructions, that can only help people see more clearly who are champions of the special privileges of the minority. Therefore, we submit that the work of the review of the Charter should be continued.

Since the founding of the United Nations a period of time has elapsed which we normally call a generation.
68.	This is a singularly appropriate occasion to consider what the United Nations has accomplished during these past three decades and what remains to be done. I am pleased to see as the President of the General Assembly the Prime Minister of a country which is not only associated with my country in close friendship but whose outward-looking attitude and whose willingness for international co-operation are exemplary. The spirit with which your country and you personally, Mr. President, participate in this co-operation both in Europe and in the world presents an example as well as a challenge, Please accept my warm congratulations on your election to this responsible office.
69.	At the same time I wish to express my thanks to the outgoing President, Mr. Bouteflika, the Foreign Minister of Algeria, who held this office during a very difficult period in the history of the United Nations.
70.	The first 30 years of the life of the United Nations have witnessed fundamental changes in the world from which this Organization has not been excepted. We are all familiar with the graph which depicts the population explosion; a curve which runs almost horizontally for thousands of years, then begins to rise and in the middle of this century suddenly shoots up almost vertically. The graphs depicting the advancement of science and technology, the growth of production and consumption, world trade and communication and, not least, the destructive force of weapons, are no different.
71.	Everywhere developments have been explosive. Within that same period the number of nations has trebled. The original Organization had 51 Members, now it has over 140. The world was then dominated by a rigid regime of bipolar confrontation of two blocs; now it is a complex, multipolar world in which multifarious forces and aspirations are asserting themselves. This process is sharply reflected within the United Nations. Nothing has had a greater influence on its development than the emergence of the third world as a separate independent element of world politics, freed from colonial dependence and vested with the same rights and obligations as all other States.
72.	Over and above their different views and attitudes, the nations which make up our world find themselves forged more and more into a community of destiny. The destructive power of modern weaponry, which has grown to immeasurable proportions, has produced a single, global security interest, and the abrupt expansion of productive power has created a single global economy. Security and economic growth and stability cannot be guaranteed today by any one State alone and in isolation. Whether it is a question of preventing a nuclear catastrophe, of fighting international terrorism, of overcoming inflation and recession, or of preserving ecological and environmental conditions on this planet, the problems that have to be resolved are everywhere beyond the resources of any individual nation and can be met only if all States and all groups of States work together.
73.	The problems have become global. The irresistible trend towards ever greater interdependence is the distinguishing feature of the new age; it is the course of world history. For the first time mankind as a whole is moving towards a common future: either to survive together or to perish together, to prosper together or to decline together. The world as a whole lives under the iron law of interdependence: its parts cannot prosper unless the whole prospers.
74.	Slowly, this development is beginning to be realized and appreciated. This is indicated by the close co-operation among the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development countries in seeking to overcome the consequences of the world economic crisis, by the constructive consensus reached by the General Assembly at its seventh special session, which tried to achieve an equitable balance of interests between industrialized and developing countries, by the reaffirmation of the will for detente and co-operation between East and West as expressed at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, and by the initiation of the European-Arab dialog.
75.	We all know the only alternative to common progress is common chaos. We are called upon resolutely to choose the course of co-operation and consistently to develop the foundations of that cooperation which have so far been laid by the United Nations. The task is to strengthen the awareness of interdependence and, as a consequence, to assert the policy of co-operation once and for all in the face of the powerful forces of traditional doctrines and ideologies, to assert it both externally and internally. Because it is also necessary that the individual citizen, too, should develop an understanding for the new constraints of interdependence and that he should muster the will for international solidarity. For the possibilities open to Governments in pursuing such a policy of solidarity reach only as far as the people themselves appreciate the need for it and are therefore prepared to support it. The present crisis of the world economy gives us a chance to draw the necessary conclusions from these considerations and insights.
76.	It would be wrong if the wealthy countries were to resort to the attitude of "every man for himself'. It would be wrong if the destruction rather than the further elaboration of the international economic system were to be regarded as the way out of the difficulties with which we are confronted in the development process. It would be equally wrong if part of the industrialized countries were to refuse to join in the necessary world-wide solidarity between industrialized and developing countries by referring to the colonial past of others and to their own non-colonial past true or alleged.
77.	Interdependence postulates the common weal universally. This must be the guideline for our action and this goal can be reached only through a policy of an equitable balance of interests.
78.	In spite of all setbacks and catastrophes our century has so far also been one of unparalleled progress for mankind. The challenges facing us in our shrinking world are extraordinary both in terms of their novelty and of their magnitude. But also extra-ordinary and unparalleled in history are the means we have at our disposal to meet those challenges. If we use them rationally and co-operatively and do not squander them in irrational conflict, we shall be able to master those tasks.
79.	The founders of the United Nations set the world the three big tasks laid down in our Charter: to maintain peace, to respect human rights and the right of self-determination, and to promote economic and social progress. What was a vision in 1945 has turned into reality today: the global interdependence of one world.
80.	The three great challenges of our time are: we must proceed from economic egotism to a worldwide reliable regime of co-operation among equals; we must proceed from the proclamation of human rights to their world-wide application and to the implementation of the right of self-determination wherever that right is still being denied; and we must proceed from the management of crises to a just and thereby lasting peace.
81.	Our first goal is to establish a reliable regime of economic co-operation. The seventh special session, which has just concluded, marked a promising beginning in our endeavor to establish a system of economic co-operation which is based on the simple realization that we are all in the same boat. During the very intensive but business-like negotiations the Assembly gave an example of a world-wide spirit of co-operation. This will make it easier to embark on the road towards a just balance of interests. For a number of problems the foundations for solutions have been laid. Some questions still require clarification, while the consequences of others need to be studied. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has joined in the consensus because it is based on the idea of reasonable and necessary reform, but not on revolutionary changes in the international economic order.
82.	The present world-wide recession has made all of us keenly aware of the relationship which I earlier called the iron law of interdependence: the parts cannot prosper unless the whole prospers. The growth rates of national economies have become interdependent. This applies also to the relationship between industrialized and developing countries. Higher growth rates in the industrialized countries mean higher growth rates in the developing countries, and lower growth rates in the industrialized countries mean lower growth rates in the developing countries. The fact that all of us recognized and accepted this interrelationship made the satisfactory result of the seventh special session possible.
83.	It is also in this spirit of co-operation that my country will enter the forthcoming producer-consumer dialog. In a world economy which can only grow and develop through joint efforts all partners have to bear their particular share of responsibility. Thus, because of their economic significance and weight, the industrialized countries have to assume a special responsibility. My Government is conscious of that responsibility and acts accordingly.
84.	In close co-ordination with the other industrialized countries having a free market economy my Government endeavors to set in motion a process of economic upswing without, however, providing inflationary impulses. By opening up markets and intensifying co-operation with the developing countries this economic upswing is especially intended to benefit the developing countries. We are against exporting our difficulties by taking restrictive measures and we consistently uphold a policy of further opening up markets, especially with regard to imports from the developing countries.
85.	As the role of the developing countries on the world economic scene grows, there is an increase in the responsibility which they, too, have to bear in all fields, including commodities and energy. Together we want to break and reverse the trend which in the past has continued to widen the gap between the rich and the poor. One objective is to achieve the general growth of the world economy; the other objective is to overcome inequality. We feel that these aims can best be achieved by basing the economic relations between States on the principles of the market economy, irrespective of their domestic economic systems.
86.	I turn now to the question of self-determination and human rights. In a system of co-operation among equals which our Organization intends to bring about, a central role falls to the application of the right of nations to self-determination. A true world community of States and peoples will emerge only if the nations are integrated within that community on the basis of free self-determination. Only in such a world can the readiness to assume responsibility for the whole fully develop. The right of nations to self-determination is therefore a fundamental principle of our system.
87.	During the first decades of the United Nations the basis for a universal international community was created through the implementation of the right of self-determination of the former colonies. At this year's session of the General Assembly too, three new States have joined our Organization, and 1 wish to take this opportunity to bid Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe a warm welcome to our Organization, which is becoming truly universal.
88.	The process of decolonization is drawing to its close. There are only a few regions left in the world to which the outdated system of colonialism still clings. But that system's days are numbered. We trust that in southern Africa, too, those days will come to an end without violence and devastation. The Federal Government therefore welcomes the decision taken by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, held at Dar es Salaam in April 1975, that in the solution of pending problems preference should be given to negotiations. It welcomes also the efforts made by the leaders of both the black and the white communities in Southern Rhodesia to establish a new and just order through negotiations and thus to avert the danger of a civil war and bloodshed.
89.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany strongly advocates the granting of the right of self-determination to the people of Namibia. The Government of the Republic of South Africa itself has stated that it does not consider Namibia to be South African territory. It must finally and quickly draw the conclusions from this and lead Namibia to independence without delay and more quickly than has so far been envisaged. The Federal Government has repeatedly and urgently brought its attitude to the attention of the Government of the Republic of South Africa and will continue to do so. With no less urgency it advocates the abolition at long last of the inhuman system of apartheid practiced in the Republic of South Africa, a system which we condemn.
90.	That last question leads me to the subject of human rights. The United Nations, which has achieved so much in promoting the application of the right of self-determination, has also been able to lay essential foundations on which to secure respect for human rights. By means of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [resolution 217 A (III)] and the human rights Covenants [see resolution 2200 A (XXI)] based on it, the United Nations has defined the term "human rights" and received acceptance of that definition all over the world. It is now up to us to see to it that human rights are implemented everywhere in practice. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will support all proposals aimed at strengthening the role of the United Nations with regard to the implementation of human rights.
91.	Human rights must apply everywhere; they must apply in all continents. And, as a European, I add that they must apply also in all parts of Europe. The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has drawn the conclusion from this and made the implementation of human rights a major subject,
92.	Freedom of movement is one of the basic rights guaranteed both by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and by the human rights Covenants. And, indeed, if co-operation in Europe is to be extended more and more, people must no longer be prevented from meeting freely. The decisions taken at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe abound with specific promises of improvements in Europe both as regards this right and as regards other human rights. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will gauge the worth of the results of the Conference particularly by the manner in which and when those promises are fulfilled.
93.	I turn now to the safeguarding of peace. Peace is the prerequisite for progress in all other spheres. It therefore remains a primary task of the United Nations to safeguard peace.
In this respect I would refer to the peace policy of the Federal Republic of Germany. Being fully aware of this perspective, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has from the very beginning pursued a policy aimed at the maintenance of peace. This goes for our own national policies as Well as for our co-operation within the European Community, that great and promising union of European States, and for our membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the defense alliance whose purpose it is to safeguard peace. By pursuing a consistent policy of the non-use of force, the Federal Government has promoted detente in Europe and thus laid the foundation for growing and mutually fruitful co-operation with our neighbors in the East. Let me mention here in this connexion the Treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague. The same is true of the Treaty on the Basis of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic done at Berlin on 21 December 1972.
95.	On the occasion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, additional arrangements were concluded in a spirit of mutual understanding with the Polish People's Republic concerning outstanding questions. These arrangements are intended, after a past full of misery and distress, to bring about the reconciliation of the two peoples and to lead to long-term co-operation between partners.
96.	The Federal Government includes in its policy of the non-use of force and detente our most painful problem also: the division of Germany. It is our aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self- determination.
97.	I reaffirm our belief that history has not spoken the last word on the division of the German nation. The nation's will to achieve its unity will preserve its historical strength. The conclusion of the Treaty on the Principles of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic is evidence of our determination to exhaust all possibilities of peaceful co-operation also in the relationship between the two German States.
98.	Building on its bilateral policy of detente and on the treaties it has concluded in this connexion, as well as on the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, signed on 3 September 1971, the Federal Government has played an active part in the work of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, because no nation in Europe senses more keenly than the German people the danger emanating from the division of our continent. The participating States want the results of the Conference to have effect throughout Europe. Indeed, security and co-operation must prove their worth particularly in that city which in the years of the cold war so often was the scene of dangerous tensions which affected the whole world the city of Berlin. Berlin remains the barometer of detente. Detente presupposes mutual confidence.
99.	Distrust and fear will only revive the former state of tension in Europe. This is why the Federal Government has begun, without delay, to implement the confidence-building measures decided upon at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. It was the first Government taking part in that Conference to announce to all other participants military maneuvers in accordance with the provisions of the Final Act of Helsinki, However, the results of the Conference are important not only for Europe. Detente in Europe should, and can, release political and economic energies which have so far been bound up in sterile conflicts. If this happens, we will have added strength to face the big challenge of our time: the reduction of the gap between rich and poor countries.
100.	In the matter of disarmament and the non- proliferation of nuclear weapons, of great importance for the safeguarding of world peace is a persistent policy of arms control and arms reduction. The Federal Government takes an active part in the negotiations in Vienna which are to lead to mutual and balanced force reductions in central Europe. It is our aim to achieve a stable balance of forces since only on the basis of equal security for all concerned will detente and trustful co-operation be possible.
101.	The Federal Government lends the same active support to all measures likely to contain and ultimately to stop the world-wide arms race. Balanced and controlled disarmament is one of our most urgent tasks. The United Nations can and must make a major contribution to its fulfillment.
102.	Likewise, one of the most pressing challenges to this interdependent world is to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The dissemination of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes will quicken considerably in the years ahead. It has been estimated that the number of nuclear reactors available in 1980 will be 15 times greater than the number in use in 1970. The operation of those reactors would make possible the potential production of up to 26,000 kilograms of plutonium in the non-nuclear-weapon States every year as from the early 1980s in other words, enough to make 50 atomic bombs a week. So the task we have to solve is to use the advantages of peaceful nuclear technology without at the same time proliferating nuclear weapons.
103.	As one of the leading producers of nuclear installations for peaceful purposes, the Federal Republic of Germany realizes that it has a special responsibility in helping to find a solution to this problem. Consequently, in every case in which it exports nuclear installations it adheres strictly to the provisions of the non-proliferation Treaty, of which it is a member, and to the safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency. In addition, it subjects itself to the commitments under the Euratom Treaty. It actively supports proposals aimed at further strengthening these safeguards and developing uniform criteria for the export of fissionable material and nuclear equipment.
104.	Let me say a word about regional crises. The policy of detente between East and West helps to consolidate peace in Europe. But in our neighborhood the sources of crisis smolder on, and the most dangerous of them is the Middle East conflict. Nowhere is it more obvious that present-day problems can no longer be resolved by war, that war is no meaningful alternative to a political settlement, that war is no longer an ultima ratio but an ultima irratio.
105.	Four sorrowful wars have failed to hammer out a solution in the Middle East, and a fifth Middle 
142
East war could have disastrous consequences. The Federal Government, therefore, welcomes with great relief the Egyptian-Israeli interim agreement of 4 September. This agreement is the result of statesman-like action on the part of all concerned. Further steps will have to follow if the momentum of this constructive development which has been set in motion is to be maintained. Standing still would mean taking a step backward and would in the end even wipe out the progress made so far.
106.	The Federal Republic of Germany supports all efforts to bring about further steps along the path of negotiations. An informal multilateral discussion of the problems to be solved, as suggested by the Secretary of State of the United States [2355th meeting], could indeed be useful in promoting a subsequent peace conference.
107.	The path towards a just balance of interests in the Middle East has been sketched out by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). This means, among other things, that any peace settlement that is to last must respect Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries; it must give effect to the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people; and it must include the termination of the occupation.
108.	This is the attitude adopted by the Federal Republic of Germany, in full agreement with its partners in the European Community. The Federal Government is most anxious that equitable and lasting peace should prevail in the Middle East, which is a neighboring region to us. It therefore seeks to make every contribution possible, both bilaterally and within the framework of the European Community, towards bringing about such peace.
109.	In Cyprus, too, a negotiated solution must quickly be found. The Federal Government, therefore, regrets that the fourth round of talks between the representatives of the two communities, which was scheduled for 8 and 9 September in New York, had to be postponed because of the lack of concrete proposals. The tragic events of 1974 were the upshot of letting things drag on for years and years without reaching the necessary compromise. Now, at least, a lesson should be drawn from this. The deadlock caused by the fact that each side is waiting for the other to be the first to make concessions must be broken. The Federal Government therefore appeals to all concerned to resume the negotiations as soon as possible. Any solution must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus.
110.	Cyprus needs a federal structure that will accommodate the interests of both communities. Accommodating the interests of both communities also requires correcting the present demarcation line between them. The Federal Government seeks, both bilaterally and together with its partners in the European Community, to give diplomatic assistance in the search for a solution and humanitarian assistance to ease the misery of the refugees.
J11. As in the Middle East, the peace-keeping forces of the United Nations in Cyprus, too, are making an indispensable contribution towards maintaining an atmosphere in which constructive efforts to find a solution can be made. The same applies to the endeavors of the Secretary-General to facilitate discussions between the two communities. I wish to express to the Secretary-General and to his staff the appreciation and the thanks of the Federal Government.
112.	I turn now to the question of strengthening the United Nations. In the efforts to establish a regime of co-operation in the spirit of global interdependence and joint responsibility, the United Nations must play a central role. In the past 30 years the United Nations has made an essential contribution preventing crises and to containing or overcoming existing ones. It has helped to accelerate the process of decolonization. It has spread the demand for the implementation of human rights throughout the world. And it has fully brought home to the public the crucial task of our time, the economic development of the third world, and has evolved a consistent strategy and a coherent strategy for tackling this task.
113.	With the growing awareness of global interdependence, the role of the United Nations, the only universal Organization in this world, must continue to increase. The prerequisite for this will be that we do all we can to achieve and maintain universality. We must continuously adapt the structure of the Organization to the changing situation and tasks in the world. The countries of the European Economic Community [££C], in a declaration of 17 June 1975, have again stressed their support of the United Nations and have spoken out in favor of the strengthening of its role. The President of EEC, the Italian Foreign Minister, Mr. Rumor, reaffirmed this willingness in an impressive way yesterday in this forum [2357th meeting]. The Federal Republic of Germany fully endorses this commitment regarding the United Nations. Only if the nations of the world will join in a spirit of genuine co-operation can the tasks of the United Nations be successfully mastered. Only if we succeed in bringing to bear everywhere that spirit of genuine co-operation within the United Nations will we be able to tackle the tasks confronting us to safeguard international peace; to implement everywhere the right of peoples to self- determination as well as their human rights; and to promote the common weal universally through economic and social progress. The Federal Government is determined to support all efforts towards that end.
1.	 Mr. President, it is with great pleasure that I should first of all like to convey to you my own congratulations and the congratulations of my country. I am personally delighted to see my colleague and friend, Gaston Thorn, preside over the work of the General Assembly. Through its excellent choice the Assembly has not only paid a tribute to a country dedicated to the cause of peace and international co-operation, but it has also secured for itself the talents of an exceptionally experienced, wise statesman who happens also to be one of the great architects of European construction. You, Sir, have continually laid emphasis on the task of opening up a united Europe towards the rest of the world, and particularly towards the developing countries. That concern, as you know, is fully shared by the French Government. Therefore France cannot but be gratified to see such a great European as yourself shouldering the burden and responsibilities that have been entrusted to you by this Assembly.
2.	I must say, too, how much we owe to the outgoing President, Mr. Bouteflika, on whom fell the important task of presiding, at times under difficult conditions, over the previous session of this Assembly and over the seventh special session.
3.	I should like, finally, to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, who presides over the work of our Organization with an authority, a competence and an impartiality that are universally recognized.
4.	The annual meeting of the General Assembly is a particularly privileged moment for all of us who represent our Governments here, but who at the same time also feel responsible, for that very reason, for the higher interests of the emerging world community.
5.	The crisis which we are going through, which perhaps for the first time in history affects the entire world, is the result of a genuine change, a complete breakaway from the old system of balances. The upheavals this crisis brings in its wake, the risks it comprises, pose a real threat to our future. But man's special characteristic is his ability to react to control his destiny.
6.	An example of this healthy reaction was recently seen at the seventh special session, and this is probably the most encouraging feature of the whole of the past year. Faced with increasing dangers, we have all recognized the obvious globalization of the economic and political problems of our age, as well as the need to resolve them by appreciating all the consequences of our indissoluble solidarity.
7.	This realization helps us to realize the importance, the very great importance, of the collective responsibility borne by our Governments. What we have to do is master and control what the President of the French Republic has described as "the crisis of the human race". It is outskirt bring under control the fever for change with which the human race is obsessed and master its course, because ultimately this crisis reflects the growing pains of all mankind. This is the price we have to pay for the tremendous progress we have achieved both in technology and in the political sphere. It is the fruit of persisting inequalities and injustices.
8.	In mankind's long march towards the achievement of the goals of the United Nations, economic justice is still lagging behind political evolution, and the desire of the less privileged States to obtain their fair share of the fruits of economic growth is most certainly justified. However, where this political determination was expressed in ideological terms, and where the rich countries bridled in defense of their privileges, there was a risk of the emergence and exacerbation of disastrous tension.
9.	At the end of 1973 and early in 1974, an infinitely dangerous trend started to divide the world into hostile blocs. France, through its President, underlined the gravity of the danger in time, and indicated the measures needed to avert it.
10.	The President's appeal was heeded, and I like to think that it has contributed to the very favorable developments we have witnessed in recent months. The results already achieved, as regards both the final resolution of the seventh special session [resolution 3362 (S-VII)] and the now forthcoming resumption of the dialog proposed by France between the industrialized and the developing countries, guarantee that we are now taking the right course.
11.	Although the subject is important, I shall not dwell on the results of the seventh special session except to stress once again that the results obtained
A/PV.2364 
complement the work that will be done at the enlarged conference which will follow up the second preparatory meeting in Paris. Let us note in this regard that the very importance of the subjects to be discussed demonstrates the political dimension of the undertaking, which was begun on behalf of our international community and in close liaison with the United Nations.
12.	It is now, therefore, quite clear that we should set as our target the gradual establishment of a political and economic world order based, not on positions of strength, but on dialog, solidarity and respect for the interests of others.
13.	For this we must keep our feet on the ground, but we also must demonstrate imagination and generosity in our response to the expectations of those who are least privileged, and all those whose problems come in the tragically brutal form of famine, death and loss of liberty.
14.	In a world where the spirit of violence, alas, is prevalent, where odious acts of terrorism and the taking of hostages seem to be replacing conventional warfare, let us proclaim that such actions are contrary to human rights; they solve nothing and corrupt the noblest aims. But at the same time let us realize that in order to halt the momentum of violence, the rights of individuals and of peoples must be recognized everywhere.
15. Let us make no mistake about the immensity of the task before us. A great deal remains to be done in order to achieve the tone and specific realization of the aims and objectives of our Organization. Tenacious determination, expressed through effective instruments, is required of us all.
16.	The Charter has given us the framework for our common efforts; hence the importance of the effective-ness of the United Nations.
17.	Our Organization, which is now 30 years old, may have been disappointing to those who forgot that its ability to settle conflicts depended on the cooperation of Member States. It has in fact done some extremely useful work and, as our Secretary-General quite rightly noted in the introduction to his last report on the work of the Organization, it has: "... shown a remarkable capacity to take on new tasks, to adjust to a changing world . . . within the conceptual and organizational framework laid down by the Charter." [A1100011.Add.I, sect. I.]
18.	Both this flexibility and this strength are without . a doubt due to the wisdom with which the founders
of our Organization, in San Francisco, were able to balance ideals and reality, rigorous principles and political realism. This balance, which has enabled it to withstand the test of time, is basic and we believe must be protected from all perfectionism.
19.	It is obvious that, given the current state of affairs, the United Nations is not and cannot be a world government. The present phase in the history of mankind is one of affirmation of independence. It is also one of consultation, more necessary than ever among sovereign States. That observation places in its proper perspective the problem resulting from the emergence of majorities which, by the way, change in international assemblies. This is a natural phenomenon once the law of democracy and thus the law of numbers is agreed to, but it is a phenomenon that should not be allowed to obscure the real mission of these assemblies and above all ours which is to seek compliance with universally accepted rules and intentions. Nor has our Charter set up a world system in which the Assembly holds sway. It provides for permanent adjustment procedures among us; a good example of this is the division of responsibilities between the General Assembly and the Security Council, because it is based on realities that it would be dangerous to forget.
20.	It is also obvious that the United Nations can be true to itself and fulfill its mission only if it respects the cardinal principle of universality, both by admitting any State that meets its requirements and by refusing to reject States whose policies might be unpopular, except for cases strictly defined in the Charter. In either case, the golden rule of universality, towards which decisive progress has been made in the past few years, must not be broken.
21.	We are pleased, in this respect, that a new step has been taken with the admission of three new Members: the Cape Verde Islands, Sao Tome and Principe, and Mozambique.
22.	We for our part were prepared to support also the applications of the two Viet Nams, as well as that of the Republic of South Korea, countries with which we have friendly diplomatic relations and which we should have liked to see join the Organization. We regret that the turn taken by the Security Council deliberations did not allow such a step to be taken this year.
23.	It is because France attaches the greatest importance to this principle of universality that it believes that any measure aimed at suspending or excluding any of our Members would bring into our Organization an element of mistrust and pressure that would be totally alien to the spirit of dialog that should prevail here.
24.	It is by remaining what it is a privileged and universal forum for consultation and dialog that our Organization will be in the best position to translate the ideals of the Charter into reality.
25.	In this attempt to advance towards a better world political and economic order, I shall first of all point out two factors which are sound reasons for having confidence in the future. The first has to do with the successful development of regional groups; the second, with detente in Europe.
26.	World consultation which should prevail in no way precludes, but rather presupposes, the grouping of co-operation efforts along regional lines. These groups of States will be a factor in conciliation and increased international co-operation provided they turn their backs on any tendency to form opposing blocs and follow the rule of openness and dialog. This, as you know, is the byword and raison d'etre of the nine members of the European Community.
27.	I think that as I said last year the task under-taken by six countries of Western Europe following the last world war is exemplary in many respects.
28.	The work begun by those six countries is now being carried forward by the nine. An unequivocal vote by the British people recently confirmed this irreversible commitment to building Europe. This task is being actively pursued with a determination that is both ambitious and pragmatic. Out of this spirit grew last year's decision by the Heads of Government a decision that has now been fully implemented to meet periodically in order to maintain the co-ordination and momentum vital to the internal process of construction as well as to the attitudes and actions of Europe in the international community of nations.
29.	This Europe, contrary to certain assertions, is in no way self-centered or preoccupied with its own future. It has been its intention from the beginning to make its contribution to the world scene as an independent source of decision and initiative, and also as a factor of equilibrium and imagination in a world of interdependence and mutual opening up.
30.	That was the main thrust of the statement by the nine European Heads of State and Government at their meeting on 17 July this year at Brussels.
31.	The current President of the nine countries —Mr. Rumor, our Italian colleague reported on the progress that has already been made [2357th meeting]. I myself shall just mention the important contribution of the ACP-EEC Convention at Lome, which, starting early this year, has opened the way for new forms of co-operation.
32.	Secondly, to stress its political importance, I shall mention the European-Arab dialog that has now been started between the Community and all the countries of the League of Arab States. New ties of solidarity, adapted to the needs of our time, have to be woven between two groups of people, heir to two of the civilizations that shared the ancient world and that history has made enemy and ally in turn.
33.	The Europe of the Community, Mr. President and I know I do not have to convince one of its prime movers of this is a voice speaking for many, making itself heard in favor of greater international co-operation. Thus, Europe is dedicating itself to the service of peace and democracy, while respecting the interests and freedoms of others. The positions that it has taken with regard to the Middle East, Cyprus and Portugal are proof of this.
34.	The strengthening of detente in Europe is another mayor positive factor which should help us to concentrate on the real problems which people will have to face at the end of the twentieth century. France, which provided the initial impetus 10 years ago, took an active part in the work of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, in close collaboration with its Community partners; it helped to see to it that the Final Act of the Conference signed at Helsinki on 1 August not only endorsed the commitment of the participants to exclude all recourse to force but also laid the foundations for the development of entente and co-operation among the signatory States. Of course there remains the task of translating into reality these very specific declarations of intent regarding increased exchanges of people and ideas, thereby giving positive content to detente. It is because France believes in the sincerity of the desire of all its partners for detente that it intends to apply along with them the letter and the spirit of the decisions made at Helsinki. In any case, the curtain has already come down on an era that has ended the era of the cold war. An objective has been jointly set; that objective is entente and cooperation. This result is not insignificant and constitutes a useful precedent for the entire world.
35.	Let us be glad in this respect that in other regions of the globe some progress has been made along the path of conciliation and the settling of conflicts.
36.	I should like to mention the Middle East first. I hardly need restate the three principles on which, in our view, a lasting peace settlement must necessarily be founded: withdrawal from the territories occupied by Israel in June 1967; recognition of the right of the Palestinians to a homeland; the right of all the States of the region to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed frontiers.
37.	France believes that for these three principles to be implemented it is indispensable for the spirit of dialog to prevail over the spirit of confrontation. That is why we welcomed and consider a positive step the disengagement agreement signed in Geneva on 4 September by the representatives of Egypt and Israel. That agreement is to be commended and is encouraging proof of the commitment of the parties concerned to the process of negotiation.
38.	The detente that has thus been brought about, as President El-Sadat of Egypt has noted, and as Mr. Henry Kissinger of the United States underscored a few days ago from this rostrum [.2355th meeting], should now make it possible to embark on an overall settlement which, by attacking the basic problems, is the only possible way of averting the risk of other major crises and establishing a lasting peace between Israel and its neighbors. Without prejudice to what may be done on other fronts, a global approach is called for. My Government has always advocated this; similarly, when there arises the question of over-all guarantees to strengthen peace in the region, France, and I believe Europe, will be ready to take an active part in them.
39.	I should not like to leave the subject of the Middle East without mentioning the current ordeals Lebanon is undergoing. My Government and the European Community wish to stress the vital importance of maintaining the independence, unity and integrity of that friendly country, which is an essential factor for equilibrium in the region. I am convinced that all the groups of the Lebanese community, as well as the parties concerned, aware of the seriousness of the situation, will do everything they can to help the Government in its efforts to maintain public order and to strengthen national unity.
40.	In Asia, peace has finally returned to Viet Nam. But the length of the conflict, the damage inflicted and the suffering caused make it even more urgent and necessary here than elsewhere for genuine cooperation to be established. France, which since 1954 has had official relations with the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam, has begun relations with the new authorities of the Republic of South Viet Nam and remains ready to take an active part in the reconstruction of the country. We hope to have with the Vietnamese people relations based on mutual esteem and trust.
41.	As far as Cambodia is concerned, the French Government, as the Assembly is aware, proposed establishing diplomatic relations with the Cambodian Government on 12 April of this year. Our intentions with regard to that country remain unchanged.
42.	In reviewing the various reasons for hope it would be a serious omission if one did not include a few words on the positive developments on a continent of the future—Latin America, whose political, economic and intellectual influence is being increasingly felt in world affairs. The topic is too vast for me to cover. I shall just point out that France attaches great importance to increasing its co-operation with all the countries of Latin America. In this respect I shall mention my delegation's satisfaction with the resumption of our relations with Peru,
43.	Africa is another continent of the future, one to which France and Europe are linked by ties the strength of which is without a doubt one of the main reasons for our confidence in the future. My country has guided many friendly countries to independence and has maintained with them particularly close relations based on co-operation. France wishes to respect the decision of all Africans freely to determine their own destiny and to assume responsibility for their future under conditions of their own choosing.
44.	Quite recently France consulted the people of the Comoros regarding their future. The great majority favored independence, and, without waiting for completion of the constitutional process, decided through their deputies to take over the management of their own affairs. The French Government took note of this and announced that it was prepared to begin talks immediately regarding the transfer of responsibilities. We still hope there can be agreement among Comorians permitting establishment of a framework within which this new State will begin its future. In this case, as in others, France is true to its continuing policy of respect for the right to self-determination.
45.	I should not like to fail to welcome the resumption of diplomatic relations between my country and Guinea.
46.	Unfortunately there are still some clouds in this picture of the international situation. In Cyprus, in Korea and in southern Africa the international community should spare no efforts to prevent tensions from degenerating into conflicts.
47.	The question of Cyprus, involving States with which my country has traditionally enjoyed friendly relations and a region that is very close to us, remains one of our foremost concerns. We are obliged to note that the situation resulting from the events of the summer of 1974, with the continuing threat it poses to peace and the suffering it inflicts on the people of the island, not only has not changed but has actually deteriorated.
48.	Yet at that time we did unanimously adopt a text defining the framework and principles for a settlement and giving the main outline of a solution, which should be one of reconciliation. Indeed, as everyone is aware, nothing can be done without the agreement of the two communities. Accordingly we have steadily given our encouragement, unilaterally or with other members of the European Community, to the inter-community talks begun last spring, with the unflagging assistance of our Secretary-General. At the same time we called for a solution to the most painful problem, that of refugees, which affects nearly one third of the people of the island. We are not unaware of the difficulties involved, but we should stress here its extreme urgency.
49.	I should therefore like to make another pressing appeal for genuine negotiations to begin without further delay, accompanied by urgent measures which the onset of winter makes necessary from a humanitarian standpoint. Such negotiations should be based on well-defined proposals for an over-all settlement that would provide solutions for all the political and territorial problems confronting Cyprus. Such a settlement should be based on right and justice "right" meaning the independence of Cyprus and the integrity of Cyprus, and "justice" meaning the respective size of the two communities. It is this double condition that will finally enable the Cypriot communities to live in peace. It is not for us to tell them how they should organize their relations. But, as the President of the French Republic said recently in Salonika, France is firmly convinced that nothing lasting can be built on force, nor can right result from faits accomplis.
50.	Of the tensions that may still exist on the vast continent of Asia, I shall mention only the problem of Korea, because of its repercussions upon the United Nations.
51.	It is disturbing that more than 20 years after the cessation of hostilities a situation should still exist in Korea which, were it to worsen, could have consequences dangerous to world peace. The Korean people feel its effects daily, and the international community views this persistent anomaly as an almost anachronistic danger, so we very much hope that the United Nations will at this session be able to find a solution to the question of its commitment in that country, taking into account the need to set up arrangements to preserve the Armistice Agreement. But it will also be necessary for the parties directly concerned, respecting the spirit of the joint communique of 4 July 1972,' to substitute dialog and a spirit of compromise for confrontation and intransigence, In this context France noted with interest the constructive proposal made by the United States Secretary of State.
52.	I should like now to return for a moment to the African continent, where tension still persists, tension to which we should devote particular attention.
53.	Last year, from this rostrum, I spoke on behalf of France and welcomed Portugal's effort to put an end to the futile fighting and the anachronistic situation in the Territories under its sovereignty. We note that in spite of its own difficulties the Portuguese Government has faithfully fulfilled its commitments, However, our satisfaction is tinged with concern over the civil war raging in Angola, a country which seemed destined for prosperity. For its part, my Government hopes that the fighting will cease and that this country will very shortly be able to achieve independence in restored harmony.
54.	But it is particularly southern Africa that remains a major cause for concern.
55.	Of course, in the past year we have been able to note signs which might seem to indicate a change in orientation. We believe in particular that the Government of South Africa can and should play a role conducive to the establishment in Rhodesia, within a reasonable period of time, of a Government based on majority rule.
56.	Concerning Namibia, the South African Government has made statements which, although partially encouraging, remain ambiguous. We shall continually stress the importance we attach to the Namibian people being able to express quickly and freely their views on the political future and constitutional structure of the Territory.
57.	In this reference to the problems of Africa, the French Government cannot forget the distressing problem of apartheid, a doctrine contrary to human rights and one which deeply disturbs our conscience. France's categorical condemnation of discriminatory measures based on race recently prompted the President of the French Republic to define the strict limits of our policy on arms sales to South Africa.
58.	South Africa must respond to the appeal of the international community; it must realize that little time remains for it to satisfy by concrete action the legitimate aspirations expressed both inside and outside that country.
59.	In all these areas, it goes without saying that France will be unflinching in its efforts to ensure that conciliation and consultation prevail.
60.	The settlement of conflicts, the easing of tension and the encouragement of dialog are daily imperatives which the international community can no longer avoid. But we must go further: we must band together to take up the challenges threatening the very existence of mankind.
61.	It is those long-term problems that I should like to mention briefly in conclusion.
62.	In the nuclear age, the first problem is quite obviously the maintenance and strengthening of peace.
63.	Can we put an end to the chronic state of insecurity from which mankind has suffered from the beginning of its history and which, since the emergence of weapons of mass destruction, threatens its survival? If the international community believes, as France does, that this ideal, although distant, is indeed attainable and that in any case for the human race there is no longer any alternative to peace, then we should get down to work.
64.	On the long road ahead, disarmament genuine, universal and controlled disarmament is and remains more necessary than ever.
65.	France, for its part, has supported the idea of a world conference now under consideration by our Organization. That plan, if it were assured of the support of all the military Powers, in particular the five nuclear Powers, would be able to get us out of the ruL in which we have become bogged down.
66.	I should now like to state the view of the French Government with regard to the principal treaties on nuclear arms. The discriminatory nature, in its view, of some of the clauses in those treaties has prevented my country from acceding to them. However, France, as it has stated, intends to act as though it were a signatory. France is fully aware of the responsibilities attaching to the status of a nuclear Power which is our status and believes with the majority of nations that the proliferation of nuclear weapons should be avoided. My Government has already made known its intention to take part in this work. I can confirm this today and state our wish to participate in every genuine effort liable to bring about real and controlled reduction, and relieve mankind of the burden and threat of the arms race.
67.	A world which, thanks to genuine disarmament and the adoption of peaceful means of settling disputes, would finally be freed from those haunting fears would be able to devote its efforts to developing its resources, its production methods and its way of life.
68.	For 30 years we have been living with the obsession of a nuclear nightmare; but is not mankind also in danger of perishing from lack of oxygen or water, packed as we are together on a planet which has become too small for us? Such prospects no longer belong just to the realm of science fiction, because we are entering the age of finite resources and we must realize the present inability of our world community to deal with those fundamental problems. Surely it is time for us to put our heads together and take joint action to remedy this situation.
69.	The excesses and lack of foresight of industrial civilization have other more subtle aspects just as potentially tragic. We are jeopardizing with reckless arrogance the balances established by nature for millions of years. That is just one more worldwide problem that should be considered by the United Nations.
70.	The development of the productive forces of mankind should be placed at the service of all men. We agree on the need for reorganization in order to put an end to intolerable inequalities. Hundreds of millions of people in the world are threatened by hunger; the majority of mankind live in a state of destitution unworthy of human beings. The continued expansion of the world economy is therefore indispensable. Nevertheless, we must not allow ourselves to be swept away by the mystique of production and consumption, nor must we forget our ultimate mission: the spiritual and intellectual development of man. Let us not become the agents and ultimately the slaves of a voracious economy. We must above all tackle the major problem of growth in its two aspects: the means of ensuring balanced expansion and the goals at which the arduous labor of man must be aimed.
71.	The topics for study which I have just suggested are directed to a fundamental concern that is basically the justification of any genuine policy respect for and development of the human personality. This concern has continually guided our Organization, which has achieved much in the field of human rights. But the battle for recognition of and respect for fundamental rights is far from won. We must fight it with determination until victory is ours.
72.	In times of change and crisis one can always distinguish two main trends: towards movement and towards immobility.
73.	Because it is France's tradition, its mission, and because France itself deeply feels the need for change, it is ready to put its resources, its imagination and its generosity to work for the emergence of a more just, more peaceful and more united world.
74.	Our Organization and all its Members can count on the active contribution of my country in this vital task of striving for world solidarity.
Mr. President, I should like to join my colleagues in saying how very pleased I am that we are meeting this year under your distinguished presidency. Those of us who have worked with you in the European Community know your qualities of wise judgment, combined with great insight and cool decision, and we are very glad that this year those qualities of yours are placed at the disposal of the United Nations. We look to your presidency because we believe it will strengthen the United Nations and we hope your term of office will add distinction to an already distinguished career and will do honor to Luxembourg.
58.	Britain extends a welcome to the newly independent countries of Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and Papua New Guinea, which are this session assuming their places as full and equal Members of our Organization. To them I wish all success.
59.	I should like too to thank our Secretary-General for his valuable and balanced report on the work of the Organization. The burdens on the Secretary- General grow no lighter, and I am glad that at this difficult time we have in that vital position a statesman of such proven diligence and dedication.
60.	There is a certain resolute tenacity with which the major problems cling to the agenda of the General Assembly. They are a reminder of the limitations of the machinery of the United Nations in achieving a peaceful settlement of disputes unless the will is present to come to an agreement.
61.	But the thirtieth year has not been barren: in fact, it has been a better than average year for the negotiators, as opposed to the war makers.
62.	At the seventh special session and elsewhere, the Member nations have firmly committed themselves to try to bring about a world in which men and women will be made more equal through constructive policies of co-operation, rather than hurling threats and counter-threats at each other. The special session was an event of great significance, and I pledge that the United Kingdom will co-operate fully in the tasks ahead. While at this General Assembly we discuss the broad political questions that face us, my country will not forget the need to respond with urgency and a sense of justice to the manifest social and economic inequalities in the world today, despite the burdens that the world economic recession is imposing on the inhabitants of the advanced industrial countries. In return we ask the oil-producing countries not to impose additional burdens on our economies, for what the world needs is a period of prolonged expansion. Despite our hopes, it is not yet certain that the expansion will endure, but it will certainly be set at risk if heavier burdens are thrust on to those more advanced countries which must be the pace setters.
63.	In the weeks and months to come, my Government would like to see progress in the military and political fields of potential conflict.
64.	In the Middle East, for the first time, there is a break in the ice. For the first time, Israel and one of its Arab neighbors have concluded an agreement which was not forced upon them by military constraints. For the first time they have jointly stated that the conflict between them shall not be resolved by force, but by peaceful means. I should like to express my admiration for the courage and statesmanship which President El-Sadat of Egypt and Mr. Rabin of Israel have shown in the negotiations which led up to the agreement. I should also like to congratulate the United States Government, and in particular President Ford and Mr. Kissinger, on their perseverance and their skillful diplomacy. I should like here to express our thankfulness that President Ford was spared yesterday, and to say that our thoughts are with Mrs. Ford, too. The agreement which Egypt and Israel have concluded is not only to their mutual benefit; it benefits the rest of the world as well.
65.	The progress that has been made does not mean that peace is around the corner. It is not. The problems which still remain are much larger than those which have been solved. Chief of these is the problem of the Palestinians, which has not yet been touched. What, then, is the way forward? First, in our view, a complementary step on the Golan Heights must be achieved, and achieved soon, to provide the proof that the latest agreement was not an end in itself but part of a continuous process leading to a comprehensive settlement. The commitment to further negotiations that has been spelled out in this newest agreement must be fulfilled. Syria and the other Arab States need to be convinced of the benefits of peace and that will require a further negotiating round. Following that must come the central problem of the Palestinians and the future of the West Bank, and at this point we shall be attacking the problem of a comprehensive settlement, and for this task a comprehensive forum, such as Geneva provides, would seem to be required. But if all the parties show the same resolution, perseverance and, not least, the flexibility that were shown in the recent negotiations, I am convinced that an ultimate solution could be reached that would ensure security for the State of Israel and justice for the Arab people.
66.	The dilemma which faces the parties in the Middle East is a familiar one. On the one hand, any attempt to reach a full settlement all at once is likely to founder because the gap between the positions of the two sides is too wide to be bridged. On the other hand, any partial resolution of the problems may appear to favour one side at the expense of the other in the stages before a full settlement is reached, and therefore arouses opposition.
67.	The new agreement between Israel and Egypt is important, not only in its practical effects though I would not wish to belittle them as in its example. Israel and Egypt have demonstrated to others that mutually beneficial agreements can be reached in the Middle East without sacrificing the interests of either party.
68.	As this agreement matures it will give the Israelis cause to believe that they can put trust in the word of Egypt; and the Egyptians and after them others  will have cause to believe in the goodwill of Israel. This is the lesson and the real achievement of the recent negotiations. It provides a new foundation on which it should be possible to build, and a demonstration of the value of compromise.
69.	We shall need a combination of methods. Problems on which partial steps can be taken should continue to be handled in that way. But the core of the problem, namely, the settlement of the Palestinian people, may well need a wider negotiation leading to a comprehensive solution. We know that it will be very difficult to achieve a peace which fulfills everyone's needs, but history has proved that peace is indivisible and the world cannot afford to settle for an incomplete solution,
70.	As regards Cyprus, I note with regret that the talks that have been pursued intermittently during the last year between the parties have made very little progress despite the patient efforts of Mr. Wald- heim, to whom we extend our grateful thanks. The British Government adheres to resolution 3212 (XXIX) and affirms that its implementation would assist the process of reaching a settlement. If a solution is to be acceptable to both sides it will require to deal with the settlement of the refugees, the constitutional relationships between the parts of the island, the powers of the central Government, and the nature and physical delimitation of whatever zones are agreed upon.
71.	A solution based on such an agenda is difficult, but not impossible; but it does mean that a declaration of independence by any part of the island is ruled out. Such a declaration would perpetuate the conflict and result in continuing tension that could spread wider than the island itself, Therefore we call upon both sides to resume their discussions and to come forward with positive proposals for a solution.
72.	Despite the lack of progress made so far in these direct talks, we are not convinced that any different forum is likely to be more successful. We wish to see the direct talks renewed, together with the continuing presence of a mediator to assist the parties. But in the end the main responsibility for success will rest with the Turkish and Greek Cypriots themselves.
73.	On Namibia we share with the international community a deep concern that the inhabitants of the Territory as a whole should be given the opportunity to express their views freely on their political and constitutional future. All political groups must be allowed to take part peacefully in the process of self- determination, and above all there must be a real sense of urgency.
74.	As a member of the Security Council, we have joined with France and the United States in making formal demarches to the South African Government. 
We observe some signs that the South African Government is taking a new look at its policies towards Namibia, but it is clear that the movement is not taking place quickly enough. We look to South Africa to make clear and positive progress without delay.
75.	For our own part, Britain has contributed to the United Nations Fund for Namibia, to the proposed Institute for Namibia at Lusaka, to a United Nations Children's Fund project for aid to Namibian refugees; and we are one of the largest contributors to the United Nations Educational and Training program for Southern Africa, which includes provision for scholarships for Namibians. We have also provided funds to enable the South West Africa People's Organization to send students to Britain for English-language training, which will enable other forms of educational assistance to be given. In Namibia, as elsewhere in southern Africa, we shall continue in co-operation with other countries to work for self-determination, justice, racial equality, independence and peace.
76.	Turning to Rhodesia, I should like, first, to pay tribute to the efforts which the Presidents of Botswana, the United Republic of Tanzania, Mozambique and Zambia have made during the last year in conjunction with the Prime Minister of South Africa to promote a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. It is a matter for regret that so much effort has not met with greater success, though some progress has been made and a first meeting between the regime and the African National Congress at Victoria Falls did reach agreement on a number of points.
77.	I see two prerequisites for further progress towards a negotiated solution. First, the Europeans, and particularly Mr. Smith, Prime Minister of Rhodesia, should realize that to rely on disunity among their political opponents as a justification for postponing essential changes is to invite disaster as history has frequently demonstrated. Second, there must be a clear and unified leadership on the African side; and that is something which the Congress itself must achieve.
78.	We believe that agreement on the change to majority rule in Rhodesia is essential if peace is to be maintained in the area. If this is not achieved there will be a long slide into armed struggle and irreparable damage will be done to the country and to its neighbors.
79.	To prevent such a disaster I call upon both sides to resume their discussions, and I urge the four Presidents and also the South African Government not to be discouraged by the difficulties which have arisen. I trust they will resume their efforts. We for our part remain ready to play our full part. Meanwhile, until a just settlement is achieved, the United Nations sanctions must continue to be applied effectively as one of the instruments for maintaining pressure on the illegal regime.
80.	. Now I turn to disarmament. The Secretary- General, in his report, has reminded us of our responsibility for disarmament. Every year the nations pile up more and more arms. Every year the arms bill grows larger. Every year the capacity for destruction more frightening. In some parts of the world such as the Middle East, competition for arms is never ceasing. Hardly any continent is exempt from the pressure. No one who cares for the progress of the human race towards decent standards of living can help but be appalled at the enormous waste of resources on weapons of destruction. A number of countries, some of whom are among the poorest, are now spending as much as 10 per cent of their gross national product for military purposes. What a boost it could give to the world's hopes if all of us could agree to limit to a maximum of even 5 per cent the amount of our gross national product we allocate for defense. This would presuppose that countries would move step by step to such a figure and would need to enter into serious multilateral negotiations with one another for reductions in their military establishments. That is indeed what we are doing in the negotiations that are now beginning on force reductions in Central Europe. If these negotiations could be paralleled in other regions of the world it would be a hopeful beginning.
81.	Probably the greatest potential risk that faces us is the nuclear danger. Of course, we welcome the steps that are being taken to control nuclear arms by the United States and the Soviet Union. We believe there should be no insuperable difficulties in bringing the arrangements made at Vladivostok to a successful conclusion. We look forward to a new strategic arms limitation agreement being signed before the end of this year. But that agreement, although important, does no more than put a brake on the present nuclear arms race. It is necessary to move onwards to an actual reduction in the number of nuclear weapons, and we ask both the United States and the Soviet Union to press to a successful conclusion the next round of talks on this subject that is due to take place in 1977.
82.	The Soviet Government has put forward a proposed draft treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests [A! 10241, annex]. The United Kingdom has consistently supported this goal. We wish the initiative well. However, I cannot fail to point out that it will require the adherence of all the nuclear-weapon States and provision for verification, and that so far it has not been possible to meet these conditions completely.
83.	We should also examine with care the proposal made by the representative of the Soviet Union at the preceding meeting [A/10243, annex] in the document that was circulated among us.
84.	But even before we solve these problems a new danger is coming to view that I now wish to discuss. It arises from the overlap between the desire of certain countries to use nuclear material for civil purposes and the increasing risk that such material may be employed for military purposes. The metals uranium and plutonium are used not solely in nuclear reactors to produce power for civil purposes, for highly enriched uranium and plutonium can also be used to make nuclear weapons. Those who possess a nuclear reactor have already taken the first step to being able to pro-duce a nuclear weapon. If they then move from that to the second step and acquire plants to enrich their uranium and to reprocess the fuels that have already been used in their nuclear reactors, then they will be a long way down the road to producing nuclear weapons. Up to the present, it is the nuclear-weapon States that alone possess such plants, namely, the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, France and China. But other countries are now beginning to consider whether they, too, should order reprocessing and enriching plants. If and when they do so, and the plants are in working order, they will be able to produce weapons material at a rate which would enable several thousand nuclear weapons a year to be produced. To give a comparison, the present nuclear programs will accumulate more than 1 million 1 million kilograms of plutonium within the next 10 years; and by contrast, the bomb which fell on Nagasaki and created such havoc and such destruction was the equivalent of no more than about 10 kilograms. A million kilograms within the next 10 years  and 10 kilograms destroyed Nagasaki. The spread of these plants would enable the whole of mankind on this planet to destroy itself. Clearly, the statesmen of the world assembled here have a moral duty to act before it is too late.
85.	The United Nations should concern itself with this problem immediately and add vigor and impetus to the work that is being done in the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA],
86.	I put forward five points for consideration, to try to contain this problem. First, the Members of the United Nations should solemnly affirm that each and all of them will not convert nuclear materials from civil use to military use. Secondly, this solemn declaration should be reinforced by an agreement to accept a common system of international inspection through the IAEA. There should be one set of rules for all countries in the world. Thirdly, all civil nuclear materials and facilities should be brought within the common inspection system. Fourthly, the IAEA should assume responsibility for inspection of enrichment and processing plants, in addition to its present task of safeguarding nuclear reactors. Fifthly, the new set of common rules should be based on monitoring nuclear material and accounting for its use at all stages through the life of the fuel.
87.	Britain intends to make a specific proposal along these lines to the IAEA. In this way we shall follow up the intentions of the recent conference on non- proliferation, although our proposals are not based on that Treaty and have a wider purpose. They are intended to give practical expression to the pledges that have already been made by many Governments that they will not convert nuclear material from civil to military purposes, and I hope that the General Assembly will give support to them.
88.	Thirty years ago at the very first session of the General Assembly in London my great predecessor Ernest Bevin pledged that the British Government would use to the full every instrument created by the United Nations and give it its whole-hearted support. I was present when he made that speech. Looking back, I believe my country, as a permanent member of the Security Council during the whole of that period, has faithfully redeemed the pledge that Ernest Bevin gave. Now, today, I repeat that undertaking at a time when the potential dangers facing the world are at least as great as they were when the United Nations was founded. None of us expects the United Nations miraculously to solve all the world's problems. But patient effort, understanding of each other, a consciousness that we are all citizens of the same world, and that none of us can escape the consequences of each other's actions this, I believe, will enable mankind of all colors and all creeds to do as the founders of the United Nations did, and as our forefathers did, to rise to the challenge of our times.




81.	 It is my privilege and pleasure, on behalf of my delegation and myself, to extend to you, Mr. President, our warm congratulations and good wishes on your election as President of the thirtieth regular session of the General Assembly. You have assumed this high office at a very significant moment in the history of this world Organization, when we are at a turning-point in the thirtieth year of its life. We are fortunate indeed to have the benefit of your outstanding ability, wide experience and dynamism in directing our deliberations during this important session. Your election is also a tribute to your country and its people and to its traditional policy of conciliation and co-operation. I assure you of my delegation's full support in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities.
182.	Your predecessor, the Foreign Minister of Algeria, Mr. Bouteflika, will be long remembered both for his able direction of the twenty-ninth session and for the constructive achievements of the seventh special session. Under his leadership we were able to accomplish much that is valuable and of lasting significance.
183.	To the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, we should like to express our appreciation for his ceaseless energy and total dedication to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. His wise counsel and his gentle persistence in drawing attention to the fundamental problems facing mankind have enhanced the prestige of the United Nations. We extend to him our continued support.
184.	Anyone who has the privilege of standing at this rostrum to address the General Assembly must be keenly aware of a special sense of responsibility, because the United Nations is an instrument for shaping the destiny of mankind. How we fulfill this responsibility will depend upon the perception of our common mission and our firm resolve to implement our decisions. Our mission, as expressed in the Charter of our Organization, is to secure peace and justice for all mankind. Our duty is to the peoples of all nations and our objective is the molding of a world based on peace and co-operation, not on its division into three or more worlds separated by conflict and inequality. The growing awareness of interdependence between peoples and nations, each conscious and responsive to the basic needs and legitimate aspirations of the other, marks the hopeful beginning of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
185.	Three decades ago our founding fathers conceived of this Organization as a means for harmonizing the views and actions of States in a common effort "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war" and "to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom". An embittered world, shattered by the destructive fury of war, was soon enmeshed in the hostile confrontation of opposing military alliances. The cold war threatened to nullify the hopes enshrined in our Charter. Vast numbers of people still lived under colonial subjugation  and for them the Charter could have no meaning until they were freed from foreign domination.
186.	Many old empires have since been dismantled and colonial rule has been ended in most parts of the world, signifying the victory of the forces of national liberation. The United Nations has made its own contribution to expediting this process. More than half of the delegations present here represent countries liberated from colonial rule. We have watched with profound satisfaction the Organization move steadily closer to its goal of full universality. We are happy to welcome among us this year delegations from the sovereign States of Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe. We are confident that their participation in our work will add to the strength of our Organization. We look forward to welcoming Papua New Guinea in the very near future.
187.	We have before us a heavy agenda, which illustrates the principal problems facing the world today. Some items have remained on the agenda year after year, testifying to their complexity and intractability. Other items are relatively new, which is an indication of the growing awareness of a rapidly changing world. It is not my intention on this occasion to express our views on all these problems. My delegation will have other opportunities for making our views known during this session. The very fact that these global problems are before us is evidence of the reality of the interdependence of peoples and nations, and a recognition that the United Nations constitutes the appropriate forum for their solution through our collective efforts. Mere recognition of this fact is not enough, however, and, in the words of the Secretary-General in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization "... we must now go forward from deliberation to action, from confrontation to co-operation and from eloquently expressed allegiance to principles to the far more difficult task of making those principles a reality." [AllOOOIIAdd.l, sect. XXI.]
188.	Many newly independent nations of the world, including my own, repudiated the concept of the cold war and chose the path of non-alignment and peaceful coexistence. Today there is widespread understanding and acceptance of the policy of non-alignment and its relevance and importance. In the United Nations the non-aligned countries have consistently worked to democratize international relations and to move from confrontation and deadlock into new fields of co-operative endeavor. The foreign ministers of the non-aligned countries, meeting in Lima last month, pledged themselves afresh to continue their efforts to achieve a new world order based on justice and equality.
189.	The maintenance of peace must be our first objective, and problems related to this question must continue to occupy our minds with a sense of urgency. Peace reigns today in Indo-China after many years of war, and this is indeed a matter of great satisfaction for all of us. However, the legacy of the past seems to cloud the vision of some. The rejection by the Security Council of the requests of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam to join the United Nations adds to the sorry record of United Nations inertia on Viet Nam. There is no doubt about the eligibility of those States for admission; we should welcome them to this Organization, which will benefit from their co-operation. The international community should do all it can to heal the wounds of war and assist in the reconstruction of the shattered economies of the countries of Indo-China. India is willing and prepared to make its contribution to this effort.
190.	The situation in the Middle East remains critical. There can be no enduring peace in the region until Israel vacates all the Arab territories it occupied by aggression and until the national rights of the Arab people of Palestine are restored. Meanwhile, an agreement has been reached between Egypt and Israel for a limited further Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai. This will be an important and positive development, provided it contributes to the reduction of tensions in that area and leads to the speedy resolution of the basic problems. However, the intransigent and obstructive attitude of Israel, which is receiving a considerable amount of sophisticated military hardware, gives cause for serious concern. It is the clear duty of the United Nations, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, to explore all avenues open to it for securing the removal of the Israeli presence from Arab territories. It is also our duty to continue our efforts to restore to the Palestinian people their national rights. We firmly believe that the unity of the Arab countries, together with the continued supporting action of the international community, would enable them to regain their lost territories and secure the restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people.
191.	In Cyprus, too, there is still an uneasy stalemate the continuance of which may well endanger its territorial integrity. Prolonged neglect of the underlying causes of inter-communal differences has led to external interventions and the virtual partition of the country, resulting in thousands of people leaving their homes in search of safety. At the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly last year, we unanimously adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX), which established an agreed framework for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from the island and the settlement of the problems between the two communities. Progress in its implementation, however, has been slow, even though the leaders of the two communities have held talks under the auspices of the Secretary-General. Given good will and practical good sense, the problem can be resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the two communities and without prejudice to the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment of Cyprus. We have every confidence that the Secretary-General will persevere in his efforts to bring the two communities together to seek a mutually acceptable solution.
192.	The continuance of multilateral military alliances conceived in the context of great-Power rivalry and the induction of vast quantities of military hardware into countries belonging to these alliances is a source of continuing tension and instability in the Indian Ocean area. The expansion of the Diego Garcia base, against the declared wishes of the littoral States of the Indian Ocean, is of serious concern. We urge the great Powers and other major maritime users to respect the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace, in conformity with the Declaration adopted by the United Nations in 1971 [resolution 2832 (XXVI)]. We also call for the early dissolution of the military pacts conceived in the context of great-Power rivalry and the dismantling of foreign military bases established in that context.
193.	We have continued to make every effort to strengthen our friendship and understanding with the countries of our region. India is ready, within the limits of its means, to contribute to the development of our region through trade and closer economic links. We have .continued to implement the Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972-'' both in spirit and in letter. It is our earnest hope that we shall achieve in the near future the objective of peace and co-operation among the States in the subcontinent.
194.	The decolonization of the Portuguese empire has proceeded with commendable rapidity. We rejoice in the notable successes achieved by the national liberation movements. However, the process of national liberation is as yet incomplete, and we must address ourselves to the problems in the remaining Territories whose people are still living under colonial and foreign domination.
195.	The transition of Angola to independence has been marked by violent clashes between liberation movements. We have followed these developments with concern, because in the last analysis it is the people of Angola who will be the victims of the struggle for power between political parties. We hope that the Organization of African Unity will find it possible to establish a basis for peace and co-operation among the different liberation groups.
196.	In southern Africa we are nowhere near a solution of the triple problem of securing the independence of Namibia, the rule of the majority in Zimbabwe and the eradication of the policy of apartheid. These are all interrelated questions and they have to be tackled together. The presence in Namibia of the administration of the white racist regime of South Africa has been declared illegal. The United Nations has been standing ready to take over temporarily the administration of Namibia pending transfer of power to the people. And yet the South African Government flagrantly continues to defy the United Nations. There is no clearer case for intervention by the United Nations and we would call for effective and resolute United Nations action against South Africa.
197.	The illegal minority regime of Smith in Zimbabwe evidently continues to be bolstered by the support of the South African Government. There is no honorable way out for this regime except to release all political prisoners, convene a constitutional conference of the legitimate leaders of the people and make arrangements for the inevitable transition to majority rule. The United Kingdom has a special responsibility in this regard and we hope that it will play an effective role. Unfortunately, even the imposition of sanctions by the Security Council has not brought about the desired result, although they may have had some impact. There are reports that the Smith regime is arranging meetings with national political leaders with the purpose of dividing them and compelling them to agree to unacceptable settlements. It is clear that the United Nations should continue to lend all support to the liberation movement in Zimbabwe.
198.	The question of apartheid has been before the United Nations in one form or another since 1946, and the appeals of the General Assembly have had no effect whatsoever on the racist regime in South Africa. This regime has remained indifferent to the diplomatic isolation in which it finds itself. We deplore that the trade boycott and arms embargo imposed by the United Nations have been ineffective. As a result, South Africa continues to pursue its pernicious policy of segregating the tribal people in separate bantustans, forcibly removing them from their homes and subjecting them to humiliating restrictions. South Africa's continued enforcement of the apartheid system in total disregard of United Nations resolutions led to the rejection of the credentials of its representatives and their consequent exclusion from the current session of the General Assembly. Even this has had little effect on the white racist regime in Pretoria, or indeed on its supporters. There is no alternative but to strengthen the hands of the fighters for freedom and liberation from this iniquitous regime.
199.	I have referred to matters that are at present, the focus of international tension where critical situations prevail. Certain hopeful developments in Europe may also be noted. We welcome the signature on 1 August by 35 Governments at Helsinki of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which establishes the basis for the preservation of peace and future co-operation in that continent. Since Europe has been the historical spawning ground for world wars in the past, this agreement has great significance. However, detente in Europe can have real meaning for the rest of the world only if this process is extended to other continents, and particularly to the crisis situations of today.
200.	The full potential of detente cannot be realized until there is a transfer of real resources from military expenditure to areas that are of vital concern for the general well-being of mankind. The very first resolution adopted by the first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations concerned disarmament. That was only natural, as the question of disarmament was an important preoccupation of the League of Nations and it was inevitable that its successor, the United Nations, established in the wake of the last world war, should as a matter of first priority concern itself with disarmament. In the 30 years since the creation of this Organization and despite the regular annual appeals for disarmament, especially nuclear disarmament, there has been virtually no progress. Instead, we have been witness to an incredible arms race involving the stockpiling of nuclear weapons and other means of mass destruction on a scale that brings into question the sanity of such measures. The global expenditure on the arms race is on the order of $300,000 million per annum, when the world is crying out for resources to relieve hunger, poverty and social injustice. We are nowhere near even considering any serious measures concerning nuclear disarmament, which clearly deserve the highest priority. We have had world conferences on food, population, the environment, industrialization, the law of the sea, the role of women and so forth, but we have not yet been able to agree on a world conference on disarmament. This is truly a tragic commentary on the state of the world, which has lost its awareness of and sensitivity to the dangers facing it.
201.	Peace is the foundation for progress. At the same time, an enduring peace cannot be achieved until the growing economic disparities in the world have been overcome. We are now in the middle of the Second United Nations Development Decade, and, despite the various measures recommended by the United Nations, the vast majority of developing countries are still facing unfavorable trade patterns and extremely heavy debt burdens. Such inequalities among nations are the cause of our present discontent. These have to be reversed if we are to move on to true interdependence as between equals, which is the compelling need of today. It is true that the reality of the interdependence of all nations is coming to be recognized more and more, but the problems it poses are only just beginning to be appreciated. The Declaration and Program of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, adopted at the sixth special session [resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S- VI)], and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, adopted at the twenty-ninth session [resolution 3281 {XXIX)), are important milestones in our journey towards the goal of interdependence. They call for measures of unprecedented scope, the most important of which, if I may say so, is bridging the gap between the minds of the developed and the developing countries.
202.	The seventh special session has made a serious attempt to identify problems in detail, to locate some available resources, to pursue further studies of important questions and above all to engage in negotiations with a view to exploring whether a meeting of minds is possible. The achievements of that session should neither be overestimated nor underestimated. Developing countries cannot look upon the final document of the seventh special session [resolution 3362 (S-VII)] with unmixed satisfaction. However, it is an opening, and if the decisions are implemented in good faith and speedily, further fruitful dialog can be continued on the outstanding issues so that the world economic imbalance can be redressed and the terms of trade for developing countries can be really improved. The status quo should change in the direction of a new and equitable economic order, and proof of this has surely to come from the concrete actions of the developed countries.
203.	The problem of under-development is as important in the economic and social field as decolonization is in the political field and constitutes a challenge facing the United Nations in the years to come. The United Nations is a unique instrument for fostering co-operation based on equality, and its structures and procedures need to be adapted with wisdom and vision to meet the unprecedented challenges of the future.
204.	I should like to conclude by recalling the words of my Prime Minister in her address to this Assembly on 23 October 1970, when she emphasized India's profound commitment to peace and the evolution of a new world order. She said:
"We have always affirmed that the way of the world should be not power but peace, not confrontation but co-operation. The world is not for destruction; it is for development. . . .
"The irony is that we have the means and we see the vision, but we lack the will and the trust to take the one big step forward. . . .
"In the years to come let the United Nations strive to bring about an era of international transformation by consent, a new era of justice and peace."4



33.	 Mr. President, it is with pleasure that I join the many representatives who have spoken before me in congratulating you most warmly on your election to the presidency of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly. You bring to this high office qualities of integrity, intellect and experience which have already carried you to the summit of political responsibility in your own country as well as on the wider European stage. The General Assembly is indeed fortunate that its leader for the coming 12 months will be a statesman deeply loyal to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
34.	The annual general debates at the General Assembly provide an occasion for a survey of the working of the international system during the preceding year, and for the public expression of the hopes and fears, the expectations and anxieties, of the Governments representing almost the totality of the population of the world. The present debate seems to me an appropriate opportunity to go a little further to look back at the 30 years of the life of the United Nations, and to try to appraise its achievements against the standards set by the founders of the Organization when they adopted the Charter in San Francisco on 26 June 1945.
35.	The United Nations was born amidst the ruin and devastation of the most terrible war experienced in the recorded history of mankind, a holocaust in' which tens of millions of men, women and children lost their lives, among them one third of the Jewish people. Its primary purposes, therefore, were to save succeeding generations from similar catastrophe and to build a better society in which fundamental human rights, equal justice before the law and economic and social advancement would be universally assured.
36 As is inevitable in human affairs, the record is uneven The most spectacular achievement of this period is unquestionably the virtual disappearance of the classic colonial system. More than half of the present Members of the United Nations, including Israel were colonial dependencies before 1945; four Cape Verde, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, and Papua New Guinea achieved independence in 1975 and have been or are being admitted to membership at this session. On behalf of the people and the Government of Israel, I am happy to wish them well.
37.	The United Nations system, through the United Nations Development program and its forerunners and through the specialized agencies, has also registered noteworthy achievements in many branches of economic development, in agriculture, health, labor, transport and other practical fields. The new impetus in the development and codification of international law would hardly have been possible outside the United Nations framework; while the financial and economic organs of the United Nations family, among which one might include the recent seventh special session of the General Assembly which may well presage a new era of international economic co-operation, have become almost indispensable for the proper conduct of the world's business. Those are all positive contributions to the welfare of mankind, even though it is clear that there is still a long way to go.
38.	This is unfortunately not the case in other areas. The United Nations has manifestly not saved this generation from the scourge of war. The graves of the millions of victims of armed conflicts in Asia, in Africa, in the Middle East and even in Europe bear anguished testimony to this massive failure; while the lofty sentiments and exhortations of a multitude of conventions, declarations and resolutions have had little impact on the flagrant abuse of fundamental human rights and freedoms in vast areas of the globe.
39.	It is common form to claim that the fault does not lie in the United Nations system, but in its Members; that the world Organization merely reflects the frailties, the stupidities, the lethargy and the evils of the world itself. This is, of course, true, but it is equally true that a system that encourages contention rather than compromise, extremism rather than tolerance and confrontation rather than negotiation is hardly suited to a world as diverse in race, religion, tradition, geographical circumstances, and social and political practices as is ours.
40.	The experience of Israel is a valid example. We belong to no bloc and no alliance. We can count on little support in this Assembly, not because our cause is unjust, not because our views do not meet with sympathy, but because of considerations of unprincipled expediency. We are assaulted every year in language so venomous and vile as to defy all canons of civilized behavior. In Assembly session after Assembly session in recent years, in conference after conference, resolutions are adopted by automatic majorities, demanding that we submit to this abusive tyranny, that we, in effect, dismantle our State, and that we commit national suicide. No regard whatsoever is paid in these resolutions to truth or to reality.
41.	Israel is a democratic State, where, in accordance with our ancient tradition, all individuals and communities enjoy equality before the law and the plenitude of their human rights; yet a resolution of a United Nations body will assert the very opposite as an incontrovertible fact and condemn Israel on the basis of that falsehood.
42.	When a World Health Organization expert finds that the medical services provided for the population in the territories under Israeli administration since 1967 are as good as those of any other civilized country and that the people are healthy, a resolution of the General Conference of that specialized agency will declare that they are ridden with disease and bereft of medical attention. When a certified lunatic, not a Jew and a foreigner to boot, sets fire to part of a mosque in Jerusalem, a resolution of the Security Council condemns Israel for the deliberate desecration of that Holy Place. When highly qualified United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization experts establish that Israeli archaeological research in Jerusalem represents a notable contribution to the cultural heritage of mankind, including that of a glorious period of Islamic history, does not contravene the applicable international law and does not endanger other monuments and sites, resolutions adopted by that organization simply ignore those findings and for good measure add sanctions to the routine condemnation. And when Israel, rightly and inevitably, refuses to take notice of these fantasies, as any other Member State would do in its place, it is once again condemned for being awkward and recalcitrant and for flouting the will of the international community.
43.	Surely there is something seriously wrong with a United Nations system which is so easily subverted for political blackmail; which, instead of being a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the objectives of the Charter, has become a propaganda battlefield; and where abuse and not reason has become the language of debate. It is surely not beyond the wit of man to arrest this hypocritical and dangerous course before it is too late.
44.	In the course of my address to the General Assembly last year, I dwelt on the positive features of the separation of forces agreements which had been concluded earlier that year between Israel and Egypt and Israel and Syria in the wake of the Yom Kippur war of October 1973.1 I expressed the view that those two agreements represented the first steps, small and hesitant though they may have been, away from the triple negatives adopted by the Conference of Arab Heads of State or Government, held at Khartoum, on 1 September 1967: no peace with Israel, no recognition, no negotiations.
45.	Those who sincerely seek peace in the Middle East will surely find cause for satisfaction in the new agreement between Egypt and Israel which was negotiated through the good offices of the President and the Secretary of State of the United States and concluded in Geneva last week. That agreement marks an important step forward. It has much greater political significance than its predecessor.
46.	I should like to draw the attention of the Assembly to some of the major provisions of this agreement:
"The Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Government of Israel have agreed that:
"The conflict between them and in the Middle East shall not be resolved by military force but by
peaceful means. 
"The parties hereby undertake not to resort to the threat or use of force or military blockade against each other. 11
"This agreement is regarded by the parties as a significant step toward a just and lasting peace. It is not a final peace agreement.
"The parties shall continue their efforts to negotiate a final peace agreement within the framework of the Geneva Peace Conference in accordance with Security Council resolution 338 (1973).
"This agreement shall enter into force upon signature of the protocol and remain in force until superseded by a new agreement."
47.	The significance of the agreement does not lie only in the pledge of the parties to continue to observe the cease-fire and to refrain from all military or paramilitary action, or in their undertaking not to resort to the threat or use of force or military blockade, or in their recognition of the essential role of the United Nations Emergency Force and the necessity that it continue its functions, or in the provision concerning the passage of non-military cargoes to and from Israel through the Suez Canal, or even in the renunciation of war as a means to settle the differences between them; rather its significance lies in the belief that it opens a new chapter in the relations between the two countries. Israel for its part will do all it can to ensure that this new chapter will indeed be one of peace. And beyond that we hope that this agreement will pave the way to better relations and peace with all our neighbors.
48.	It is a proper opportunity to stress here that the agreement, in all its particulars, was concluded, in response to the free will of two sovereign States. If Egypt and Israel consider that the agreement is advantageous to them and, moreover, it is a step not directed against any other party nobody in this General Assembly has the right to censure it or to set himself up as an arbiter of the interests of the parties directly concerned.
49.	As I have already stated, both parties to the agreement have recognized the essential role played by the United Nations Emergency Force and I wish to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the officers and men of the Force, who are performing a difficult and delicate task in an exemplary manner; to Lieutenant General Ensio Siilasvuo, who has been identified with the peace-keeping efforts of the United Nations in the Middle East for many years and who has gained the respect and regard of all parties; and to the Secretary-General, who is ultimately responsible for this successful United Nations enterprise. I wish to include in this tribute the commanders, officers and men of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, who also play an important role in the area, and to the Governments which have contributed their personnel to all three United Nations forces.
50.	As far as we are concerned, the new agreement is not an end, but the beginning of a process of peacemaking. We do not delude ourselves that this will be a simple undertaking, for the making of peace after
so many years of hostility and 
suspicion will call for qualities of moral courage, understanding and tenacity far greater than those needed for the waging of war But the beginning must be made-for the sake of this generation and for the sake of the Israeli and Arab children who were surely born to live and create and not to die on the battlefield.
51.	Security Council resolution 338 (1973) calls for "negotiations . . . between the parties concerned aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in 'the Middle East". From this rostrum I declare that Israel is ready to enter into such negotiations with each and every one of the neighboring States. I note with regret repeated statements made by the leaders of Syria which reject the whole concept of a genuine peace treaty with Israel. Nevertheless, I should like to hope that this is not their last word. And for our part I solemnly reiterate that the Government of Israel is ready and willing to enter into peace negotiations with Syria without prior conditions, as called for by Security Council resolution 338 (1973), at any place and at any time.
52.	In this connexion I wish to emphasize that as far as Israel is concerned the Geneva Peace Conference can be reconvened whenever the parties are ready for it, following adequate preparation. Moreover, in principle, Israel is in favor of any mechanism which will advance the process of negotiation between the parties to the conflict. It will therefore give the idea put forward by the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger, for an informal multilateral consultation most earnest consideration.
53.	As I emphasized in my statement at the General Assembly last year, it is self-evident that genuine peace in the Middle East must include a just and constructive solution for the Palestine Arab problem, Israel is fully alive to this problem, probably more so than the majority of those who pronounce freely upon it, and we do not require persuasion of the need to solve it peacefully and honorably. Indeed we insist that this be done. For far too long now the Palestinian Arabs have been used as a pawn on the chess-board of inter-Arab politics; throughout the years they have been the victims of Arab extremism. The solution to their problem therefore demands a change of attitude in the Arab world. The Palestine Arab problem should and can be solved in the context of a peace agreement between Israel and Jordan, which constitutes the major part of the area of historic Palestine on both sides of the river as well as being the homeland of the great majority of the Palestine Arabs.
54.	Thus if the matter at issue is a fair and constructive solution for the problem of Palestine Arab identity. Israel's response is emphatically positive. But it is categorically negative about the absurd pretensions of the so-called Palestine Liberation Organization to speak in the name of the Palestine Arabs. This congeries of feuding terrorist gangs, whose principal victims are the Arabs of Palestine themselves and whose primary aim is the annihilation of the State of Israel and the genocide of its people, is neither a valid representative of the Palestine Arab community nor a valid interlocutor for Israel.
55.	It should cause no surprise that at the spearhead of the frenzied efforts of the extreme regimes in the Arab world to prevent a political settlement of
the Middle East dispute, and to disrupt the recent agreement between Egypt and Israel, is precisely the PLO.
56.	There is nothing more fraudulent than the scheme of this faction to establish, naturally on the ruins of Israel, a so-called democratic secular State in which Moslems, Christians and Jews would, as it were, live in amity and equality. This facile slogan, this transparent propaganda gimmick, has somehow found support among naive and well-meaning people. What is the pattern which the progenitors and supporters of this idea propose to follow? For lack of anything more promising they themselves have put forward the example of Lebanon: Lebanon, which since April of this year has been torn apart by a vicious, sectarian civil war between its Moslem and Christian communities. The latest published estimate of the casualties during these past six months is more than 5,000 killed and nearly 18,000 injured. The material damage is estimated at $2,500 million. The PLO knows what it means when it talks about the democratic and secular State of Palestine. So do we. We have only to look at the more than 800,000 Jews who have left, or have been driven out of, the Arab countries of the Middle East and North Africa since 1948, or at the tortured existence of the 4,500-odd Jewish hostages left in Syria today, to know what the fate of the Jews of Israel would be if the PLO nightmare were realized. But we know and they know that this will never be.
57.	It is one of the anomalies of our times that Israel, which is rigorously excluded from the Middle East region in all that concerns the civilian pursuits of the United Nations and its specialized agencies such as health, education, meteorology, trade and civil aviation is emphatically held to be a part of the Middle East region when the discussion turns to military matters, including the supply of arms. If one were cynical one might almost suspect that the reason, in both cases, is to weaken Israel in one case by boycott, and in the other by depriving it of the means of defense.
58.	Be that as it may, the problem of arms control in the Middle East is real and urgent. The area is being swamped by a flood of new and sophisticated military hardware, such as it has never known in all its long history. Each month that passes raises the level of technology, and the price. Tens of billions of dollars which might otherwise be spent on economic and social development and it must be realized that the population of large parts of the Middle East is among the poorest in the world are drained off to pay for these instruments of human destruction.
59.	Israel is forced to take part in this senseless competition because, given the circumstances in the area, if it did not it would invite immediate aggression. But Israel is ready at any time, even before peace is made, to consult with its neighbors on measures to limit the arms race, with all its dangerous consequences, without materially affecting the relative defensive capacity of any of the parties to the consultation.
60.	Israel supports the proposal for a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East and will be ready to enter into negotiations with all States concerned in order to attain that objective. By negotiations we mean a process of
intergovernmental consultation similar to that which preceded the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and other international instruments of like character. We do not think that so grave a matter can be settled by correspondence through the Secretary-General.
61.	Israel welcomes the signature of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which gave formal expression to the spirit of detente. Only the future will tell if this instrument will serve as a guide for the conduct of the nations in the years to come, or whether it will remain a compilation of pious hopes, like so many international instruments which have been adopted since the end of the Second World War.
62.	In this connexion we have of course noted the following passage in the address of the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union to this Assembly on 23 September: "Assessing highly the results of the Conference, the Soviet Union believes that the main task now is to translate the understandings reached into deeds . . .". [2357th meeting, para. 128.]
63.	As far as Israel is concerned, we have two criteria for judgment: one, that detente must apply to the Middle East no less than to Europe and to other areas of the world and so far we have seen no evidence of this; two, that the humanitarian provisions of the Final Act signed at Helsinki must be scrupulously applied. The United Kingdom Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Wilson, expressed this eloquently in his address to the Conference in these words:
"Our work here will be judged not only by the spirit of 'live and let live' which this Conference asserts. It will be judged by how that spirit is reflected in the lives of ordinary families, by such issues as the reunification of families ... I hope that what we have each today committed ourselves to within Europe can apply also to those within our countries who want to go to start a new life outside Europe, whether in the Middle East or elsewhere."
64.	None of the noble provisions of the Final Act have yet been applied to the Jewish national minority in the Soviet Union. For them the Helsinki agreement is still a piece of paper, and detente is still far over the horizon. I hope that the Soviet Union will live up to the spirit of this historic agreement and will enable the Jews who aspire to be reunited with their brethren in their ancient homeland to do so without hindrance. For us this is the touchstone.
65.	Finally, in addressing the General Assembly I cannot ignore a grave development which affects the Jewish people wherever they may be. This is the mounting of a despicable attack on Zionism by associating it with abhorrent political concepts.
66.	Let me state categorically that anti-Zionism is but a euphemism for anti-Semitism. Subscribing to a resolution condemning Zionism means an endorsement of anti-Semitism and the legitimization of aggression against Israel. Let me state with equal emphasis that, on this the thirtieth anniversary of the liberation of the survivors of the gas chambers and the concentration camps, the Jewish people will not tolerate a revival of the cancer of anti-Semitism. One cannot
here escape a tragic reflection how many of the 6 million victims of the Nazis would be alive today if it had been given to the Zionist movement to create the State of Israel before that catastrophe?
67.	It is painful to me to see a group of nations, many of which were recently liberated from colonial rule, deriding one of the most noble liberation movements in this century a movement which not only gave an example of encouragement and determination to the peoples struggling for independence but also actively aided many of them during their period of preparation for independence and immediately thereafter.
68.	What is the essence of Zionism? Zionism, in a nutshell, is the modern expression of the ancient Jewish heritage. Zionism is the national liberation movement of a people exiled from its historic homeland and dispersed among the nations of the world. Zionism is the redemption of an ancient nation from a tragic lot and the redemption of a land neglected for centuries. Zionism is the revival of an ancient language and culture, in which the vision of universal peace has been a central theme. Zionism is the embodiment of a unique pioneering spirit, of the dignity of labor and of enduring human values. Zionism means creating a society, however imperfect it may still be, which tries to implement the highest ideals of democracy political, social and cultural for all the inhabitants of Israel, irrespective of religious belief, race or sex. Zionism is, in sum, the constant and unrelenting effort to realize the national and universal vision of the prophets of Israel.




 I am glad indeed to have this early opportunity to congratulate Mr. Thorn on behalf of New Zealand on his election as President. New Zealand's relationship with Western Europe is of great importance historically and because of our close trade links, which we intend to preserve. We have been involved in negotiations with the European Economic Community which are basic to the well-being of our people. For the spirit of friendly understanding in which these negotiations have been conducted, New Zealand owes a great deal to him personally. We are confident that the same competence and understanding will distinguish Mr. Thorn's present term of high office. He can be assured of our fullest co-operation in his difficult task.
216.	This thirtieth year of the existence of the United Nations has been a year of unprecedented economic and social activity. It has been a year when more than half of the world's population, that half which consists of women, has been reasserting its unanswerable claim to equal status and opportunity with men. For far too long women have been forced to carry an undue burden of the world's poverty and prejudice. And for them, quite rightly, words are no longer enough.
217.	It has been a year also in which the poorer developing nations have been pursuing with great
vigor their unanswerable claims to fairer terms of trade to enable them to earn a better life for their own people. And for them, quite rightly also, words are no longer enough.
218.	The shocks and economic pains of the last two years have shown as never before the urgent necessity for practical steps to achieve change, Nations which for long have called for a new economic order are now at last being joined by others which are realizing that change is in their interests also. The growing interdependence of all nations is more apparent. We welcomed the general political commitment to change firmly and unanimously adopted at the seventh special session. We welcomed the new spirit of conciliation and compromise. Even more, we welcomed the obvious strong determination to go beyond words and votes and get down to practical action. The effectiveness of the United Nations will be judged not by its words, votes or hopes, but by its practical achievements in helping to bring about a better life. The record of words and resolutions of 30 years of United Nations existence would fill many warehouses; but the practical achievements can be quickly listed. So we must achieve a better balance, a balance that would provide new life to the United Nations and justifiable new hope to the peoples of the world,
219.	The next steps are crucial. We now have a map showing the possible roads to the objective of a new world economic order. But the new rules of the road must be worked out and agreed upon to ensure that fast travelers do not monopolize the highways. Those who started late and those who wish to travel more slowly must have their fair share of the road also. They must be given the right of way at times so that they, too, can reach the destination that they desire for themselves. Difficult economic and political decisions will have to be made by developing and developed countries alike. It will take a new political will assisted by popular backing for the measures that are necessary in the wider interest. A task as far-reaching as this will never be easy; it never has been, nor will it ever be so. But, at least, we are committed to try.
220.	Last year, on behalf of my Government, I stressed the folly of squandering vast resources on the armaments race, which is now estimated to cost $300,000 million a year over $75 for every man, woman and child living on this earth. This is a frightening thought, when we know that over 1,000 million people have less than $200 a year to live on. It is an appalling waste of resources considering the desperate need to use all the skill and capital investment available for developing new sources of energy to help provide the increasing supply of food that is urgently needed to prevent much of the world's population growing, up with stunted bodies and minds.
221.	The ever-growing trade in arms is another intensely disturbing development. Arms must not be treated as a normal means of earning money for the export trade. Those nations which contribute to the $20,000 million total of the world's arms trade surely bear a heavy responsibility to review their arms sales policies. This needs to be done on a joint basis for at present we find countries sheltering behind the sad argument that if they do not supply arms some competitor will.
222.	My country views with special concern the constant growth of nuclear weaponry, with all its unthinkable consequences. And now as never before we require urgent agreement on a comprehensive test-ban treaty, a treaty that will put an end for all time to the further development and testing of new and even more terrible methods of mass destruction. But, beyond that, we need measures that will actually stop and reverse the build-up of nuclear weapons.
223.	The New Zealand Government acknowledges with satisfaction the decision taken by the French Government a year ago to end its Program of testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, of which due note was taken by the International Court of Justice in its decision last year. We, the Government of New Zealand, acknowledge with satisfaction the decision of the French Government at that time. At the same time, let it be clear that New Zealand regrets that all nuclear-weapon States continue to test nuclear weapons, whether in the atmosphere or underground.
224.	We regret that a number of States with the capacity to develop nuclear weapons have not yet signed the non-proliferation Treaty. We regret the unwillingness of some countries to agree to international control and supervision of peaceful nuclear explosions.
225.	We believe we must have a comprehensive test- ban treaty. We believe that all countries must ratify and carry out the non-proliferation Treaty. Each day that passes when those steps are not achieved, more and more people view the continued piling up of nuclear arms with fear and horror. But if those steps were taken, it would help create the confidence on which greater measures of disarmament would be built.
226.	As long as there is no comprehensive test-ban agreement, as long as there is no visible sign of progress towards such an agreement, it is natural that groups of like-minded neighboring States should try to reduce the legitimate anxieties of their peoples. New Zealand is attempting to do this by approaching the problem of nuclear disarmament on a partial and regional basis.
227.	A remarkable feature of the disarmament debate at the twenty-ninth session was the upsurge of interest in nuclear-free zones. At the Review Conference to the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons held at Geneva last May the value of this approach was fully recognized in the Conference's Final Declaration [A IC. 111068, annex /}. The Secretary-General, in an important passage in the introduction to his report this year, emphasized that nuclear-weapon free zones provide the best and easiest means by which those States which neither possess nor want to possess these weapons can, by their own initiative, interest and effort, ensure the total absence of nuclear weapons from their territories and enhance their mutual security [Aj 10001 lAikl.I, sect. VIII].
228.	As the Secretary-General pointed out, the Latin American countries have already made substantial progress towards this objective in a large and populated part of the globe [ibid.]. For some years my Government has believed that the independent and self-governing nations of the South Pacific might emulate the example of their Latin American neighbors in an adjoining area. Although the South Pacific contains a vast expanse of ocean, it also comprises many islands and the inhabitants of these islands are deeply concerned about the nuclear threat. Last July, the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free zone was discussed further at the South Pacific Forum by the Heads of Government of Australia, the Cook Islands, Fiji, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Tonga, Western Samoa and Papua New Guinea, whose independence and forthcoming membership in this Organization we greatly welcome. These nine South Pacific countries agreed unanimously that the concept of a nuclear- free zone in the South Pacific should be studied further and that, as a first step, the General Assembly should be asked to endorse the concept of such a zone. Accordingly, two members of the Forum which are also Members of the United Nations, Fiji and New Zealand, have proposed for this session an item on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Pacific [item 120], We appreciate that it is a complex question, and we are, of course, anxious to consult all countries which might be affected by the proposal. This process of consultation has already begun.
229.	We hope that Members will recognize this proposal as a positive response to a widespread desire to extend the application of the nuclear-weapon-free zone concept, and we ask you to accept this action as contribution to nuclear disarmament and the strengthening of peace. It is on that basis that I ask with confidence for the support of all Members of this Organization .
230.	The house of peace will be constructed from many building blocks. The great Powers have offered us no final blueprint. Sometimes we have no choice but to start building, setting some blocks in place without knowing precisely what the final structure will look like. But we do believe that all who can must start building those blocks now, in the knowledge that they will ultimately be used to build the house of peace that we all seek. My Government, for its part, will support any constructive proposal which offers the prospect of early progress towards disarmament.
231.	My Government regrets that the question of the admission of new Members to the United Nations has again become a matter of controversy. The early history of this matter was an unhappy one: for many years, well qualified applicants were denied admission through the use or, rather, the abuse of the veto power. Eventually, a large number of longstanding applicants were admitted together, in what was described at the time as a "package deal". What was done then strained the provisions of the Charter, but my country actively worked for a positive result, believing that it was intolerable to exclude qualified applicants indefinitely and that exceptional measures were required to solve the problem.
232.	After the log-jam was broken in 1955, applications, for the most part, were dealt with promptly and on their individual merits; a large number of new Members were admitted without difficulty. The divided States Germany, Korea and Viet Nam  were the main exceptions, and they were recognized as a special problem. Then, just two years ago, the two Germanys were admitted simultaneously. We hoped that this welcome development would be followed by agreed solutions in respect of Korea and, following a peace settlement, in respect of Viet Nam. Unhappily, this has not proved possible. On the contrary, a situation has arisen which seems likely to provoke more controversy and bitterness and which could delay for a long time the admission of several countries which should be Members.
233.	I wish therefore to describe my Government's general attitude towards the question of membership in the present situation. We believe that applications should be dealt with in accordance with the principle of universality. It is true that the present membership provisions of the Charter do not reflect that principle as clearly as we believe they should. In our view, membership in the United Nations is primarily a duty. Membership imposes important obligations, and no sovereign, independent State should be prevented from assuming them.
234.	That is not the only consideration. Membership also exposes countries to the cross-currents of international opinion; it can help to reconcile different views, or at least moderate them; and the benefits of all this can not be lightly disregarded.
235.	My Government therefore favors the admission of North Viet Nam, South Viet Nam, North Korea and South Korea, even though reunification may remain the ultimate objective or even a priority objective in those countries. We recognize that North Korea is not at present pressing its application, which it first submitted some 25 years ago. But that is not a valid reason, we believe, for not admitting South Korea. There has been criticism of one of the permanent members of the Security Council for linking the application of South Korea with those of North and South Viet Nam. But if that approach is to be deprecated, then equally so is the attitude of those who insist that an application from South Korea can be considered only in conjunction with an application from North Korea in other words, that both States must apply together. If linking is wrong in the one case, it is equally wrong in the other. My Government regrets that the Security Council did not approve the applications of North and South Viet Nam. We hope it will reconsider their applications and consider that of South Korea as well at an early date.
236.	My Government believes that in order to bring about universality the Charter provisions concerning admission should be simplified. In our view, the unanimity rule should not be applicable to membership applications in the Security Council and should be replaced by a suitable qualified majority. The criteria for admission should be the generally accepted criteria of independent statehood.
237.	There is a further consequence of our philosophy of universality, and this concerns Members which do not live up to their Charter obligations. In my country's view, the philosophy of universality is opposed to the tendency which has recently become evident to invoke the expulsion provision in Article 6 of the Charter. We regard expulsion as a last resort, and one of doubtful practical value. It would be a substantial improvement if provision could be made for a variety of sanctions against a Member which persistently violated the Charter, including suspension from the exercise of some or all of the rights and privileges of 
membership. The Member wh.ch is subjected to these measures should not, however, be relieved of the obligations of membership. In our view, that is a serious drawback to the present expulsion provision.
238.	New Zealand is a firm supporter of the process of decolonization and of the principles of racial equality enshrined in the Charter. During the past year we have followed the developments in southern Atrica with close concern. My Prime Minister welcomed the opportunity to discuss the situation in southern Africa with the Heads of Government of the African countries which are members of the Commonwealth when the Commonwealth Heads of Government met in Kingston in May. New Zealand fully subscribed to the views expressed by Commonwealth Prime Ministers, including those relating to sanctions against the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia and on the question of aid to the many indigenous peoples of southern Africa.
239.	In southern Africa there has been since last year's session of the Assembly encouraging progress in some areas, but disquieting developments in other areas, and in still other areas a disheartening lack of forward movement.
240.	Following the admission to the United Nations a year ago of the first Portuguese colony to be liberated, Guinea-Bissau, three more newly independent African States which were formerly under Portuguese rule have now taken their place among us. I take this opportunity to say a special word of welcome to the representatives of those countries. My country is conscious of the special problems which these new Governments face after a long period of struggle for their freedom and independence.
241.	The decolonization of Portugal's African colonies has brought about a fundamental shift in the balance of forces in southern Africa. With this change has come new hope for a solution of the problems of southern Rhodesia and Namibia. In Southern Rhodesia the goal of independence on the basis of majority rule has at times during the year seemed closer. It remains the earnest hope of my Government that this goal will be achieved quickly and peacefully. We trust that the Smith regime will take full advantage of what may well be the last opportunity to achieve a negotiated settlement. As the Commonwealth Heads of Government pointed out at Kingston, if peaceful avenues are blocked by the Smith regime, a stepping-up of armed struggle seems inevitable.
242.	Towards the end of 1974 the Prime Minister of South Africa asked that his Government be given six months to demonstrate its determination to make progress on the issues which caused the Assembly to reject the credentials of the South African delegation at the twenty-ninth session. Those six months have elapsed, and the United Nations is entitled to ask what progress has in fact been made. On the positive side, let us acknowledge that the South African Government played a constructive role in bringing Mr. Smith to the conference table with the leaders of the liberation movements in Southern Rhodesia. On the negative side, I think we must acknowledge that there has been little indication of any intention on the part of the South African Government to abandon its intolerable policy of apartheid. For the non-white majority of its people, South Africa continues to be a police State in which racial discrimination is not simply a matter of ignorance and prejudice but a fundamental doctrine embedded in the basic political and legal system.
243.	South Africa's position in regard to Namibia is equally indefensible. South Africa has no legal claim to the Territory. The situation is a simple one, where the people of Namibia as a whole should be given the opportunity to exercise the right of self-determination as soon as possible under United Nations supervision. In the absence of a change of heart on these issues, South Africa cannot expect to resume its rightful place in the international community.
244.	Since east and south-east Asia is an area of prime concern to New Zealand, I cannot conclude without commenting briefly on some of the important events that have taken place in this region during the past year.
245.	In Indo-China the prolonged military struggle is over. Political power there is in new hands, and whatever views we may hold about this we must all be grateful that the conflict has ended. There are lessons to be learned from the Indo-China experience if we, the international community, are prepared to heed them. It is not recrimination which is called for now, but a spirit of reconciliation and a readiness to help with the task of reconstruction. Some of the international agencies have already been engaged in this task, and their support has been invaluable. My Government is playing its part. We are willing, if so requested, to help with development Programs here as elsewhere without considerations of ideology.
246.	Elsewhere in South-East Asia the changes may not have been as dramatic as they have been in IndoChina. But developments are under way which promise to be just as significant for the region's future. We have been heartened above all by the growth of a genuine regional spirit. This is best seen in the progress of the Association of South-East Asian Nations. The five members of the Association have displayed a sense of cohesion and common purpose in seeking new solutions to old problems. New Zealand has been pleased to offer support, in practical ways, for their collective efforts. We look forward to the day when with them, and with the countries of Indo-China we will work together as a partnership in a wider scheme of regional co-operation, for this is the way ahead.
247.	My Government finds the trends in Asia encouraging. The situation in Korea, however, remains a source of serious concern. The continuing tension there, to which accusation and counter-accusation, threat and counter-threat, contribute, is a relic of another era.
248.	The Korean question has been on the Assembly's agenda for a quarter century. Korea may seem remote to some countries and the history of events there may be growing dim. But in considering this item it would be folly to forget that the interests of many Powers are involved. It has been the scene of a terrible war. With irresponsible handling it could be the scene of another. The supreme interest of the United Nations is peace. It is our duty to make decisions that contribute to peace and reconciliation rather than to insecurity and continued bitterness. It is my Government's earnest hope that this year a solution will be found that is acceptable to all parties and particularly, of course, to the two Korean States. If such a solution requires that the United Nations Command be dissolved, then we have a responsibility to ensure that adequate arrangements remain to safeguard peace and the well-being of the Korean people.
249.	In conclusion, the general debate with which we open each session of the General Assembly gives each Member small or large, poor or rich an equal opportunity to speak out honestly and frankly on matters it regards of vital concern. Indeed, it is more than an opportunity; it is a right and a responsibility. Each Member equally has a responsibility to help solve the problems facing the United Nations, and to contribute a share of the needed resources in proportion to its means. New Zealand has spoken out on the issues of most concern to us. I renew our pledge to play our part in finding fair and constructive solutions.


104.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to the high position of President of the General Assembly for its thirtieth session and I wish you full success in the discharge of this most important function.
105.	For three decades now, regular sessions of the General Assembly have been held towards the end of each year. And each session becomes a significant event in international life. Indeed, the United Nations activities are focused on the most important and acute problems.
106.	If we try to visualize with our mind's eye the work of our Organization over all these years, we shall see a vivid picture of the concerns and anxieties, aspirations and hopes of mankind, permeated by a desire, common to all peoples, for peace and for material, social and spiritual progress.
107.	Whether or not international developments are in line with that desire, this should be, above all, the starting-point in analyzing the state of affairs in the world. It is from this angle that the Soviet Union views the situation in which representatives of States have gathered for the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
108.	The main feature of the situation is that the process of relaxation of international tensions is gaining in scope, and detente itself is increasingly gaining substance. This finds its expression, in particular, in the conclusion of a whole number of agreements between States, including the well-known Soviet- American agreements, which are ot great importance for the cause of peace and international security.
109.	And though the process of improving the political climate is still being influenced by various, sometimes conflicting, factors, it can be definitely stated that in the past year a new significant step has been taken along the path leading, towards a more durable peace.
110.	The peaceful foreign policy of the USSR, a policy of socialism, is aimed at those objectives, at the strengthening of international security. Those objectives were set forth by the great Lenin himself, back in the early years of the existence of the Soviet State, and our country has been invariably guided by them throughout its historical march.
111.	Following this course, a course embodied in the Peace Program adopted by the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the USSR is an active participant in, and in many instances a sponsor of, efforts radically to improve the international situation.
112.	In present-day conditions, we believe it feasible, though not at all easy, to carry out a restructuring of relations among States such as would leave no room for wars between them and would secure respect for the rights of all peoples, large or small, to free and independent development.
113.	The principled foreign policy line of the USSR will, no doubt, be reaffirmed and expanded in the decisions of the forthcoming Twenty-Fifth Congress of the Party of Soviet communists early next year. All those who fight for the peace, national independence and social progress of peoples can continue to count on our solidarity and active support.
114.	In pursuing its policy of peace, the Soviet Union acts in the world arena in close unity with the fraternal socialist countries. And we are proud that the peaceful policies of the socialist countries are in keeping with ti.s aspirations of all peoples.
115.	This yea.' will remain in the memory of the peoples as the year of the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The Final Act of the Conference, to which the signatures of top leaders of 33 European countries, the United States of America and Canada were affixed in Helsinki, in one of the most outstanding documents of our times.
116.	The peoples of Europe to a very large extent pinned on the Conference the hope that the European continent would be able, at last, to break out of the vicious circle of its history where every post-war period turned into a pre-war period, to be followed by a war unleashed by aggressors. The peoples of Europe expected that the Conference would work out and adopt important decisions in the interests of ensuring their security and agree on the main directions for equal and versatile co-operation. Everywhere in Europe people wished the Conference to succeed.
117.	The participants in the Conference succeeded through intense collective efforts in achieving important results, which have been clearly recorded in the Final Act.
118.	This concerns, above all, the political sphere —the working out of principles governing relations among the participating States. Provided they are strictly observed by all States, the threat of war will be excluded from the life of the peoples of Europe and an atmosphere of trust in the peaceful development of each country will come into being on the continent.
119.	This is also true and applicable with regard to the stability and confidence measures agreed on at the Conference, which are designed to promote a reduction of the risk of armed conflicts in Europe.
120.	A positive role is to be played by the understandings reached at the Conference on co-operation in the fields of trade, large-scale industrial projects, science and technology, and the protection of the environment.
121.	A substantial contribution to the development of co-operation between the States participating in the Conference are the understandings reached on questions of co-operation in the fields of culture, information, contacts and education, and their significance will be ever increasingly felt as detente deepens and develops.
122.	It is not without a sense of satisfaction that I note that the success of the Conference was largely facilitated by the efforts of the socialist countries, which invariably seek to switch international relations on to the track of peaceful coexistence. This success became possible also because in Western countries the well-founded conviction is gaining strength that it is necessary to adopt a constructive approach to the solution of problems that arise in Europe instead of aggravating and inflaming the situation, which in the past often reached dangerous levels.
123.	The understandings reached as a result of the Conference are based on the recognition by all its participants of the absolute truth that respect for the sovereign equality of States, the non-use of force, the inviolability of frontiers, territorial integrity, nonintervention from outside in the internal affairs of States as well as other basic principles are laws which no one may transgress.
124.	What are the implications of the result of this joint work of 35 States for the peoples of Europe and indeed of the entire world?
125.	The answer is provided by the experience of the past, when a desire to seize others' territories and brute force raised to the level of State policy acquired the character of criminal claims to world domination and developed into the brown plague of fascism, racism, direct aggression and the tragedy of world wars. Now 35 States which took part in the Conference have assumed, jointly and before the whole world, the obligation to build their relations on the principles of peace, and peace alone, and of deeper co-operation.
126.	The results of the Conference constitute a carefully weighed balance of the interests of all its participants, and they reflect generally acceptable understandings and well-founded compromises. We have every reason to state that the experience of the Conference should be used most extensively for the settlement in general of the pressing problems of today.
127.	In short, as was stressed by L. I. Brezhnev in his speech at Helsinki:
"The results of the prolonged negotiations are such that there are neither victors nor vanquished, neither winners nor losers. This is a victory for reason. Everyone has won the countries of the East and of the West , the peoples of socialist and capitalist States, parties to alliances and neutrals, large and small. This is a gain for all people who hold dear the cause of peace and security on our planet.
128.	Assessing highly the results of the Conference, the Soviet Union believes that the main task now is to translate the understandings reached into deeds, and to advance towards new milestones in the struggle for a lasting peace. This is the course the Soviet Union follows and will continue to follow, and this is what we also expect others to do.
129.	Who would contest that the year 1975 will go down in history as the year of the triumph of the just cause of the peoples of Indo-China? Triumph crowned their liberation struggle that had been carried on for almost 30 years against colonialists and aggression.
130.	Those people sustained tremendous losses, but their will for freedom was never broken. The victory won by the peoples of Indo-China is above all the result of their own efforts. At the same time, it is also a major and common success of all the peace-loving and progressive: forces which invariably demonstrated their solidarity with the struggle of the patriots of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia, and provided them with moral and material support.
131.	The Soviet Union as the whole world knows has fulfilled its internationalist duty to the Vietnamese people. It has sought persistently the elimination in
Indo-China of one of the most dangerous hot-beds of war which troubled international relations.
132.	Understandably, the removal of that hot-bed was welcomed everywhere with a sense of relief. Now that freedom and peace have dawned over the whole of Indo-China, favorable prospects are opening up for its peoples to begin healing the wounds of war and building a new life, which they are doing with the dedication and heroism so characteristic of them.
133.	Having defended their sovereignty and independence in the long struggle, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam now express their willingness to participate within the framework of this world Organization also in efforts to develop international co-operation. We are convinced that the admission to the United Nations of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam would be fully in keeping with the lofty purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter; and the Soviet Union supports the request of their Governments to that effect. No one who stands for peace should fear such a decision of the United Nations.
134.	The lessons of Indo-China are simple and obvious. The struggle of peoples for freedom, national independence and social progress is invincible. It cannot be destroyed by bullets or fire. The outcome of many years of conflict in Indo-China is a convincing case in point. It is also clear that any attempt to dictate or to impose one's will on other peoples by force of arms is untenable and in the final account doomed to failure.
135.	This is a good lesson, in the sense that the policy of acting from "positions of strength", which has now been rejected also at the conference table in Helsinki, should be relegated to the archives of history, never to be revived.
136.	The radical change in the state of affairs in Indo-China creates more favorable prerequisites for establishing peaceful co-operation in Asia as a whole. Practical steps in this direction would serve the interests of the settlement of urgent problems and the strengthening of security throughout the continent of Asia which of course requires, as in Europe, collective efforts by all States concerned, both large and small. And it is through such efforts, and subject to strict compliance with the principles of equality and non- use of force in any guise in resolving disputes between States, that a most effective solution of the problem of Asian security can be found. Let no one think that the Soviet Union would benefit from such a turn of events in Asia to a greater extent than some other States. Not at all; objectively all countries of Asia are equally interested in this.
137.	The entire course of world events in recent times confirms the conclusion reached a long time ago by all those who stand on the ground of reality, that only the policy of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems can have a future and is in keeping with the interests of the peoples.
138.	Our country, the Soviet Union, which is faithful to the legacy of Lenin, carries on a tireless struggle for the further establishment of these principles as a generally recognized rule of international relations. In our relationships with countries of different social systems 'here are a good many positive elements which serve both our interests and those of our partners in corresponding agreements and understandings. This finds its expression in particular in the development of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America in recent years, primarily as a result of Soviet-American summit meetings, which favorably influences the situation in the world as a whole.
139.	A joint search for solutions of urgent problems, including their consideration at the very highest level, the development of political contacts, the expansion of economic, scientific, technological and cultural exchanges have already yielded tangible results which have a positive impact on the general state of international relations and strengthen the spirit of trust in them, without which relations among States cannot be built on a solid basis.
140.	The Soviet Union continues to consolidate friendly relations with developing countries with which we are united by a common desire for peace and progress. We have invariably rendered and will continue to render support to the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America and to the movement of non- aligned States in their struggle to consolidate their national sovereignty and economic independence, to overcome the grim legacy of the colonial past, and against intrigues aimed at undermining their independence and infringing upon their legitimate rights.
141.	Step by step the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are freeing themselves of the consequences of the "cold war" and its distortions in politics. In this respect the decision by Latin American States to put an end to the policy of boycotting socialist Cuba, a policy imposed upon them, was an important event.
142.	It is quite natural that it should be precisely in the present-day situation that the last pillars of colonialism, built up over centuries, are falling down. Quite recently, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, the Comoros and Papua New Guinea have joined the ranks of independent States. Our country welcomes the victory of the just cause of their peoples.
143.	We congratulate the representatives present in this Hall of the Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, and the People's Republic of Mozambique, which have become full-fledged Members of our Organization.
144.	Of course, the completion of the process of decolonization is not proceeding without difficulties. The events in Angola, for example, testify to this. The forces hostile to the liberation struggle of peoples do not surrender their positions without fighting. They sometimes find accomplices also among those who like to pose as zealous champions of the good of oppressed peoples while in practice they are in collusion with the oppressors.
145.	But in spite of all difficulties, the struggle for the elimination of the vestiges of colonialism, for the uprooting of racism, is now closer to final victory than ever before.
146.	The States of Asia, Africa and Latin America constitute a great and active force in world politics, and this imposes on them a grave responsibility for the state of affairs in the world. We view with understanding the fact that these countries, still suffering from the consequences of exploitation, discrimination and economic coercion, are today participating in the work of putting forward and elaborating proposals to establish such international economic relations as would be based on equality and justice.
147.	The solution of those questions, too, is inseparably connected with the further relaxation of political tensions in the world. The Soviet Union is fully aware of the legitimate interests and demands of the developing countries, and it based itself precisely upon such positions in the course of the recently concluded seventh special session of the General Assembly, the results of which we assess positively, although it is quite clear to everyone that much has still to be done before the relevant problems are actually solved.
148.	Thus, the past was marked by significant inter-national events of a positive nature. It is not for us, the socialist States, to underestimate the significance of successes in the international arena. Their contribution to the struggle for those successes is common knowledge.
149.	At the same time, one should be clearly conscious of the fact that detente is not a process which develops by its own momentum. For detente to move ahead, ever new impulses must be given it. A continuous day-to-day struggle must be conducted for it in international forums and from parliamentary rostrums. Each State, each Government, should realize that it can and should make its own contribution to detente.
150.	We deem it necessary to state this from the rostrum of the United Nations because, as facts prove, it would be wrong to underestimate the resistance of the enemies of detente.
151.	Designs dangerous to the cause of international co-operation continue to originate in their camp. And in this connexion no small arsenal of means is put into action, ranging from the direct use of force against other countries and peoples to demagoguery which exploits the tenacity of the "cold-war" dogmas and sows doubts as to the benefits of detente for all peoples.
152.	The same forces which once in the past sought to thwart the convening of the all-European Conference, and later on tried to prevent it from succeeding, attempt to question the effectiveness of its results.
153.	However the problem does not only lie in tendentious propaganda campaigns against detente and international actions aimed at deepening it; what is even more dangerous is the continuous policy of interference which endangers the independence of States, even though such a policy may be camouflaged words in defense of the ideals of freedom and democracy. Two years ago, this policy paved the way for the bloody Fascist coup in Chile. Today, almost the same methods are used to exacerbate the situation concerning some other countries.
154.	The world is deeply concerned over the blatant attempts to bring outside pressure to bear on Portugal, clearly made with the intent to compel the Portuguese people to abandon their chosen road of free development.
155.	The interests of solving the complex political and economic problems faced by Portugal require that a calm situation be ensured with regard to that country. No one can be allowed to flout the inalienable right of the Portuguese people to determine its destiny independently and without outside interference. Such is the position on which the Soviet Union has proceeded and will continue to proceed.
156.	Opponents of the process of detente will try to slow it down. But if we ask all those who, overtly or semi-overtly, today come out against the line of lessening international tensions what alternative they offer, they cannot come up with anything intelligible. In reality, their policy has but one answer, an answer which would tend to reserve this process and bring it back to the times of the "cold war".
157.	Herein lies the watershed between those who in practice stand for peace, for the improvement of relations between States and for the development of peaceful co-operation in all fields and they are backed by the peoples and those who reject this course in the development of world affairs, who would rather push the world towards the old path of tension, clashes between States, and an unrestrained arms race with all the ensuing dangers.
158.	All participants in this world forum of States would probably agree that one of the main tasks in the international sphere remains the elimination of the hot-beds of armed conflict. One need not dwell on the gravity of the threat when in this or that hot-bed the conflict suddenly flares up and again produces a crisis. The world has repeatedly faced such a turn of events and knows full well how hard it is to put out the flames of war.
159.	This, above all, concerns the Middle East, where a dangerous situation has persisted for many years.
160.	The essence of the conflict, its origins and causes are well knwon. What is required for the solution of the problem is no secret either. Only those do not see it who do not wish to. To establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle East in the interests of all States of the area and peoples inhabiting it, it is necessary that Israeli forces be withdrawn from all the Arab territories occupied by them in 1967; to ensure the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their right to establish their own State; to guarantee the rights of all the countries of the Middle East to independent development. I repeat, "all" the countries of the Middle East.
161.	A Middle East settlement cannot make headway if those crucial problems are left unsolved. Without their solution a settlement in the Middle East can only be delayed indefinitely, with increasing dangers for the situation. No palliative measures or camouflaging can change the substance of the matter.
162.	The problem of the Middle East must be free from an approach based on momentary considerations and publicity. It can be solved in the interests of the security and independence of all the countries of the region only in conditions of a serious and responsible approach to its solution.
163.	From all appearances, the circles which determine the political course of Israel have not yet realized that it is impossible to ensure the security of the country while trampling upon the legitimate rights of other countries which are jits neighbors. That policy naturally meets with broad condemnation. The Soviet Union, too, decisively condemns it.
164.	The main problems of the Middle East are still awaiting solution. There is appropriate machinery for their examination the Geneva Peace Conference. The Soviet Union stands for the reconvening of the Conference with the participation of all—and I stress "all"—parties concerned, including representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization. It will be recalled that the General Assembly at its twenty- ninth session reaffirmed by an overwhelming majority the right of the Arab people of Palestine to self-determination and national sovereignty [resolution 3236 (XXIX)\. The solution of the Palestine problem is an integral part of an over-all settlement in the Middle East. Today this is axiomatic and politicians cannot pretend that they do not see it.
165.	The main thing with which the participants should come to the Conference is a firm desire jointly to seek acceptable solutions. The Soviet Union, for its part, is ready to continue to do everything so that the Middle East may become an area of lasting and durable peace. That is what we mainly want to see in the Middle East, an area adjacent to the southern borders of our country.
166.	The Soviet Union consistently pursues a policy of friendship with the Arab countries, which are defending their just cause. This friendship is deeply ingrained and we do not believe that anyone will succeed in undermining it. The Soviet Union will continue to do everything in its power to consolidate this friendship on a basis of justice and principle.
167.	The situation in and around Cyprus still remains complicated. To satisfy interests alien to Cyprus the sovereignty of that small country and the inalienable rights of its people have been trampled upon for more than a year.
168.	The Soviet Union has consistently come out in defence of the independence and the territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the island, and for the settlement of the internal matters of their State by the two communities, Greek and Turkish, themselves. In other words, we are for the implementation of the well-known United Nations decisions on Cyprus. It is only on such a basis that a just settlement of the Cyprus problem and the elimination of this hotbed of tension will be possible.
169.	The precarious state of armistice obviously does not ensure the stabilization of the state of affairs on the Korean peninsula. The need to create conditions for establishing durable peace on the Korean peninsula and speeding up the peaceful reunification of Korea has long been pressing.
170.	Those goals would be served by a cessation of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people and, in the first place, the withdrawal from South Korea of all foreign troops stationed there under the United Nations flag, as well as by the conclusion of a peace treaty. It is the duty of the United Nations to assist in every possible way in taking such steps. This can be done on the basis of the proposals put forward at the current session of the General
Assembly by a large group of States, including the Soviet Union.
171.	The process of lessening tensions in the world, the very logic of its development, pose most acutely the question of the need to curb the arms race. The measures taken in this direction in recent years are to be commended. We attach great importance also to the negotiations now under way aimed at working out a new long-term agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States of America on the limitation of strategic offensive weapons. Its conclusion will be a new and major step forward, not only in bilateral Soviet-American relations, but in a wider international context as well.
172.	Hardly anyone would dispute the fact that everything that has been achieved in the field of disarm-ament so far represents but the first steps. Indeed, mankind so far has been unable to check the arms race or even substantially to slow down its pace. It goes on in the direction both of developing ever more destructive means of warfare and of building up the total volume of armaments.
173.	The Soviet Union is convinced that in the conditions of a relaxation of tensions in the world the prerequisites have been created for the implementation of effective measures which would end the arms race. In other words, it is now not only necessary but also possible to supplement political detente with military detente. The States participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe unanimously pronounced themselves in favor of this in the Final Act.
174.	The Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held last May at Geneva, came out for the implementation of broad measures for the limitation of the arms race ana fcr disarmament. It is precisely such specific steps towards easing the burden of armaments that become the touchstone for testing the genuine readiness of States and Governments to pursue the course of peace.
175.	The struggle for disarmament has always been and continues to be an integral part of the foreign policy line of the Soviet Union. The USSR is a permanent and active participant in negotiations on various aspects of the disarmament problem.
176.	We attach great importance to the lessening of military confrontation in areas where it is especially dangerous. Now, following the conclusion of the all- European Conference, one of the primary tasks is to find ways towards agreement on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe, without infringing the security of anyone. The Soviet Union will contribute in every way to the success of the talks on this problem currently under way in Vienna.
177.	Within the framework of the United Nations we have on more than one occasion already stated in detail our position on disarmament questions. And we have not merely stated it. The Soviet Union has put forward a large number of specific proposals many of which have formed the basis of important decisions adopted by the United Nations. We have consistently supported their implementation. This applies in particular to the resolution of the twenty- seventh session of the General Assembly on the non-use of force in international relations and the simultaneous permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)].
178.	Another question raised by the Soviet Union the reduction of the military budgets of States permanent members of the United Nations Security Council also retains the utmost importance..
179.	We consider it important speedily to conclude an international convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of techniques to influence the environment. The conclusion of such a convention would be not only a means of limiting the sphere of the arms race, but also an important means of preserving the environment, which would meet the vital interests of all States and peoples. We would like to express the hope that agreement will be reached on this matter in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, where a relevant draft is under consideration.
180.	In the field of disarmament, as in other matters, the Soviet Union adopts a realistic approach. It is constantly seeking areas of disarmament and arms- race limitation in which it is feasible to find commonly acceptable agreements.
181.	At the same time, we have never overlooked the main objective general and complete disarmament. We are of the view that this problem should be in the forefront of the attention of the World Disarmament Conference. The United Nations has already approved the idea of convening it. In that forum all countries of the world could, on an equal footing and freely, set out and compare their positions and outline ways and means of limiting and arresting the arms race.
182.	It is high time that efforts were made to complete preparations for the conference and to convene it. As is well known, this is something in which the Soviet Union will not be, and has not been, found wanting.
183.	The Soviet delegation would like to draw your attention to two aspects of the disarmament problem on which, in our view, decisions are required and can be taken in practice at the earliest possible date.
184.	We all realize the importance of scientific and technological progress. The mission of science is noble and humane in essence. It expands the horizons of human knowledge, makes knowledge a powerful force of economic development, of raising the well- being of peoples and their cultural levels, and links countries together by bonds of peaceful co-operation.
185.	Quite recently the entire world was given new proof of this. We are referring to the outstanding international experiment in outer space, the docking and joint flight of the Soviet and American space craft, "Soyuz" and "Apollo". The • handshake in orbit, as this experiment is now known, has rightfully become a symbol of the fruitful union of scientific achievements and the policy of peaceful coexistence.
186.	The USSR is a consistent champion of the use of science exclusively for peaceful purposes and in the interest of mankind, and is prepared for wide, large-scale co-operation in the sphere of science and technology with all States interested in this.
187.	However, the experience of the past shows that achievements in science and technology can be used for dangerous, even criminal purposes.
188.	With today's rapid development of science and technology in various countries new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction could emerge in various places. One can assume with a high degree of certainty that they would be even more ominous than those existing at present.
189.	None of this can be ignored. Further, it is well known how difficult it is to withdraw any weapon that has already been developed from the arsenals of States, and consequently how much safer and more reasonable it is to prevent its emergence in advance. If things are viewed from that angle, the need for, the urgency of, effective measures to prohibit the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction should become absolutely evident.
190.	Proceeding from this, aware of its responsibility as a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly as an important and urgent matter of item 126 entitled "Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons".
191.	We propose that States, and first of all the major Powers, conclude an agreement based on an undertaking neither to develop nor to manufacture new types and new systems of such weapons and not to assist in or encourage any activities in that direction.
192.	The need may arise to be more specific as to the categories of weapons which should be covered by the ban. The Soviet Union is prepared to take part in a detailed examination of this question in the course of appropriate negotiations. It is ready to speak out on the substance of this matter and to put forward most concrete proposals.
193.	The draft agreement which we submit to the General Assembly [see A/10243, annex] is worded in such a way that, while banning the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction, the agreement would not at the same time impede the economic, scientific and technical development of States parties and would not infringe their right to make use of scientific research and discoveries for peaceful purposes, for the benefit of people and without any discrimination.
194.	Such an international agreement would make a major contribution to the cause of limiting the arms race and to the cause of further easing international tensions. We should like to express our hope that our proposal will find support from the participants in this session and that other countries will join us in our initiative.
195.	In submitting^ our second proposal we were moved by the same concern, that of delivering mankind from the danger of war; by the desire to curb the race in the most pernicious weapons at present in the arsenals of States, nuclear weapons. Its purpose is to end completely nuclear weapon tests and thus radically to limit the practical possibilities for perfecting it further.
196.	Major steps have already been taken towards this aim: the 1963 Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water," and the 1974 Treaty between the USSR and the United States of America on the limitation of underground nuclear weapons tests.2
197.	_ In our view, conditions are ripe at present for the final step along this road: to conclude a broad international agreement imposing a ban on all nuclear weapon tests without exception.
198.	In line with this approach, the Soviet Union has already proposed the inclusion in the agenda of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Conclusion of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests" [item 122].
199.	In accordance with the draft treaty which is submitted for the consideration of Member States [see AH0241, annex], its adherents would undertake from now on not to manufacture nuclear weapons and to prohibit and prevent any test explosions of nuclear weapons in any environment, including the underground environment. Such an obligation must, of course, be assumed by all States, including all nuclear Powers.
200.	While outlawing all nuclear weapon tests, the treaty must not at the same time deny access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear explosions for both nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon countries.
201.	We hope that the General Assembly will support our initiative for the conclusion of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests.
202.	The implementation of the proposals submitted by the Soviet Union for consideration at the present session is in our view an integral part of the fulfillment of the general task which life itself has today made the corner-stone of all United Nations activities. The essence of the task is to promote the further development of the positive processes taking place in the world and to make them irreversible.
203.	We are convinced that the United Nations is equal to that task. Our world Organization has accumulated enormous experience in the multilateral co-operation of States. That valuable asset can and must be constantly employed for the benefit of peace.
204.	The successful fulfillment of its lofty mission by the United Nations as an important instrument for consolidating international security, particularly in the present-day most responsible period, presupposes constant enhancement of the effectiveness of its work. That need is ever greater, since some useful decisions of the United Nations still remain unimplemented, and that plays into the hands of those who would like to maintain hotbeds of the danger of war, colonial domination and remnants of racism.
205.	It would do no harm to recall once again from this rostrum that, as regards the obligation to comply strictly with the provisions of the United Nations Charter, there can be no exceptions for any of its Members. The Charter is the foundation of the entire structure of the United Nations. It has stood the test of time, and fully retains its significance for the future.
It is in the strict observance of the Charter, rather than in its revision, that one should look for resources for the further enhancement of the effectiveness of the United Nations and the strengthening of its authority.
206.	The lofty purposes and principles proclaimed in the Charter are an embodiment of the collective quest of the peoples for peace and progress. They were born out of the flames of the greatest tragedy that has ever befallen mankind. Celebrating this year the thirtieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War, the peoples look to the future with hope.
207.	The greatness of the exploits performed in the struggle against fascism and aggression by the peoples of the Soviet Union and the peoples of all countries who, during the years of war, combined their efforts in the name of victory and founded the United Nations, setting themselves the task of saving present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war, will never fade.
208.	In the three decades since the end of the Second World War a great distance has been covered in the struggle for international security. Particularly impressive are the successes achieved in recent years, which graphically prove that the prevention of wars between States is not a Utopian but an attainable goal. However, that must not be a source of complacency. There is still much to be done to achieve a truly stable peace on earth.
209.	As for the Soviet Union, we wish to see no stops on this road, no zigzags and, above all, no reversals. Substantial steps in that direction can be made here, at this General Assembly, and we are willing to take a most active part in this common endeavor.



At the outset, let me say how pleased we are that our deliberations this year take place under the presidency of the Prime Minister of Luxembourg. His contribution to European co-operation, his diplomatic skills,
' his devotion to democracy, give us confidence that this thirtieth session will be marked by a constructive and creative spirit.
63.	I want also to pay a tribute to the Secretary- General, whose fairness, leadership and tireless efforts are dedicated to carrying this Organization forward into a new era of co-operation for world peace.
64.	This century has seen war and cataclysm on an unprecedented scale. It has witnessed the breakdown of established patterns of order and practices of international conduct. It has suffered global economic depression and cycles of famine. It has experienced the birth of thermonuclear weapons, and the proliferation of armaments around the planet.
65.	But this century has also seen the triumph of the principle of self-determination and national independence. A truly global community has begun to evolve, and this development is reflected in a multitude of institutions of international co-operation. We have shaped new methods of peaceful settlement and of arms limitation, and new institutions to promote economic development and to combat hunger and disease world-wide.
66.	As we deliberate the future, an event of potentially vast implications has just been achieved in this Organization: the unanimous agreement produced by the seventh special session of the General Assembly on measures to improve the economic condition of mankind [resolution 3362 (S-VII)].
67.	Despite differences of ideology and of approaches to economic development, the nations assembled here began the move towards the recognition that our interdependence spells either common progress or common disaster; that in our age no nation or group of nations can achieve its aims by pressure or by confrontation and that the attempt to do so would damage everyone. They agreed to transcend the stereotypes of the past in the search for a co-operative future. The seventh special session forged a sense of common purpose based on the equality and co-operation of States. Now we must dedicate ourselves to the implementation of this consensus.
68.	Let us carry forward the spirit of conciliation into the deliberaDigitiZed by Dag HammarSkjoid LibraryLet us address the issues of world peace the foundation of all we do on this planet with this same consciousness of our common destiny. It is our duty to avoid empty slogans and endless recrimination.
69.	Only in a structure of co-operation can disputes be settled and clashes contained. Only in an atmosphere of conciliation can the insecurity of nations, out of which so much conflict arises, be eased, and habits of compromise and accommodation be nurtured. Social progress, justice and human rights can thrive only in an atmosphere of reduced international tension.
70.	The United States stands ready to dedicate itself to co-operative efforts to harmonize the different perspectives of the world community in creating a new sense of security and well-being. We do so, not out of fear, for we are better able to sustain ourselves in situations of confrontation than most other nations. Nor do we do so out of a sense of guilt, for we believe that on the whole we have used our power for constructive ends.
71.	We affirm our common destiny because of our recognition of global interdependence and because global peace requires it. Indeed there is no realistic alternative to shared responsibility in dealing with the international agenda of peace, security, economic well-being and justice.
72.	Let me set forth the views of the United States on the work we face in each of these areas.
73.	Our first and transcendent concern is for peace in the world. Peace is never automatic. It is more than the absence of war. And it is inseparable from security, A world in which the survival of nations is at the mercy of a few would spell oppression and injustice and fear. There can be no security without equilibrium and no safety without restraint.
74.	Only when the rights of nations are respected, when accommodation supplants force, can man's energies be devoted to the realization of his deepest aspirations.
75.	The United States will pursue the cause of peace with patience and an attitude of conciliation in many spheres. We shall nurture and deepen the ties of co-operation with our friends and allies. We shall strive to improve relations with countries of different ideology or political conviction. We shall always stand ready to assist in the settlement of regional disputes. We shall intensify our efforts to halt the spiral of nuclear armaments. We shall strive to improve man's economic and social condition and to strengthen the collaboration between developed and developing nations. And we shall struggle for the realization of fundamental human rights.
76.	America's close ties with the industrial democracies of North America, Western Europe and Japan have been the corner-stone of world stability and peace for three decades. Today, looking beyond immediate security and defence, we are working together on a range of new issues. Through our consultations, we have begun joint efforts to ease inter-national tensions; to co-ordinate our national policies for economic recovery; to work together on common challenges such as energy and the environment; and to address the great issues that concern the developing countries.
77.	In the same spirit, the United States has opened a new dialog with its neighbors in Central and Latin America. We have taken important steps towards resolving major political problems; we have begun close consultations for co-operation in promoting economic and social development. Alliance relations in the Western Hemisphere have a long history and great promise for the future. With imagination and dedication, we can make inter-American co-operation on the tasks of development an example to and a pillar of the global community.
78.	Peace, to be secure, must place on a more durable and reliable basis the relations between the nations possessing the means to destroy our planet.
79.	In recent years, the bipolar confrontation of the last generation has given way to the beginning of dialog and an easing of direct conflict. In this body, of all organizations, there is surely an appreciation of the global importance of lessened tension between the nuclear super-Powers. All nations have a stake in its success. When weapons of mass destruction can span continents in minutes, nuclear conflict threatens the survival of all mankind.
80.	We recognize that the suspicion and rivalry of a generation will not be swept away with a document or a conference. Real ideological and political differences exist. We shall firmly defend our vital interests and those of our friends. But we shall also never lose sight of the fact that in our age peace is a practical necessity and a moral imperative. We shall pursue the relaxation of tensions on the basis of strict reciprocity. We know the difference between posturing and policy; we will not encourage the belief that anyone can benefit from artificial tensions. We are deeply conscious that we owe it to future generations not to be swayed by momentary passions.
81.	The state of United States-Soviet relations today and just a decade ago presents a dramatic contrast. The world is no longer continually shaken by chronic and bitter confrontations. Periodic consultations including those held at the highest level encourage restraint and amplify areas of mutual interest. The forthcoming meeting between the President of the United States, Mr. Ford, and the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, should strengthen this process.
82.	Principles of mutual restraint have been enunciated at various summit meetings; they were reaffirmed by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe two months ago. These principles provide a standard of behavior by which our actions will be tested. If they are observed as we insist and if neither side seeks unilateral advantage, the specter of general war will be lifted not only from our own peoples but from all nations. There can be no more important task before us.
83.	We have likewise pursued more constructive and beneficial relationships with the countries of Eastern Europe. The United States has many traditional and deep-rooted bonds of friendship with the proud peoples of that region. We see widening possibilities for practical co-operation as the barriers between East and West in Europe diminish.

84.	There is no relationship to which the United States assigns greater significance than its new ties with the People's Republic of China. We believe that the well-being and progress of a quarter of humanity is an important element in global stability. The hostility of decades between our two nations has been replaced by a relationship of mutual respect which is now a durable feature of the world scene. It serves not only the interest of our two countries but also the broader interests of peace and stability in Asia and around the world. President Ford plans to visit the People's Republic of China later this year to confirm the vitality of our relationship and to advance the ties between us on the basis of the strict implementation of the Shanghai Communique. We take seriously the process of normalizing our relationship. We are dedicated to pursuing it.
85.	The world community must find a way to contain or resolve regional conflicts before they spread into global confrontation. Nowhere has the danger been greater than in the Middle East. Nowhere has the need for persistent and imaginative negotiation between suspicious rivals been more evident. Nowhere is there greater promise of moving from perennial crisis towards peace. Nowhere has the Security Council established a clearer framework than in its resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
86.	The road towards a lasting peace stretches long and hard before us. The Middle East has seen more than its share of dashed hopes and disappointment. But the conclusion of the recent Sinai agreement1 marks a major step forward. It is the first agreement in the long and tragic history of the Arab-Israeli conflict which is not the immediate consequence of hostilities. It could mark a turning-point.
87.	The agreement deserves the support of all the countries assembled here because every nation here has an interest in progress towards peace in the Middle East. It is another step in the process launched by Security Council resolution 338 (1973). The alternative was a continuing stalemate which would have led over time to another war creating a serious threat to world peace and the prospect of global economic confrontations.
88.	Neither fear of the future nor pride should obscure the fact that an unusual opportunity for further progress on all issues now exists. But opportunities must be seized or they will disappear. I want to emphasize that the United States did not help negotiate this agreement in order to put an end to the process of peace, but to give it new impetus.
89.	President Ford has stated that we will not accept stalemate or stagnation in the Middle East. That was true before the Sinai agreement was signed; it remains true today. The objective of our policy is not merely to create another temporary truce but to sustain the momentum of negotiations. The United States is determined to take every feasible step to help promote further practical progress towards final peace.
90.	As a first step, it is essential that the Sinai agreement be carried out impeccably, within the terms and the time-frame that are stipulated.
91.	In the improved atmosphere thus created, the United States stands ready to participate in any promising initiative towards peace at the request of the parties concerned.
92.	We have made clear that we are prepared to make a serious effort to encourage negotiations between Syria and Israel.
93.	We also intend to consult over the coming weeks with all concerned regarding the reopening of the Geneva Conference which met at an early crucial phase. As co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference together with the Soviet Union, our two countries have special responsibilities in this regard.
94.	We are prepared also to explore possibilities for perhaps a more informal multilateral meeting to assess conditions and to discuss the future.
95.	The United States seeks no special benefit; we do not attempt to exclude any country. We will cooperate with any nation that is willing to make a contribution. We have no preference for any particular procedure. We will support whatever process seems most promising. Our approach will continue to be both flexible and determined.
96.	The search for final peace must be conducted on a wide basis. We are in frequent touch with Governments in the Middle East. We have begun discussions with the Soviet Union with a view to assessing the current situation and weighing possible diplomatic approaches to bring about a just and durable peace in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). While we have had important differences with the Soviet Union, our two countries have held parallel views that the situation in the Middle East poses grave dangers and that partial steps must be part of and contribute to progress towards a comprehensive settlement.
97.	The role of the world Organization remains essential. If this Organization had no other accomplishment than its effective peace-keeping role in this troubled area, it would have well justified itself. These soldiers of peace, wearing the blue beret of the United Nations, as members of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine, the United Nations Emergency Force, and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force have become indispensable to the maintenance of the two 1974 disengagement accords as well as the Sinai agreement. I want to take this occasion to salute the Secretary- General, Mr. Waldheim, and his staff, and General Siilasvuo, the Chief Coordinator of the United Nations peace-keeping missions in the Middle East, and all the men and women from many countries who have served in these forces which have no enemy.
98.	The deliberations of this Assembly regarding the Middle East also play a central role. They can encourage progress or exacerbate tensions. Procedural decisions can be based on the recognition that dialog requires universality of membership, or they can fuel a futile, self-defeating effort to discriminate in violation of the Charter against a Member State whose participation is vital for a solution.
99.	The Middle East will continue to be an area of anguish, turmoil, and peril until a just and durable peace is achieved. Such a peace must meet the principal concerns and interests of all in the area; among and security and the legitimate interests of the Palestinians.
100.	In the Middle East today here is a yearning for peace surpassing any known for three decades. Let us not doom the region to another generation of futile struggle. Instead, let the world community seize the historic opportunity before it. The suffering of all the peoples of the Middle East cry out for it; the hopes and interests of all the world's peoples demand it. The United States promises its full dedication to further progress towards peace.
101.	The contribution of the United Nations to the process of peace is essential in Cyprus as well. The Secretary-General has the responsibilities of organizing the peace-keeping forces on the island and of facilitating the talks between the leaders of the Greek and Turkish communities.
102.	Strict maintenance of the cease-fire is imperative. For this we look to the restraint of the parties and the efficacy of the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
103.	We know that the world community shares our sense of urgency that the negotiating process be resumed and that the parties demonstrate flexibility and statesmanship. The status quo on the island must not become permanent; a rapid and equitable solution is essential. The Secretary-General has worked tirelessly and imaginatively under the most difficult circumstances to narrow the differences. He deserves the full support of the parties and of every nation here.
104.	The details of a Cyprus settlement are for the two communities themselves to decide. However, in keeping with United Nations resolutions which the United States has fully supported, the following principles are believed by my Government to be essential:
(a)	A settlement must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It must ensure that both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot communities can live in freedom and have a large voice in their own affairs.
(b)	The present dividing lines cannot be permanent. There must be movement from these lines to agreed territorial arrangements which reflect the economic requirements of the Greek Cypriot community and take account of its self-respect.
(t ) There must be provision for the withdrawal of foreign military forces other than those present under the authority of international agreements.
(id) There must be security for all Cypriots; the needs and wishes of the refugees who have been the principal victims and whose tragic plight touches us all must be dealt with speedily and with compassion.
105.	Another area where this Organization will be called upon to take responsible actions is the Korean peninsula. This requires, above all, maintenance of the armistice, pending agreement by all of the parties most directly concerned to replace it with a new arrangement. The existing Armistice Agreement is the only legal instrument committing the parties to maintain the peace. It is a carefully designed structure for monitoring and policing the military demarcation line.
106.	The United Nations Commander-in-Chief is a signatory to that Agreement. The armistice machinery functions daily. None of the signatories has repudiated it. Nor could they do so without serious risks to the peace of the world.
107.	Since 1972, South and North Korea have pledged themselves to enter into a dialog and to seek unification without resort to arms. This Assembly in 1973 and 1974 encouraged this process first in a consensus supporting talks between the two sides, then in a resolution [resolution 3333 (XXIX)] which looked towards termination of the United Nations Command. The United States agrees that 20 years after the end of the Korean war it is timely to terminate the United Nations Command. We have, in fact, sponsored a draft resolution to that effect which is now before you.
108.	It would be foolhardy, however, to terminate the United Nations Command without new arrangements to preserve the integrity of the Armistice Agreement. In the interest of peace, the United States cannot accept any solution which fails to provide for the continuing validity of the Armistice Agreement.
109.	The Republic of Korea and the United States have stated their general readiness to meet with representatives of the other side and with other members of the Security Council to discuss the termination of the United Nations Command while preserving the Armistice Agreement.
110.	Today I can be more specific. The United States and the Republic of Korea, looking forward to the time when a lasting solution of the Korean problem can be achieved, are herewith proposing to the parties to the Armistice Agreement the convening of a conference to discuss ways to preserve it. At such a meeting we would also be prepared to explore other measures to reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula, including the possibility of a larger conference to negotiate a more fundamental arrangement.
111.	It would be in keeping with this spirit of dialog for this body to open its doors to full membership for the two Korean Governments. The United States supports the dual entry of both South and North Korea into the United Nations without prejudice to their eventual reunification. For our part, if North Korea and its allies would move to improve their relations with the Republic of Korea we would be prepared to take similar reciprocal action. It goes without saying that no proposal for security arrangements on the Korean peninsula which attempts to exclude the Republic of Korea from the discussions can be accepted by the United States.
112.	The United Nations can contribute significantly to the process of peace on the Korean peninsula by supporting a responsible approach.
113.	Over the past year the United States has followed carefully and with great sympathy the efforts to reach peaceful settlements in southern Africa.
114.	We welcome the statesmanlike efforts of both black and white African leader: who are seeking to prevent violence and bloodshed and to promote a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. The differences between the two communities in that country, while substantial, have been narrowed in the last decade. Both sides in Rhodesia, and Rhodesia's neighbors,
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
war. The United States will support all efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement.
115.	In underlining our goal of peaceful change for southern Africa, I want to emphasize the importance of an early settlement in Namibia. My Government's opposition to South Africa's continuing occupation of Namibia and our rejection of South Africa's apartheid system are well known. The United States has consistently conveyed our position on this subject to South Africa. We will continue to do so.
116.	We believe that the people of Namibia should be given the opportunity, within a short time, to express their views on the political future and constitutional structure of their country, freely and under United Nations supervision.
117.	Peace in the world will be fragile and tenuous without a curb and, eventually, an end to the arms race. This is why the United States has embarked, with the Soviet Union, upon the difficult and complex negotiation to limit strategic arms. Our objectives are to prevent unchecked destabilizing competition in strategic armaments; to achieve reduction of these arms; to lessen further the likelihood of hasty decisions in times of crisis; and to ease the economic burden of the nuclear arms race.
118.	The Vladivostok accord of last autumn marked a major step towards achieving these goals. When this agreement in principle is translated into a treaty, agreed ceilings will be placed on strategic force levels for a 10-year period. This unprecedented step will slow the pace of new arms programs, especially those driven by fear of major deployments by the other side.
119.	The United States is actively engaged in other amis control negotiations. Together with the Soviet Union, we have made progress towards establishing a regime for peaceful nuclear explosions, and we have agreed to set a threshold on the underground testing of nuclear weapons. These are significant steps towards a. verifiable comprehensive test ban.
120.	In addition, the United States and the Soviet Union have presented to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament identical drafts of a convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques [A/10027, annex II, documents CCDI47I and CCD/472]. Misuse of this knowledge might open new avenues of military competition and wreak untold and irreversible harm upon all humanity. We urge the Conference to complete its consideration rapidly.
121.	Another urgent task is a substantia] reduction in the high levels of military forces now confronting each other in various parts of the world. The United States believes that the time has come to give new impetus to the negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions in central Europe. The significance of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe depends to an important extent on whether we can achieve progress in this area. An agreement that enhances mutual security in central Europe is feasible and essential. We will work towards that goal.
122.	The world faces a paradox with respect to the proliferation of nuclear energy. Men have fashioned from the atom weapons which can in minuter end the civilization of centuries. Simultaneously, the atom is fast becoming a more and more essential source of energy. It is clear that the cost and eventual scarcity of oil and other fossil fuels will increasingly spread nuclear power around the world in the decades ahead.
123.	But the spreading of nuclear power poses starkly the danger of proliferating nuclear weapons capabilities and the related risks of the theft of nuclear materials, blackmail by terrorists, accidents or the injection of the nuclear threat into regional political conflicts. Now is the time to act. If we fail to restrain nuclear proliferation, future generations will live on a planet shadowed by nuclear catastrophe.
124.	Over the past year the United States has repeatedly urged new efforts among the supplier States to strengthen and standardize safeguards and controls on the export of nuclear materials. We must not allow these safeguards to be eroded by commercial competition. We must ensure the broad availability of peaceful nuclear energy under safe, economical and reliable conditions.
125.	The United States has intensified its efforts within the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA ] and with other nations to broaden and strengthen international standards and safeguards, and has proposed an international convention setting standards to protect the physical security of nuclear materials in use, storage and transfer.
126.	The United States continues to urge the widest possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] and the associated safeguard measures of the IAEA.
127.	The greatest single danger of unrestrained nuclear proliferation resides in the spread, under national control, of reprocessing facilities for the atomic materials in nuclear power plants. The United States therefore proposes, as a major step to reinforce all other measures, the establishment of multinational regional nuclear fuel-cycle centers. These centers would serve energy needs on a commercially sound basis and encourage regional energy co-operation. Their existence would reduce the incentive for small and inefficient reprocessing facilities, limit the possibility of diverting peaceful nuclear materials to national military use, and create a better framework for applying effective international safeguards.
128.	We urge that groups of nations begin now to explore this concept and that all States support the work of the IAEA in this field.
129.	In the last two years the world community has been reminded dramatically to what extent economic relations are an essential foundation of the economic order. It would be one of history's most tragic ironies if, at a time when .. i are putting behind us the tensions of the cold war, we were to enter a new period of conflict between North and South, rich and poor. At the recently concluded seventh special session, the United States called for an end to the sterile confrontations of the past. We stated that, when the ancient dream of mankind, a world without poverty, becomes a possibility, our moral convictions also make it a duty. And we emphasized that only co-operation, not extortion, can achieve gives us ground for hope that, at least for the immediate future, a choice has been made to turn away from confrontation towards co-operation. The United States is proud to support the final document [resolution 3362 (S-VII)], which is the product of the arduous effort and dedication of so many in this chamber.
130.	The United States considers the achievements of the seventh special session a beginning, not an end. As recommended in the final report, we must now move forward in available forums to give reality and content to the objectives on which we have agreed. In the difficult negotiations ahead my Government will participate energetically, in a co-operative and conciliatory spirit.
131.	Beyond peace, security and prosperity lies a deeper universal aspiration to dignity and equal opportunity. Mankind will never be spared all the tragedies inherent in the cycle of life and death. But we do have it in our power to eliminate or to ease the burden of social tragedy and of organized injustice.
132.	The United States has traditionally been an advocate of extending the reach of international law in international affairs. We have offered our help to the victims of disease and natural disaster. There is no longer any dispute that international human rights are on the agenda of international diplomacy.
133.	The reach of international law must extend to the last frontiers of our planet, the oceans. They are the common heritage of mankind, but they can turn into arenas of conflict unless governed by law. They hold untapped sources of energy, minerals and proteins; their environmental integrity is crucial to our survival.
134.	The United States welcomes the United Nations mandate for a comprehensive treaty governing the use of the oceans and their resources. Last month at Montreal I set forth our approach to this negotiation and urged that next year's session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea move matters to a rapid and successful conclusion. No international negotiation is more vital for long-term political and economic stability and the prosperity of our globe.
135.	International law must also come to grips with international terrorism. Innumerable innocent lives have been lost as a consequence of the lack of internationally accepted standards specifically designed to avert unlawful and dangerous interference with civil aviation. The hijacking of aircraft, the kidnapping and murder of innocent civilian victims for presumed political gain remain a plague on civilized man. This remains one of the under-developed areas of international law which merits the most urgent attention of this Organization.
136.	Compassion for our fellow men requires also that we mobilize international resources to combat the age-old scourges of mankind: disease, famine and natural disaster.
137.	The great human rights must be recognized, respected and given reality in the affairs of nations. The earliest United Nations declarations and the recent Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe leave no doubt that these are matters of international concern. The United States will support these principles. Throughout the world, in all continents, violations of human rights must be opposed whether they are inflicted by one race upon another or upon members of the same race. Human rights must be cherished regardless of race, sex or religion. There can be no double standard.
138.	The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has taken its first steps against gross violations of human rights where serious and reliable allegations are submitted by individuals. We support those steps. The organized concern of the world community can be a potent weapon in the war against degradation of human values.
139.	One of the most persistent and serious problems is torture, a practice which all nations should abhor. It is an absolute debasement of the function of government with  its overwhelming power is used not for people's welfare but as an instrument of their suffering.
140.	The United States urges this Assembly to adopt the draft Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, recommended for adoption by the Assembly by the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Geneva recently.4 In addition, we propose that this General Assembly establish a group of experts, to be appointed by the Secretary-General, to study the nature and extent of torture in the world today and to report back to the next session of our Assembly.
141.	This Organization was created in the belief that the universality of the human race can be reflected in the conduct of international affairs. This Chamber symbolizes the hope that mankind places in the force of nations working together in the common interest, with reason, responsibility and mutual respect.
142.	The problems we face are complex and perilous. The sterile slogans of yesterday, the solutions of the past, the dwelling upon old resentments, can only widen the gaps between us and allow the dangers to peace and the well-being of our peoples to fester and to grow.
143.	We have it in our power to prove to future generations that the last quarter of the twentieth century was not an era of violence and conflict, but one of the creative epochs of world history.
144.	My country's history tells us that it is possible to fashion unity while cherishing diversity; that common action is possible despite the variety of races, interests and beliefs we see here in this Chamber. Progress and peace and justice are attainable.
145.	So we say to all peoples and all Governments: let us fashion together a new world order. Let its arrangements be just. Let the new nations help shape it and feel it is theirs. Let the old nations use their strengths and skills for the benefit of all mankind. Let us all work together to enrich the spirit and to ennoble mankind.
60. Profound changes have taken place in the international situation since the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly. A serious capitalist economic crisis plagues most parts of the world. All the basic contradictions in the world are becoming sharper. The trend of revolution by the people of the world is actively developing. The Asian, African and Latin American peoples have advanced valiantly and won a series of significant victories in their struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism. On the other hand, the contention between the two super-Powers for world hegemony has become more md more intense. The whole world is in greater turbulence and unrest. Rhetoric about detente cannot cover up the stark reality. The danger of war is visibly growing.
61.	First of all, it should be pointed out that the great victory of the three Indo-Chinese peoples has shaken the world. The Cambodian and Vietnamese peoples have thoroughly defeated United States imperialism and its lackeys, thus making an important contribution to the anti-imperialist cause of the people of the world and greatly inspiring all oppressed nations and oppressed people. Their victory is a brilliant example showing that a weak nation can defeat a strong one, and a small nation can defeat a big one.
62.	The peoples of Asia are strongly against superPower interference and control and against the attempt of any country to seek hegemony in any part of Asia. The South-East Asian countries want their region to become a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality, free from any form or manner of interference by outside Powers. This position of theirs has won the recognition and respect of an increasing number of countries. The struggle of the South Asian peoples against expansionism and hegemonism has made new progress. In West Asia, long-standing disputes have been resolved by the countries concerned which excluded foreign influence and conducted consultations on an equal footing, thus creating favorable conditions for friendly co-operation among the countries in the region. The Gulf countries are uniting in the common struggle against super-Power infiltration and control.
63.	In Africa, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and the Comoros have achieved independence, one after another. This is the result of their persistence in protracted struggles, particularly armed struggles. The struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania against racism and white rule is developing in depth. The situation on the African continent is most encouraging.
64.	The struggle of the Latin American peoples to combat imperialism and hegemonism, safeguard State sovereignty and defend their national natural resources and economic rights and interests has continued to surge forward. Those peoples have reinforced their unity in the struggle in various ways.
65.	Furthermore, we are pleased to see that in Oceania Papua New Guinea has recently achieved its national independence.
66.	In order to change the old international economic order and oppose the shifting of economic crises, the third-world countries have, in pursuance of the Declaration and program of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order [resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)], adopted by the General Assembly at its sixth special session, advanced many reasonable proposals and waged unremitting struggles at various conferences and achieved marked successes.
67.	The unity and struggle of the third-world countries, extending from the political to the economic sphere, have ushered in a new stage in the revolutionary cause of the people of the world against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism.
68.	The countries of the second world have also heightened their struggle against super-Power, and particularly social-imperialist, control, intervention, subversion and threat of force. The trend among the West European countries to unite against hegemonism has continued to grow. The second world has increased its dialog and contacts with the third world. Such co-operation will doubtless have good prospects for development as long as it is based on mutual respect for sovereignty and equality.
69.	The contention between the two super-Powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, extends to all parts of the world. Those Powers are intensifying iheir strife in Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, the Indian Ocean, the Pacific, the Atlantic, Asia, Africa and Latin America. Strategically, Europe is the focus of their contention. Social- imperialism is making a feint to the East while attacking in the West. This was revealed, rather than covered up, by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The two super-Powers do reach some agreements from time to time, but these only erect a facade, behind which they are engaged in bigger and fiercer contention.
70.	Take, for example, the agreement in principle reached at the United States-Soviet summit meeting last November on the limitation of strategic offensive arms. This agreement only sets a numerical limit on the arms in question, which exceeds the amount each side possesses at the moment, while qualitatively' it sets no limit at all. It is evident, therefore, that such an agreement should more appropriately be called an agreement on strategic arms expansion rather than an agreement on strategic arms limitation. Facts are at hand to prove this. Since the signing of this agreement, the United States and the Soviet Union have both stepped up their development and deployment of new types of strategic arms, each trying hard to overpower the other.
71.	Of late, the Soviet Union has made use of the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to turn out much propaganda alleging that detente has progressed to a new stage. This is sheer deception. We are aware of the eager desire for security on the part of the many small and medium-sized countries which participated in that Conference. We are also aware that such countries have no illusions about its agreements, which have no binding force. What security let alone detente— is there to speak of when Europe remains in the prolonged state of tense armed confrontation? While chanting "peace and security" in the conference hall, the Soviet Union made moves to aggravate tension outside. It not only concentrated massive military forces and carried out unbridled provocations in the seas of northern Europe and the Mediterranean, but it has also brazenly stretched its tentacles to the
Iberian peninsula. Such deeds of expansion coupled with words of detente are a huge mockery of the Conference. From its inception we considered the Conference a European insecurity conference. Now that this Conference has ended, is there greater security in Europe? In our view, no. The Conference has not altered the basis situation in Europe in the least. If one should be so naive as to believe in Soviet propaganda, that would be dangerous indeed.
72.	The Soviet leadership hankers after a so-called "Asian collective security system". Now that the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has been a success, as they say, we Asian countries should learn from its example. What a bright idea! The situation in Asia, however, is different from that in Europe. It was only a short while ago that a super-Power was driven out of Indo-China. So the purpose of the Soviet Union is not the preservation of Asian security; rather, it is to "fill the vacuum" and at the same time divert world attention to Asia to cover up the fact that Europe is the focus of its strategy. As for the principle of the inviolability of existing frontiers that was stressed at the European security Conference, what implications would it have in Asia? Is it that the Soviet Union wants, us to recognize as legal its occupation of the territories of some Asian countries while at the same fame allowing it to reserve the right to support one Asian country in violating the existing frontiers of another, as it did in 1971? To put it bluntly, the idea of a so-called "Asian collective security system" peddled by the Soviet leadership is designed to facilitate its contention with the other super-Power for hegemony in the Asia- Pacific region and serves as a means by which it seeks to divide and control the Asian countries. But the Asian countries, which won their independence after protracted struggles, know well that in order to be masters in their own house they must never "let the tiger in through the back door while expelling the wolf through the front gate". China's attitude towards this stuff of "Asian collective security system" is clear- cut: first, we are against it; second, we despise it.
73.	As Lenin pointed out time and again, imperialism means war. So long as imperialism and social-imperialism exist, war is inevitable. The content of imperialist politics is world domination, and the continuation of this politics is imperialist war. Since both super-Powers are after world domination, the contradiction between them is irreconcilable; one either overpowers the other, or is overpowered. The so- called "balance of power", even if it exists, is only a transient and superficial one. It will not do to depend on a "balance of power" or a so-called "balance of terror" for maintaining peace. Khrushchev's brainchild that peaceful coexistence is the only alternative in this nuclear age is a hypocritical lie. If the Soviet Union took this stuff seriously, why should it frantically develop conventional armed forces in addition to energetically developing nuclear arms and maintain an offensive posture far exceeding its defense needs? With the super-Powers contending so fiercely and expanding their armaments so madly, they are bound to go to war against each other some day. This is independent of man's will. The super-Powers are the source of a new world war, and the danger of war comes mainly from the wildly ambitious social-imperialism. The frequent meetings between the superpowers and their profuse talk about detente precisely prove that there is no detente, let alone lasting peace, in this world. What characterizes the current world situation is decidedly not an irreversible process of detente but the approaching danger of a new world war.
74.	We hope that the people of all countries will heighten their vigilance and get prepared in view of the growing danger of a new world war. It is better to be prepared than unprepared. Without preparations one will suffer. The super-Powers look strong but are inwardly weak and very isolated. The more evils they do, the more thoroughly they will reveal their true features, and the stronger the resistance of the people of the world will become. At present, the factors for both revolution and war are increasing on a world scale. Whether war gives rise to revolution or revolution prevents war, in either case the international situation will develop in a direction favorable to the people. And the future of the world will be bright.
75.	Numerous questions will be considered at the current session of the General Assembly. The Chinese delegation would like to state our views on some of them.
76.	First, there is the question of opposing colonialism. The past year was a year in which the African people continued to win important victories in their straggle for national independence and liberation. With the collapse of the Portuguese colonial system and the glorious birth of a number of newly independent States, the African national liberation movement has advanced to a new stage, and the last strongholds of colonialism in southern Africa are assailed from all sides by the multitude of African people and countries persisting in struggle.
77.	But even before old-line colonialism dies out, the two super-Powers have already stepped in. The United States has long supported colonial race in Africa, and southern Africa in particular. The Soviet Union, flaunting the banner of "socialism", has infiltrated the African national liberation movement to sow discord and stir up trouble in an attempt to bring the movement within its social-imperialist orbit.
78.	All revolutionary peoples of the world are saddened by the civil war in Angola. Differences within a national liberation movement are something normal. The correct attitude is to encourage unity in their common struggle to combat the enemy and drive out the colonialists. That is why the Organization of African Unity has recognized and supported all the three liberation organizations in Angola engaged in armed struggle and has made tireless efforts to promote unity in the Angolan national liberation movement. But the Soviet leadership, which considers itself as the patron of the national liberation movement, disregards the agreement reached among the three Angolan organizations on unity against the enemy and has, through its propaganda media, identified one organization as revolutionary and censured another as reactionary in a deliberate attempt to create division. Furthermore, it has sent large quantities of arms, including heavy arms, to one of the Angolan organizations. That was how t? civil war was provoked in Angola. The other super-Power, on its part, has not lagged behind. The situation in Angola is becoming ever more complicated.
79.	From the very beginning, China has given its support to the national liberation movement in Angola. We gave military aid to all three Angolan liberation organizations to help them fight Portuguese colonialism. Being aware of their differences, we have all along urged them to unite against the enemy. After the agreement on independence was reached between the Angolan national liberation movement and Portugal, we stopped giving new military aid to the three Angolan organizations. Such are the facts, and facts are more eloquent than words. The Soviet slanders against China can in no way cover up the truth; instead, they serve to lay bare the true features of the Soviet Union.
80.	The civil war in Angola instigated by the Soviet Union is a bad thing, but a good thing too. It is good precisely because it serves as teaching material by negative example. All revolutionary movements are bound to go through twists and turns. We believe that the broad masses of the Angolan people, after experiencing setbacks and detours, will certainly uphold unity, persist in struggle, frustrate the super-Power and particularly social-imperialist schemes and achieve their independence and liberation. Their temporary difficulties and sacrifices will not only greatly enhance their own political awareness, but also provide a profound lesson for the liberation movements of the oppressed nations throughout the world.
81.	An excellent situation prevails in Africa. It was because the racists in southern Africa were driven into a corner that Vorster of South Africa prorosed "dialog" between the minority white regime of Southern Rhodesia and the Zimbabwe national liberation organizations. This signifies only the weakness of the racists, not their strength. Through such tactics they intend to disintegrate the national liberation movement and to preserve the reactionary white rule. The recent twelfth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity penetratingly stated that " Vorster's detente manoeuvres on Rhodesia are a transparent trick to frustrate majority rule and to disarm the freedom-fighters". The Assembly stressed the necessity of armed struggle, called on the Zimbabwe' people to intensify immediately their armed struggle and expressed a determination to fight by every means possible the white racist regimes until their complete elimination. We warmly support this correct stand. We have always advocated the use of revolutionary dual tactics against the reactionaries' counter-revolutionary dual tactics. Armed struggle is fundamental; the people's armed forces must be strengthened and not weakened, negotiations or no negotiations. Deviations and detours may sometimes occur in the complicated struggle against counter-revolutionary dual tactics. But the people will sum up their experience, overcome difficulties and continue to advance. Through long and tortuous struggles the people of southern Africa will eventually win the complete liberation of the African continent.
82. Secondly, I take up the Korean question. The independent and peaceful reunification of Korea is the common aspiration of the entire Korean people. Over the years the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea has put forward many reasonable proposals and propositions for the peaceful reunification of the fatherland. Thanks to its initiative, an agreement was reached with the South Korean authorities in 1972 on the three principles for independent and peaceful reunification, which were affirmed by the General Assembly in 1973.2 However, Korea remains divided today, because the Chung Hee Park clique, supported by the United States, has abandoned these principles and sabotaged the North-South talks.
83.	Under the impact of the great victory of the Indo-Chinese peoples this year, United States imperialism became panicky and endlessly repeated the myth of a so-called "threat of a southward invasion from the north" concocted by the Chung Hee Park clique, deliberately played up the tension on the Korean peninsula and even declared that it would not hesitate to use nuclear weapons there. Backed and abetted by the United States, the Chung Hee Park clique pursued its policy of national division with greater frenzy, issued a succession of "emergency laws", declared a state of war and intensified its suppression of the people in South Korea. It looked as if a Korean war was an imminent possibility. As a matter of fact, that was much ado about nothing. It is now cigar that the United States and the Chung Hee Park clique have acted in this way merely to create a pretext and deceive the people of the world so that United States troops may hang on in South Korea and the division of Korea may be perpetuated. If there is a danger of war on the Korean peninsula, it can only originate from the South Korean authorities that constantly clamor for "reunification by prevailing over communism", and absolutely not from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea which insists on independent and peaceful reunification.
84.	The draft resolution on Korea submitted by the United States, Japan and other countries this year [A/10142 and Add.1-7] claims a "preparedness" to terminate the United Nations Command. But there is no mention at all of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea. Obviously, its purpose is, under the cover of terminating the United Nations Command, to legalize the presence of United States troops in South Korea and create "two Koreas." The United States attempt to thrust the Chung Hee Park clique into the United Nations is part of this scheme. Clearly, such a draft resolution can by no means lead to a peaceful settlement of the Korean question, no matter how nicely it is worded. It is absolutely unacceptable to us.
85.	We have consistently held that the Korean question should be settled by the Korean people themselves free from any outside interference. The draft resolution on Korea submitted by Algeria, China and other other countries [A! 10191 and Add. 1-3] proposes that the United Nations Command be dissolved and all the foreign troops stationed in South Korea under the flag of the United Nations be withdrawn, and that the Korean Armistice Agreement be replaced with a peace agreement signed by the real parties to the Armistice Agreement. It also puts forward a series of positive measures to remove tension between North and South Korea, prevent armed conflicts and promote the normalization of the situation. This proposal is entirely just and reasonable.
It not only meets the eager desire of the entire Korean people but is conducive to the fundamental improvement of the situation on the Korean peninsula and in northeast Asia.
86.	The United Nations Command must be dissolved. From the day of its formation it has been illegal and a tool of United States aggression. In fact, it has become a United States command long since.
87.	However, the dissolution of the United Nations Command must be coupled with the withdrawal of all the foreign troops from South Korea. For what would be the point of merely changing the name while keeping everything else intact? Continued presence of United States troops in South Korea under whatever name contravenes the principles of the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and will only aggravate the tension on the Korean peninsula. The question of withdrawal of all the foreign troops from Korea should have been discussed and settled within three months after the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement. This has been delayed for no less than 22 years because of obstructions placed by successive United States administrations. And 17 years have passed since the Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew on their own initiative from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to facilitate a peaceful settlement of the Korean question. Now there are no foreign troops in North Korea, but United States troops still hang on in South Korea. For how much longer does the United States intend to prolong such a state of affairs?
88.	Korea cannot remain forever in a state of armistice. The United States representative's idea for the United States and the South Korean authorities to propose to the parties to the armistice the convening of a conference to discuss ways to preserve the Armistice Agreement is of no avail. The Korean Armistice Agreement has been in existence for 22 years, and how much longer will it be preserved? Moreover, as is known to all, the parties to the Korean Armistice Agreement have in fact changed a great deal. The Chinese People's Volunteers withdrew from Korea long ago. Most components of the United Nations Command have dispersed and evaporated into thin air. So how can such a conference be convened?
89.	As for the exploration at such a conference of the possibility of a larger conference to negotiate a more fundamental arrangement, is it not even more impractical? After the armistice in 1953, under the provisions of the Armistice Agreement a political conference at a higher level should have been held to settle the Korean question. However, owing to sabotage by the United States, even the preliminary talks failed to produce any result. Subsequently in 1954, the Korean and Chinese sides made tremendous efforts at Geneva to urge the convening of a political conference at a higher level in the hope that a peaceful settlement of the Korean question could be realized. At the time, the United States representative, stubbornly and arbitrarily clinging to his own course, went so far as to refuse to reopen any discussions on the Korean question in the future. Thus, the United States single-handedly slammed the door to a political conference on the Korean question. In the actual circumstances at present, the practical way is for the real parties to the Korean Armistice Agreement to negotiate and sign a peace agreement to replace it.
The facts over the past two decades and more prove that United States interference in Korea is the root- cause of constant tensions in Korea. Therefore, the key to a peaceful settlement of the Korean question lies in the conclusion of a peace agreement to replace the Armistice Agreement and in the withdrawal of all United States troops.
90.	The United States asserts that, as there is no normal international boundary between North and South Korea, the Armistice Agreement and the demilitarized zone stipulated therein absolutely must not be changed. We cannot accept this view. Korea is only in a state of temporary division. Between North and South Korea there can be no normal international boundary but only a provisional demarcation line. Since both North and South Korea have agreed on the mutual non-use of force and on reunification by peaceful means, why should it be impossible for some necessary measures to be agreed on to settle this problem pending the peaceful reunification? It is groundless to assert that a war will break out in Korea in the absence of the Armistice Agreement.
91.	The Chinese delegation maintains that the draft resolution on Korea sponsored by Algeria and other countries is one that can solve the problem. We hope that the current session of the General Assembly will seriously consider and adopt this draft resolution.
92.	I now come to my third topic, the Middle East question. Since the October war, the Middle East has reverted to a state of "no war, no peace." This is the result of the fierce and many sided contention between the two super-Powers carried on against the will of the Arab and Palestinian peoples.
93.	During this period, disengagement agreements were signed between Egypt and Israel and between Syria and Israel. Recently, a second disengagement agreement has been signed by Egypt and Israel. Nevertheless, the Middle East question is far from being settled.
94.	It is mainly the two super-Powers that are to be held responsible for this state of affairs. In the two years since the October war, one super-Power proposed a "comprehensive solution" and the other a "step-by-step solution" of the Middle East question, each trying hard to boost itself and denigrate the other and masquerade as a friend of the Arab and Palestinian peoples. In fact, while the United States has no intention of bringing about a thorough settlement of the Middle East question, the Soviet Union is still less inclined to do so. It may be recalled that, when the October war in the Middle East was at its most critical juncture and thereafter, the Soviet Union withheld the shipment of arms already promised to Egypt and even pressed for the repayment of debts. How can one expect such a perfidious country to support in earnest the Arab people in their just.struggle for the recovery of the lost territories and the restoration of the Palestinian national rights?
95.	Both super-Powers have the need to maintain a state of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East —brief fighting followed by a period of truce, with both war and peace kept under control. Taking advantage of this state of affairs, they contend for spheres of influence, places of strategic importance and oil resources in the Middle East. Taking advantage of the same, they sell munitions in order to reap fabulous profits and alleviate their own economic difficulties. Again taking advantage of this, they test new weapons in preparation for a new war on a larger scale. All this is done at the expense of the fundamental interests of the people in the Middle East.
96.	Countless agreements on the Middle East have been reached inside and outside the United Nations in the past twenty-odd years. Now, in retrospect, is there any agreement that has been strictly observed by the Israeli aggressors, or that has brought about a basic change in the Middle East situation? None, practically none. In the final analysis, it is not agreements on paper but the struggle of the people that will determine the future of the Middle East. What calls for close attention and vigilance now is that a super-Power is taking advantage of the present situation to sow discord and attempt to undermine Arab unity. The Arab and Palestinian peoples must never be taken in.
97.	The Chinese people have consistently supported the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their just struggle against the Israeli aggressors and have all along opposed super-Power contention in the Middle East. We believe that the Palestinian and Arab peoples will continue to strengthen their unity, persevere in struggle and carry their fight against aggression and hegemonism through to the end.
98.	My fourth theme is the question of disarmament. Disarmament is an old question. At a time when there is a growing danger of a new world war, it is fully understandable that the people of all countries, and those of the third- and second-world countries in particular, should feel more concerned about this question. After the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Soviet leadership has become particularly clamorous for "complementing political detente by military detente", preaching that the most important task now is general and complete disarmament. This is making political profit out of the well- intentioned desire of the people of the world. It is a calculated fraud.
99.	Anyone having respect for realities can see that what exists in Europe is not political detente at all but a fierce and many-sided contention between the two super-Powers. Immediately after the conclusion of the European security Conference the Soviet Union violated Norway's airspace. Is this not another proof that the so-called detente is just empty talk? To advocate in these circumstances the expanding, developing in depth and spreading of detente can only make people laugh.
100.	Exploiting the developing countries' keen desire to improve their national economies, the Soviet Union recently has again trumpeted its proposal for a 10 per cent reduction of the military budgets of the five permanent members of the Security Council and the use of part of-the funds thus saved to provide assistance to developing countries. The Soviet Union deems this proposal its masterstroke, and its representative has tried to sell it to us here for no one knows how many times. But so far he has failed to inform us just how big the real Soviet military budget is. It would probably take several years to get this clear. And who knows how many more before military budgets can truly be reduced as proposed by the Soviet
Union? This magnificent Soviet plan, to use a Chinese saying, is "to draw a pie to satisfy hunger". If the developing countries were made to wait for such assistance, would they not be left helpless like "the stranded fish which is promised water to be fetched from a distant sea"?
101.	China's views on disarmament are known to all: we are for disarmament, but it must be genuine and not phony disarmament. We are against phony disarmament, and still more against the Soviet attempt to use a disarmament conference as a veil to cover up the truth of its arms expansion and war preparations. The two super-Powers are quickening their pace towards a new world war. At this juncture, a disarmament conference in whatever form will only create the illusion of peace, serve to deceive and lull the people of the world and bind the hands of the numerous small and medium-sized countries. This is what we are firmly against.
102.	As regards a world disarmament conference, China keeps to the position it set forth long ago, namely, that such a conference must have a clear aim and fulfill the necessary pre-conditions. The clear aim is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons, and absolutely not the so-called limitation of strategic arms. The pre-conditions are: all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that they will not be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time and in any circumstances, and in particular will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries or nuclear-free zones, and that they must withdraw from abroad all their armed forces, including nuclear-missile forces, and dismantle all their military bases, including nuclear bases, on the territories of other countries. But now the super-Powers even refuse to undertake the minimum obligation not to use nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear countries. How can it be said that conditions are ripe for holding a world disarmament conference?
103.	Historical experience merits attention. The more the imperialists diffuse a smoke-screen of disarmament, the bigger is the danger of war. Before the Second World War, a large-scale international disarmament conference lasting nearly three years was held under the sponsorship of the League of Nations after nearly seven years of preparation, and hundreds of proposals and suggestions were discussed. But what were the results? They were arms expansion instead of disarmament, and war instead of peace. The only effect of that conference was to put many countries off guard and as a result they were caught unprepared by the outbreak of the Second World War and suffered a great deal. We hold that the United Nations should not repeat the mistake of the League of Nations.
104.	Nevertheless, as was expected, the Soviet Union tabled at this session of the General Assembly a proposal for the "complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons tests" [At10241]. This is old ware in new wrappings and another of its tricks for maintaining nuclear monopoly. China's stand on this question is clear to all and we will not repeat it. As regards the Soviet proposal for the prohibition of the manufacture of what it calls new types of weapons even more formidable than nuclear weapons, its aim is none other than to divert people's attention from the immediate issues by talking about remote things. Let it be discussed by those who are prepared to manufacture such weapons. There is no need to bring it up here to scare people.
105.	My fifth point is the question of development. Since the sixth special session of the General Assembly, the third-world countries have waged an effective struggle and have put forward a series of reasonable proposals and ideas for transforming the old international economic order which was based on exploitation. The oil-exporting countries have bravely stood up to super-Power intimidation and threats, and have kept a firm hold on their oil resources and their right to fix oil prices. Many countries have taken measures to curb transnational corporations in order to regain their sovereign rights in varying degrees. Various associations of raw material-producing countries have been set up one after another. The third-world countries have put forward a number of proposals, such as the integrated program for commodities and the indexation of prices, for the transformation of the present irrational international economic order. The situation of the struggle in the economic field against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism is excellent.
106.	There are two conflicting positions on the question of development. The position taken by the third world is for maintaining independence and self-reliance, for transforming the old economic order of exploitation of the third world by a few big Powers and for establishing a new economic order on the principles of sovereignty, equality and mutual benefit. The other position, taken by the super-Powers, stresses "interdependence" or the "international division of labor" between the exploiting and the exploited countries in an attempt to preserve the old economic order. Are the industrially developed countries and the raw material-producing countries interdependent? Yes, they are. This interdependence has been in existence ever since the emergence of a single world market. The point is what kind of interdependence. It may be said that there is an interdependence between the horse and its rider. But, we all know it is the horse that takes the burden and not the rider. As for the "international division of labor", it is in essence one and the same as "interdependence". With the emergence of colonialism and imperialism, a new international division of labor sprang up in the world that converted one part of the globe into an area of chiefly agricultural production serving the other part which was chiefly industrial. But to call such cosmopolitan exploitation internationalism is an idea that could only be engendered in the brains of the social- imperialists. Whether or not there is exploitation in the existing international economic relations and whether or not an end should be put to such exploitation this is a real problem of great importance today.
107.	Towards the demand of the third world for transforming the old international economic order, two differing attitudes are adopted by different industrially developed countries. One is dialog, and the other confrontation. Since the use of oil as a weapon by the oil-exporting countries, one super-Power has kept hurling abuses and waving the big stick at them and even threatened them with armed intervention in an attempt to coerce them into submission. The other super-Power has chimed in, saying that oil prices should not be raised unilaterally and asserting threateningly that the aggravation of the oil problem may cause a new flare-up of international tensions. Both take an out-and-out imperialist attitude. We are firmly against this attitude. Facts show that this attitude, far from subduing the oil-exporting countries, only stimulated them to closer unity and hardened their fighting will. We are in favor of dialog. In the past year and more, many second-world countries have frequently tried dialog with a number of third- world countries, and some of these attempts have yielded positive results. Ties between the second world and the third world have been strengthened. This is a good phenomenon in the international economic life of today.
108.	In the face of the worsening capitalist economic crisis and the shifting of crisis by industrialized countries, the third-world countries have advanced such proposals as the integrated program for commodities, the indexation of prices and the democratization of the international financial institutions in order to improve their trade terms and develop their national economies. These are entirely justifiable and are minimum demands. But they have met with opposition from a few major industrialized countries. For they constitute a violation of the so-called free market system, which is allegedly sacred and inviolable. Instead, those industrialized countries have put forward a series of concrete proposals allegedly designed to "promote economic development". As a matter of fact, the so-called free market of today has never been free ever since the emergence of monopoly capital. This market is free only for monopoly capital and the industrial Powers and not for the developing countries. In the 1960s, for example, the prices of oil and many other raw materials were kept very low. Was that determined by supply and demand? No, it was determined arbitrarily, or "freely" if you like, by big monopoly capital. To transform the old international economic order, it is imperative to touch this free market system of gaining profits at the expense of others. Otherwise, no matter how many concrete proposals the super-Powers may submit or how much money they may promise, these in essence are nothing but a kind of alms and relief which can at best temporarily and slightly mitigate the difficulties of the developing countries but will not help them shake off exploitation and control. The root-cause of their poverty will still be there. The gap between the poor and rich countries will keep widening.
109.	The oil weapon has opened up new vistas for the anti-colonialist, anti-imperialist and anti-hegemonic struggle in the economic field. The key to the victories of the oil struggle lies in upholding unity and daring to touch what the industrial Powers regard as sacred and inviolable. All raw material-producing countries should get organized and fight in defense of their proper interests. Some people accuse the Organization of Petroleum-Exporting Countries of being a monopoly organization, a cartel. Why do they not stop and think that cartels, trust and transnational corporations were inventions of the industrial Powers and that to date they still weigh heavily on the developing countries? Are we to tolerate the injustice of the magistrates being allowed to burn down houses while the common people are forbidden to use fire even to light lamps? All the developing countries should unite more closely. It is true that among the developing countries some are in the greatest need. Other countries should give them more help, and they have already begun to do so. The neediest and other developing countries share common experiences and face common tasks. To call the neediest countries the "fourth world" is groundless or ill-intentioned. There are no saviors in the world. To develop the national economy, a country must persist in independence and self-reliance. Political independence is not won easily, so it is essential to give play to State sovereignty to eliminate gradually but firmly the forces of imperialism and all forces of colonialism and neocolonialism. The old international economic order was evolved over centuries of colonialist and imperialist plunder and exploitation. It is impossible to thoroughly change it at one stroke. The seventh special session of the General Assembly is a continuation of the struggle of the sixth special session. The struggle against exploitation will be a long one. United as one and persisting in our efforts, we developing countries will surely attain our goal.
110. Before concluding my speech, I would like to state briefly our opinions on the review of the Charter of the United Nations. We are in favor of reviewing the Charter and making the necessary amendments. Nothing in the world is immutable. The situation within and outside the United Nations has changed, and it is only natural that the Charter should be amended accordingly so as to suit the changed situation. This is common sense. Basing themselves on the purposes and principles of the Charter, many countries have put forward views in principle on the revision of certain provisions of the Charter, such as expanding the power of the General Assembly, restricting the power of the Security Council, changing the composition of the Council, limiting or abolishing the veto right of the States permanent members of the Council. We think that these views deserve serious consideration. Since the Charter was drawn up by man, why cannot it be revised by man? But the super-Powers are greatly upset by the changed situation within the United Nations. One super-Power describes the democratic voting in the General Assembly as a "tyranny of the majority". The other goes further; at the mere mention of the phrase "review of the United Nations Charter," it flies into a rage and breaks into abuse, calling people in favor of reviewing the Charter "reactionary forces". It mortally fears that it might be deprived of its privilege to abuse the veto power. We would advise this "natural ally of the developing countries" to calm down a bit and not get so exasperated. If you are sure that you have the truth, why are you so afraid of dissenting views? A review of the Charter is the general trend and popular demand. We believe that a rational solu-tion acceptable to all can be found so long as the nations, big and small, carry on patient consultations and repeated discussions on the basis of the principle of equality for all. If anyone still resorts to deliberate obstructions, that can only help people see more clearly who are champions of the special privileges of the minority. Therefore, we submit that the work of the review of the Charter should be continued.

Since the founding of the United Nations a period of time has elapsed which we normally call a generation.
68.	This is a singularly appropriate occasion to consider what the United Nations has accomplished during these past three decades and what remains to be done. I am pleased to see as the President of the General Assembly the Prime Minister of a country which is not only associated with my country in close friendship but whose outward-looking attitude and whose willingness for international co-operation are exemplary. The spirit with which your country and you personally, Mr. President, participate in this co-operation both in Europe and in the world presents an example as well as a challenge, Please accept my warm congratulations on your election to this responsible office.
69.	At the same time I wish to express my thanks to the outgoing President, Mr. Bouteflika, the Foreign Minister of Algeria, who held this office during a very difficult period in the history of the United Nations.
70.	The first 30 years of the life of the United Nations have witnessed fundamental changes in the world from which this Organization has not been excepted. We are all familiar with the graph which depicts the population explosion; a curve which runs almost horizontally for thousands of years, then begins to rise and in the middle of this century suddenly shoots up almost vertically. The graphs depicting the advancement of science and technology, the growth of production and consumption, world trade and communication and, not least, the destructive force of weapons, are no different.
71.	Everywhere developments have been explosive. Within that same period the number of nations has trebled. The original Organization had 51 Members, now it has over 140. The world was then dominated by a rigid regime of bipolar confrontation of two blocs; now it is a complex, multipolar world in which multifarious forces and aspirations are asserting themselves. This process is sharply reflected within the United Nations. Nothing has had a greater influence on its development than the emergence of the third world as a separate independent element of world politics, freed from colonial dependence and vested with the same rights and obligations as all other States.
72.	Over and above their different views and attitudes, the nations which make up our world find themselves forged more and more into a community of destiny. The destructive power of modern weaponry, which has grown to immeasurable proportions, has produced a single, global security interest, and the abrupt expansion of productive power has created a single global economy. Security and economic growth and stability cannot be guaranteed today by any one State alone and in isolation. Whether it is a question of preventing a nuclear catastrophe, of fighting international terrorism, of overcoming inflation and recession, or of preserving ecological and environmental conditions on this planet, the problems that have to be resolved are everywhere beyond the resources of any individual nation and can be met only if all States and all groups of States work together.
73.	The problems have become global. The irresistible trend towards ever greater interdependence is the distinguishing feature of the new age; it is the course of world history. For the first time mankind as a whole is moving towards a common future: either to survive together or to perish together, to prosper together or to decline together. The world as a whole lives under the iron law of interdependence: its parts cannot prosper unless the whole prospers.
74.	Slowly, this development is beginning to be realized and appreciated. This is indicated by the close co-operation among the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development countries in seeking to overcome the consequences of the world economic crisis, by the constructive consensus reached by the General Assembly at its seventh special session, which tried to achieve an equitable balance of interests between industrialized and developing countries, by the reaffirmation of the will for detente and co-operation between East and West as expressed at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, and by the initiation of the European-Arab dialog.
75.	We all know the only alternative to common progress is common chaos. We are called upon resolutely to choose the course of co-operation and consistently to develop the foundations of that cooperation which have so far been laid by the United Nations. The task is to strengthen the awareness of interdependence and, as a consequence, to assert the policy of co-operation once and for all in the face of the powerful forces of traditional doctrines and ideologies, to assert it both externally and internally. Because it is also necessary that the individual citizen, too, should develop an understanding for the new constraints of interdependence and that he should muster the will for international solidarity. For the possibilities open to Governments in pursuing such a policy of solidarity reach only as far as the people themselves appreciate the need for it and are therefore prepared to support it. The present crisis of the world economy gives us a chance to draw the necessary conclusions from these considerations and insights.
76.	It would be wrong if the wealthy countries were to resort to the attitude of "every man for himself'. It would be wrong if the destruction rather than the further elaboration of the international economic system were to be regarded as the way out of the difficulties with which we are confronted in the development process. It would be equally wrong if part of the industrialized countries were to refuse to join in the necessary world-wide solidarity between industrialized and developing countries by referring to the colonial past of others and to their own non-colonial past true or alleged.
77.	Interdependence postulates the common weal universally. This must be the guideline for our action and this goal can be reached only through a policy of an equitable balance of interests.
78.	In spite of all setbacks and catastrophes our century has so far also been one of unparalleled progress for mankind. The challenges facing us in our shrinking world are extraordinary both in terms of their novelty and of their magnitude. But also extra-ordinary and unparalleled in history are the means we have at our disposal to meet those challenges. If we use them rationally and co-operatively and do not squander them in irrational conflict, we shall be able to master those tasks.
79.	The founders of the United Nations set the world the three big tasks laid down in our Charter: to maintain peace, to respect human rights and the right of self-determination, and to promote economic and social progress. What was a vision in 1945 has turned into reality today: the global interdependence of one world.
80.	The three great challenges of our time are: we must proceed from economic egotism to a worldwide reliable regime of co-operation among equals; we must proceed from the proclamation of human rights to their world-wide application and to the implementation of the right of self-determination wherever that right is still being denied; and we must proceed from the management of crises to a just and thereby lasting peace.
81.	Our first goal is to establish a reliable regime of economic co-operation. The seventh special session, which has just concluded, marked a promising beginning in our endeavor to establish a system of economic co-operation which is based on the simple realization that we are all in the same boat. During the very intensive but business-like negotiations the Assembly gave an example of a world-wide spirit of co-operation. This will make it easier to embark on the road towards a just balance of interests. For a number of problems the foundations for solutions have been laid. Some questions still require clarification, while the consequences of others need to be studied. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has joined in the consensus because it is based on the idea of reasonable and necessary reform, but not on revolutionary changes in the international economic order.
82.	The present world-wide recession has made all of us keenly aware of the relationship which I earlier called the iron law of interdependence: the parts cannot prosper unless the whole prospers. The growth rates of national economies have become interdependent. This applies also to the relationship between industrialized and developing countries. Higher growth rates in the industrialized countries mean higher growth rates in the developing countries, and lower growth rates in the industrialized countries mean lower growth rates in the developing countries. The fact that all of us recognized and accepted this interrelationship made the satisfactory result of the seventh special session possible.
83.	It is also in this spirit of co-operation that my country will enter the forthcoming producer-consumer dialog. In a world economy which can only grow and develop through joint efforts all partners have to bear their particular share of responsibility. Thus, because of their economic significance and weight, the industrialized countries have to assume a special responsibility. My Government is conscious of that responsibility and acts accordingly.
84.	In close co-ordination with the other industrialized countries having a free market economy my Government endeavors to set in motion a process of economic upswing without, however, providing inflationary impulses. By opening up markets and intensifying co-operation with the developing countries this economic upswing is especially intended to benefit the developing countries. We are against exporting our difficulties by taking restrictive measures and we consistently uphold a policy of further opening up markets, especially with regard to imports from the developing countries.
85.	As the role of the developing countries on the world economic scene grows, there is an increase in the responsibility which they, too, have to bear in all fields, including commodities and energy. Together we want to break and reverse the trend which in the past has continued to widen the gap between the rich and the poor. One objective is to achieve the general growth of the world economy; the other objective is to overcome inequality. We feel that these aims can best be achieved by basing the economic relations between States on the principles of the market economy, irrespective of their domestic economic systems.
86.	I turn now to the question of self-determination and human rights. In a system of co-operation among equals which our Organization intends to bring about, a central role falls to the application of the right of nations to self-determination. A true world community of States and peoples will emerge only if the nations are integrated within that community on the basis of free self-determination. Only in such a world can the readiness to assume responsibility for the whole fully develop. The right of nations to self-determination is therefore a fundamental principle of our system.
87.	During the first decades of the United Nations the basis for a universal international community was created through the implementation of the right of self-determination of the former colonies. At this year's session of the General Assembly too, three new States have joined our Organization, and 1 wish to take this opportunity to bid Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe a warm welcome to our Organization, which is becoming truly universal.
88.	The process of decolonization is drawing to its close. There are only a few regions left in the world to which the outdated system of colonialism still clings. But that system's days are numbered. We trust that in southern Africa, too, those days will come to an end without violence and devastation. The Federal Government therefore welcomes the decision taken by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, held at Dar es Salaam in April 1975, that in the solution of pending problems preference should be given to negotiations. It welcomes also the efforts made by the leaders of both the black and the white communities in Southern Rhodesia to establish a new and just order through negotiations and thus to avert the danger of a civil war and bloodshed.
89.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany strongly advocates the granting of the right of self-determination to the people of Namibia. The Government of the Republic of South Africa itself has stated that it does not consider Namibia to be South African territory. It must finally and quickly draw the conclusions from this and lead Namibia to independence without delay and more quickly than has so far been envisaged. The Federal Government has repeatedly and urgently brought its attitude to the attention of the Government of the Republic of South Africa and will continue to do so. With no less urgency it advocates the abolition at long last of the inhuman system of apartheid practiced in the Republic of South Africa, a system which we condemn.
90.	That last question leads me to the subject of human rights. The United Nations, which has achieved so much in promoting the application of the right of self-determination, has also been able to lay essential foundations on which to secure respect for human rights. By means of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights [resolution 217 A (III)] and the human rights Covenants [see resolution 2200 A (XXI)] based on it, the United Nations has defined the term "human rights" and received acceptance of that definition all over the world. It is now up to us to see to it that human rights are implemented everywhere in practice. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will support all proposals aimed at strengthening the role of the United Nations with regard to the implementation of human rights.
91.	Human rights must apply everywhere; they must apply in all continents. And, as a European, I add that they must apply also in all parts of Europe. The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has drawn the conclusion from this and made the implementation of human rights a major subject,
92.	Freedom of movement is one of the basic rights guaranteed both by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and by the human rights Covenants. And, indeed, if co-operation in Europe is to be extended more and more, people must no longer be prevented from meeting freely. The decisions taken at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe abound with specific promises of improvements in Europe both as regards this right and as regards other human rights. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will gauge the worth of the results of the Conference particularly by the manner in which and when those promises are fulfilled.
93.	I turn now to the safeguarding of peace. Peace is the prerequisite for progress in all other spheres. It therefore remains a primary task of the United Nations to safeguard peace.
In this respect I would refer to the peace policy of the Federal Republic of Germany. Being fully aware of this perspective, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany has from the very beginning pursued a policy aimed at the maintenance of peace. This goes for our own national policies as Well as for our co-operation within the European Community, that great and promising union of European States, and for our membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the defense alliance whose purpose it is to safeguard peace. By pursuing a consistent policy of the non-use of force, the Federal Government has promoted detente in Europe and thus laid the foundation for growing and mutually fruitful co-operation with our neighbors in the East. Let me mention here in this connexion the Treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague. The same is true of the Treaty on the Basis of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic done at Berlin on 21 December 1972.
95.	On the occasion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, additional arrangements were concluded in a spirit of mutual understanding with the Polish People's Republic concerning outstanding questions. These arrangements are intended, after a past full of misery and distress, to bring about the reconciliation of the two peoples and to lead to long-term co-operation between partners.
96.	The Federal Government includes in its policy of the non-use of force and detente our most painful problem also: the division of Germany. It is our aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self- determination.
97.	I reaffirm our belief that history has not spoken the last word on the division of the German nation. The nation's will to achieve its unity will preserve its historical strength. The conclusion of the Treaty on the Principles of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic is evidence of our determination to exhaust all possibilities of peaceful co-operation also in the relationship between the two German States.
98.	Building on its bilateral policy of detente and on the treaties it has concluded in this connexion, as well as on the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin, signed on 3 September 1971, the Federal Government has played an active part in the work of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, because no nation in Europe senses more keenly than the German people the danger emanating from the division of our continent. The participating States want the results of the Conference to have effect throughout Europe. Indeed, security and co-operation must prove their worth particularly in that city which in the years of the cold war so often was the scene of dangerous tensions which affected the whole world the city of Berlin. Berlin remains the barometer of detente. Detente presupposes mutual confidence.
99.	Distrust and fear will only revive the former state of tension in Europe. This is why the Federal Government has begun, without delay, to implement the confidence-building measures decided upon at the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. It was the first Government taking part in that Conference to announce to all other participants military maneuvers in accordance with the provisions of the Final Act of Helsinki, However, the results of the Conference are important not only for Europe. Detente in Europe should, and can, release political and economic energies which have so far been bound up in sterile conflicts. If this happens, we will have added strength to face the big challenge of our time: the reduction of the gap between rich and poor countries.
100.	In the matter of disarmament and the non- proliferation of nuclear weapons, of great importance for the safeguarding of world peace is a persistent policy of arms control and arms reduction. The Federal Government takes an active part in the negotiations in Vienna which are to lead to mutual and balanced force reductions in central Europe. It is our aim to achieve a stable balance of forces since only on the basis of equal security for all concerned will detente and trustful co-operation be possible.
101.	The Federal Government lends the same active support to all measures likely to contain and ultimately to stop the world-wide arms race. Balanced and controlled disarmament is one of our most urgent tasks. The United Nations can and must make a major contribution to its fulfillment.
102.	Likewise, one of the most pressing challenges to this interdependent world is to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The dissemination of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes will quicken considerably in the years ahead. It has been estimated that the number of nuclear reactors available in 1980 will be 15 times greater than the number in use in 1970. The operation of those reactors would make possible the potential production of up to 26,000 kilograms of plutonium in the non-nuclear-weapon States every year as from the early 1980s in other words, enough to make 50 atomic bombs a week. So the task we have to solve is to use the advantages of peaceful nuclear technology without at the same time proliferating nuclear weapons.
103.	As one of the leading producers of nuclear installations for peaceful purposes, the Federal Republic of Germany realizes that it has a special responsibility in helping to find a solution to this problem. Consequently, in every case in which it exports nuclear installations it adheres strictly to the provisions of the non-proliferation Treaty, of which it is a member, and to the safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency. In addition, it subjects itself to the commitments under the Euratom Treaty. It actively supports proposals aimed at further strengthening these safeguards and developing uniform criteria for the export of fissionable material and nuclear equipment.
104.	Let me say a word about regional crises. The policy of detente between East and West helps to consolidate peace in Europe. But in our neighborhood the sources of crisis smolder on, and the most dangerous of them is the Middle East conflict. Nowhere is it more obvious that present-day problems can no longer be resolved by war, that war is no meaningful alternative to a political settlement, that war is no longer an ultima ratio but an ultima irratio.
105.	Four sorrowful wars have failed to hammer out a solution in the Middle East, and a fifth Middle 
142
East war could have disastrous consequences. The Federal Government, therefore, welcomes with great relief the Egyptian-Israeli interim agreement of 4 September. This agreement is the result of statesman-like action on the part of all concerned. Further steps will have to follow if the momentum of this constructive development which has been set in motion is to be maintained. Standing still would mean taking a step backward and would in the end even wipe out the progress made so far.
106.	The Federal Republic of Germany supports all efforts to bring about further steps along the path of negotiations. An informal multilateral discussion of the problems to be solved, as suggested by the Secretary of State of the United States [2355th meeting], could indeed be useful in promoting a subsequent peace conference.
107.	The path towards a just balance of interests in the Middle East has been sketched out by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). This means, among other things, that any peace settlement that is to last must respect Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries; it must give effect to the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people; and it must include the termination of the occupation.
108.	This is the attitude adopted by the Federal Republic of Germany, in full agreement with its partners in the European Community. The Federal Government is most anxious that equitable and lasting peace should prevail in the Middle East, which is a neighboring region to us. It therefore seeks to make every contribution possible, both bilaterally and within the framework of the European Community, towards bringing about such peace.
109.	In Cyprus, too, a negotiated solution must quickly be found. The Federal Government, therefore, regrets that the fourth round of talks between the representatives of the two communities, which was scheduled for 8 and 9 September in New York, had to be postponed because of the lack of concrete proposals. The tragic events of 1974 were the upshot of letting things drag on for years and years without reaching the necessary compromise. Now, at least, a lesson should be drawn from this. The deadlock caused by the fact that each side is waiting for the other to be the first to make concessions must be broken. The Federal Government therefore appeals to all concerned to resume the negotiations as soon as possible. Any solution must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus.
110.	Cyprus needs a federal structure that will accommodate the interests of both communities. Accommodating the interests of both communities also requires correcting the present demarcation line between them. The Federal Government seeks, both bilaterally and together with its partners in the European Community, to give diplomatic assistance in the search for a solution and humanitarian assistance to ease the misery of the refugees.
J11. As in the Middle East, the peace-keeping forces of the United Nations in Cyprus, too, are making an indispensable contribution towards maintaining an atmosphere in which constructive efforts to find a solution can be made. The same applies to the endeavors of the Secretary-General to facilitate discussions between the two communities. I wish to express to the Secretary-General and to his staff the appreciation and the thanks of the Federal Government.
112.	I turn now to the question of strengthening the United Nations. In the efforts to establish a regime of co-operation in the spirit of global interdependence and joint responsibility, the United Nations must play a central role. In the past 30 years the United Nations has made an essential contribution preventing crises and to containing or overcoming existing ones. It has helped to accelerate the process of decolonization. It has spread the demand for the implementation of human rights throughout the world. And it has fully brought home to the public the crucial task of our time, the economic development of the third world, and has evolved a consistent strategy and a coherent strategy for tackling this task.
113.	With the growing awareness of global interdependence, the role of the United Nations, the only universal Organization in this world, must continue to increase. The prerequisite for this will be that we do all we can to achieve and maintain universality. We must continuously adapt the structure of the Organization to the changing situation and tasks in the world. The countries of the European Economic Community [££C], in a declaration of 17 June 1975, have again stressed their support of the United Nations and have spoken out in favor of the strengthening of its role. The President of EEC, the Italian Foreign Minister, Mr. Rumor, reaffirmed this willingness in an impressive way yesterday in this forum [2357th meeting]. The Federal Republic of Germany fully endorses this commitment regarding the United Nations. Only if the nations of the world will join in a spirit of genuine co-operation can the tasks of the United Nations be successfully mastered. Only if we succeed in bringing to bear everywhere that spirit of genuine co-operation within the United Nations will we be able to tackle the tasks confronting us to safeguard international peace; to implement everywhere the right of peoples to self- determination as well as their human rights; and to promote the common weal universally through economic and social progress. The Federal Government is determined to support all efforts towards that end.
1.	 Mr. President, it is with great pleasure that I should first of all like to convey to you my own congratulations and the congratulations of my country. I am personally delighted to see my colleague and friend, Gaston Thorn, preside over the work of the General Assembly. Through its excellent choice the Assembly has not only paid a tribute to a country dedicated to the cause of peace and international co-operation, but it has also secured for itself the talents of an exceptionally experienced, wise statesman who happens also to be one of the great architects of European construction. You, Sir, have continually laid emphasis on the task of opening up a united Europe towards the rest of the world, and particularly towards the developing countries. That concern, as you know, is fully shared by the French Government. Therefore France cannot but be gratified to see such a great European as yourself shouldering the burden and responsibilities that have been entrusted to you by this Assembly.
2.	I must say, too, how much we owe to the outgoing President, Mr. Bouteflika, on whom fell the important task of presiding, at times under difficult conditions, over the previous session of this Assembly and over the seventh special session.
3.	I should like, finally, to pay a tribute to our Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, who presides over the work of our Organization with an authority, a competence and an impartiality that are universally recognized.
4.	The annual meeting of the General Assembly is a particularly privileged moment for all of us who represent our Governments here, but who at the same time also feel responsible, for that very reason, for the higher interests of the emerging world community.
5.	The crisis which we are going through, which perhaps for the first time in history affects the entire world, is the result of a genuine change, a complete breakaway from the old system of balances. The upheavals this crisis brings in its wake, the risks it comprises, pose a real threat to our future. But man's special characteristic is his ability to react to control his destiny.
6.	An example of this healthy reaction was recently seen at the seventh special session, and this is probably the most encouraging feature of the whole of the past year. Faced with increasing dangers, we have all recognized the obvious globalization of the economic and political problems of our age, as well as the need to resolve them by appreciating all the consequences of our indissoluble solidarity.
7.	This realization helps us to realize the importance, the very great importance, of the collective responsibility borne by our Governments. What we have to do is master and control what the President of the French Republic has described as "the crisis of the human race". It is outskirt bring under control the fever for change with which the human race is obsessed and master its course, because ultimately this crisis reflects the growing pains of all mankind. This is the price we have to pay for the tremendous progress we have achieved both in technology and in the political sphere. It is the fruit of persisting inequalities and injustices.
8.	In mankind's long march towards the achievement of the goals of the United Nations, economic justice is still lagging behind political evolution, and the desire of the less privileged States to obtain their fair share of the fruits of economic growth is most certainly justified. However, where this political determination was expressed in ideological terms, and where the rich countries bridled in defense of their privileges, there was a risk of the emergence and exacerbation of disastrous tension.
9.	At the end of 1973 and early in 1974, an infinitely dangerous trend started to divide the world into hostile blocs. France, through its President, underlined the gravity of the danger in time, and indicated the measures needed to avert it.
10.	The President's appeal was heeded, and I like to think that it has contributed to the very favorable developments we have witnessed in recent months. The results already achieved, as regards both the final resolution of the seventh special session [resolution 3362 (S-VII)] and the now forthcoming resumption of the dialog proposed by France between the industrialized and the developing countries, guarantee that we are now taking the right course.
11.	Although the subject is important, I shall not dwell on the results of the seventh special session except to stress once again that the results obtained
A/PV.2364 
complement the work that will be done at the enlarged conference which will follow up the second preparatory meeting in Paris. Let us note in this regard that the very importance of the subjects to be discussed demonstrates the political dimension of the undertaking, which was begun on behalf of our international community and in close liaison with the United Nations.
12.	It is now, therefore, quite clear that we should set as our target the gradual establishment of a political and economic world order based, not on positions of strength, but on dialog, solidarity and respect for the interests of others.
13.	For this we must keep our feet on the ground, but we also must demonstrate imagination and generosity in our response to the expectations of those who are least privileged, and all those whose problems come in the tragically brutal form of famine, death and loss of liberty.
14.	In a world where the spirit of violence, alas, is prevalent, where odious acts of terrorism and the taking of hostages seem to be replacing conventional warfare, let us proclaim that such actions are contrary to human rights; they solve nothing and corrupt the noblest aims. But at the same time let us realize that in order to halt the momentum of violence, the rights of individuals and of peoples must be recognized everywhere.
15. Let us make no mistake about the immensity of the task before us. A great deal remains to be done in order to achieve the tone and specific realization of the aims and objectives of our Organization. Tenacious determination, expressed through effective instruments, is required of us all.
16.	The Charter has given us the framework for our common efforts; hence the importance of the effective-ness of the United Nations.
17.	Our Organization, which is now 30 years old, may have been disappointing to those who forgot that its ability to settle conflicts depended on the cooperation of Member States. It has in fact done some extremely useful work and, as our Secretary-General quite rightly noted in the introduction to his last report on the work of the Organization, it has: "... shown a remarkable capacity to take on new tasks, to adjust to a changing world . . . within the conceptual and organizational framework laid down by the Charter." [A1100011.Add.I, sect. I.]
18.	Both this flexibility and this strength are without . a doubt due to the wisdom with which the founders
of our Organization, in San Francisco, were able to balance ideals and reality, rigorous principles and political realism. This balance, which has enabled it to withstand the test of time, is basic and we believe must be protected from all perfectionism.
19.	It is obvious that, given the current state of affairs, the United Nations is not and cannot be a world government. The present phase in the history of mankind is one of affirmation of independence. It is also one of consultation, more necessary than ever among sovereign States. That observation places in its proper perspective the problem resulting from the emergence of majorities which, by the way, change in international assemblies. This is a natural phenomenon once the law of democracy and thus the law of numbers is agreed to, but it is a phenomenon that should not be allowed to obscure the real mission of these assemblies and above all ours which is to seek compliance with universally accepted rules and intentions. Nor has our Charter set up a world system in which the Assembly holds sway. It provides for permanent adjustment procedures among us; a good example of this is the division of responsibilities between the General Assembly and the Security Council, because it is based on realities that it would be dangerous to forget.
20.	It is also obvious that the United Nations can be true to itself and fulfill its mission only if it respects the cardinal principle of universality, both by admitting any State that meets its requirements and by refusing to reject States whose policies might be unpopular, except for cases strictly defined in the Charter. In either case, the golden rule of universality, towards which decisive progress has been made in the past few years, must not be broken.
21.	We are pleased, in this respect, that a new step has been taken with the admission of three new Members: the Cape Verde Islands, Sao Tome and Principe, and Mozambique.
22.	We for our part were prepared to support also the applications of the two Viet Nams, as well as that of the Republic of South Korea, countries with which we have friendly diplomatic relations and which we should have liked to see join the Organization. We regret that the turn taken by the Security Council deliberations did not allow such a step to be taken this year.
23.	It is because France attaches the greatest importance to this principle of universality that it believes that any measure aimed at suspending or excluding any of our Members would bring into our Organization an element of mistrust and pressure that would be totally alien to the spirit of dialog that should prevail here.
24.	It is by remaining what it is a privileged and universal forum for consultation and dialog that our Organization will be in the best position to translate the ideals of the Charter into reality.
25.	In this attempt to advance towards a better world political and economic order, I shall first of all point out two factors which are sound reasons for having confidence in the future. The first has to do with the successful development of regional groups; the second, with detente in Europe.
26.	World consultation which should prevail in no way precludes, but rather presupposes, the grouping of co-operation efforts along regional lines. These groups of States will be a factor in conciliation and increased international co-operation provided they turn their backs on any tendency to form opposing blocs and follow the rule of openness and dialog. This, as you know, is the byword and raison d'etre of the nine members of the European Community.
27.	I think that as I said last year the task under-taken by six countries of Western Europe following the last world war is exemplary in many respects.
28.	The work begun by those six countries is now being carried forward by the nine. An unequivocal vote by the British people recently confirmed this irreversible commitment to building Europe. This task is being actively pursued with a determination that is both ambitious and pragmatic. Out of this spirit grew last year's decision by the Heads of Government a decision that has now been fully implemented to meet periodically in order to maintain the co-ordination and momentum vital to the internal process of construction as well as to the attitudes and actions of Europe in the international community of nations.
29.	This Europe, contrary to certain assertions, is in no way self-centered or preoccupied with its own future. It has been its intention from the beginning to make its contribution to the world scene as an independent source of decision and initiative, and also as a factor of equilibrium and imagination in a world of interdependence and mutual opening up.
30.	That was the main thrust of the statement by the nine European Heads of State and Government at their meeting on 17 July this year at Brussels.
31.	The current President of the nine countries —Mr. Rumor, our Italian colleague reported on the progress that has already been made [2357th meeting]. I myself shall just mention the important contribution of the ACP-EEC Convention at Lome, which, starting early this year, has opened the way for new forms of co-operation.
32.	Secondly, to stress its political importance, I shall mention the European-Arab dialog that has now been started between the Community and all the countries of the League of Arab States. New ties of solidarity, adapted to the needs of our time, have to be woven between two groups of people, heir to two of the civilizations that shared the ancient world and that history has made enemy and ally in turn.
33.	The Europe of the Community, Mr. President and I know I do not have to convince one of its prime movers of this is a voice speaking for many, making itself heard in favor of greater international co-operation. Thus, Europe is dedicating itself to the service of peace and democracy, while respecting the interests and freedoms of others. The positions that it has taken with regard to the Middle East, Cyprus and Portugal are proof of this.
34.	The strengthening of detente in Europe is another mayor positive factor which should help us to concentrate on the real problems which people will have to face at the end of the twentieth century. France, which provided the initial impetus 10 years ago, took an active part in the work of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, in close collaboration with its Community partners; it helped to see to it that the Final Act of the Conference signed at Helsinki on 1 August not only endorsed the commitment of the participants to exclude all recourse to force but also laid the foundations for the development of entente and co-operation among the signatory States. Of course there remains the task of translating into reality these very specific declarations of intent regarding increased exchanges of people and ideas, thereby giving positive content to detente. It is because France believes in the sincerity of the desire of all its partners for detente that it intends to apply along with them the letter and the spirit of the decisions made at Helsinki. In any case, the curtain has already come down on an era that has ended the era of the cold war. An objective has been jointly set; that objective is entente and cooperation. This result is not insignificant and constitutes a useful precedent for the entire world.
35.	Let us be glad in this respect that in other regions of the globe some progress has been made along the path of conciliation and the settling of conflicts.
36.	I should like to mention the Middle East first. I hardly need restate the three principles on which, in our view, a lasting peace settlement must necessarily be founded: withdrawal from the territories occupied by Israel in June 1967; recognition of the right of the Palestinians to a homeland; the right of all the States of the region to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed frontiers.
37.	France believes that for these three principles to be implemented it is indispensable for the spirit of dialog to prevail over the spirit of confrontation. That is why we welcomed and consider a positive step the disengagement agreement signed in Geneva on 4 September by the representatives of Egypt and Israel. That agreement is to be commended and is encouraging proof of the commitment of the parties concerned to the process of negotiation.
38.	The detente that has thus been brought about, as President El-Sadat of Egypt has noted, and as Mr. Henry Kissinger of the United States underscored a few days ago from this rostrum [.2355th meeting], should now make it possible to embark on an overall settlement which, by attacking the basic problems, is the only possible way of averting the risk of other major crises and establishing a lasting peace between Israel and its neighbors. Without prejudice to what may be done on other fronts, a global approach is called for. My Government has always advocated this; similarly, when there arises the question of over-all guarantees to strengthen peace in the region, France, and I believe Europe, will be ready to take an active part in them.
39.	I should not like to leave the subject of the Middle East without mentioning the current ordeals Lebanon is undergoing. My Government and the European Community wish to stress the vital importance of maintaining the independence, unity and integrity of that friendly country, which is an essential factor for equilibrium in the region. I am convinced that all the groups of the Lebanese community, as well as the parties concerned, aware of the seriousness of the situation, will do everything they can to help the Government in its efforts to maintain public order and to strengthen national unity.
40.	In Asia, peace has finally returned to Viet Nam. But the length of the conflict, the damage inflicted and the suffering caused make it even more urgent and necessary here than elsewhere for genuine cooperation to be established. France, which since 1954 has had official relations with the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam, has begun relations with the new authorities of the Republic of South Viet Nam and remains ready to take an active part in the reconstruction of the country. We hope to have with the Vietnamese people relations based on mutual esteem and trust.
41.	As far as Cambodia is concerned, the French Government, as the Assembly is aware, proposed establishing diplomatic relations with the Cambodian Government on 12 April of this year. Our intentions with regard to that country remain unchanged.
42.	In reviewing the various reasons for hope it would be a serious omission if one did not include a few words on the positive developments on a continent of the future—Latin America, whose political, economic and intellectual influence is being increasingly felt in world affairs. The topic is too vast for me to cover. I shall just point out that France attaches great importance to increasing its co-operation with all the countries of Latin America. In this respect I shall mention my delegation's satisfaction with the resumption of our relations with Peru,
43.	Africa is another continent of the future, one to which France and Europe are linked by ties the strength of which is without a doubt one of the main reasons for our confidence in the future. My country has guided many friendly countries to independence and has maintained with them particularly close relations based on co-operation. France wishes to respect the decision of all Africans freely to determine their own destiny and to assume responsibility for their future under conditions of their own choosing.
44.	Quite recently France consulted the people of the Comoros regarding their future. The great majority favored independence, and, without waiting for completion of the constitutional process, decided through their deputies to take over the management of their own affairs. The French Government took note of this and announced that it was prepared to begin talks immediately regarding the transfer of responsibilities. We still hope there can be agreement among Comorians permitting establishment of a framework within which this new State will begin its future. In this case, as in others, France is true to its continuing policy of respect for the right to self-determination.
45.	I should not like to fail to welcome the resumption of diplomatic relations between my country and Guinea.
46.	Unfortunately there are still some clouds in this picture of the international situation. In Cyprus, in Korea and in southern Africa the international community should spare no efforts to prevent tensions from degenerating into conflicts.
47.	The question of Cyprus, involving States with which my country has traditionally enjoyed friendly relations and a region that is very close to us, remains one of our foremost concerns. We are obliged to note that the situation resulting from the events of the summer of 1974, with the continuing threat it poses to peace and the suffering it inflicts on the people of the island, not only has not changed but has actually deteriorated.
48.	Yet at that time we did unanimously adopt a text defining the framework and principles for a settlement and giving the main outline of a solution, which should be one of reconciliation. Indeed, as everyone is aware, nothing can be done without the agreement of the two communities. Accordingly we have steadily given our encouragement, unilaterally or with other members of the European Community, to the inter-community talks begun last spring, with the unflagging assistance of our Secretary-General. At the same time we called for a solution to the most painful problem, that of refugees, which affects nearly one third of the people of the island. We are not unaware of the difficulties involved, but we should stress here its extreme urgency.
49.	I should therefore like to make another pressing appeal for genuine negotiations to begin without further delay, accompanied by urgent measures which the onset of winter makes necessary from a humanitarian standpoint. Such negotiations should be based on well-defined proposals for an over-all settlement that would provide solutions for all the political and territorial problems confronting Cyprus. Such a settlement should be based on right and justice "right" meaning the independence of Cyprus and the integrity of Cyprus, and "justice" meaning the respective size of the two communities. It is this double condition that will finally enable the Cypriot communities to live in peace. It is not for us to tell them how they should organize their relations. But, as the President of the French Republic said recently in Salonika, France is firmly convinced that nothing lasting can be built on force, nor can right result from faits accomplis.
50.	Of the tensions that may still exist on the vast continent of Asia, I shall mention only the problem of Korea, because of its repercussions upon the United Nations.
51.	It is disturbing that more than 20 years after the cessation of hostilities a situation should still exist in Korea which, were it to worsen, could have consequences dangerous to world peace. The Korean people feel its effects daily, and the international community views this persistent anomaly as an almost anachronistic danger, so we very much hope that the United Nations will at this session be able to find a solution to the question of its commitment in that country, taking into account the need to set up arrangements to preserve the Armistice Agreement. But it will also be necessary for the parties directly concerned, respecting the spirit of the joint communique of 4 July 1972,' to substitute dialog and a spirit of compromise for confrontation and intransigence, In this context France noted with interest the constructive proposal made by the United States Secretary of State.
52.	I should like now to return for a moment to the African continent, where tension still persists, tension to which we should devote particular attention.
53.	Last year, from this rostrum, I spoke on behalf of France and welcomed Portugal's effort to put an end to the futile fighting and the anachronistic situation in the Territories under its sovereignty. We note that in spite of its own difficulties the Portuguese Government has faithfully fulfilled its commitments, However, our satisfaction is tinged with concern over the civil war raging in Angola, a country which seemed destined for prosperity. For its part, my Government hopes that the fighting will cease and that this country will very shortly be able to achieve independence in restored harmony.
54.	But it is particularly southern Africa that remains a major cause for concern.
55.	Of course, in the past year we have been able to note signs which might seem to indicate a change in orientation. We believe in particular that the Government of South Africa can and should play a role conducive to the establishment in Rhodesia, within a reasonable period of time, of a Government based on majority rule.
56.	Concerning Namibia, the South African Government has made statements which, although partially encouraging, remain ambiguous. We shall continually stress the importance we attach to the Namibian people being able to express quickly and freely their views on the political future and constitutional structure of the Territory.
57.	In this reference to the problems of Africa, the French Government cannot forget the distressing problem of apartheid, a doctrine contrary to human rights and one which deeply disturbs our conscience. France's categorical condemnation of discriminatory measures based on race recently prompted the President of the French Republic to define the strict limits of our policy on arms sales to South Africa.
58.	South Africa must respond to the appeal of the international community; it must realize that little time remains for it to satisfy by concrete action the legitimate aspirations expressed both inside and outside that country.
59.	In all these areas, it goes without saying that France will be unflinching in its efforts to ensure that conciliation and consultation prevail.
60.	The settlement of conflicts, the easing of tension and the encouragement of dialog are daily imperatives which the international community can no longer avoid. But we must go further: we must band together to take up the challenges threatening the very existence of mankind.
61.	It is those long-term problems that I should like to mention briefly in conclusion.
62.	In the nuclear age, the first problem is quite obviously the maintenance and strengthening of peace.
63.	Can we put an end to the chronic state of insecurity from which mankind has suffered from the beginning of its history and which, since the emergence of weapons of mass destruction, threatens its survival? If the international community believes, as France does, that this ideal, although distant, is indeed attainable and that in any case for the human race there is no longer any alternative to peace, then we should get down to work.
64.	On the long road ahead, disarmament genuine, universal and controlled disarmament is and remains more necessary than ever.
65.	France, for its part, has supported the idea of a world conference now under consideration by our Organization. That plan, if it were assured of the support of all the military Powers, in particular the five nuclear Powers, would be able to get us out of the ruL in which we have become bogged down.
66.	I should now like to state the view of the French Government with regard to the principal treaties on nuclear arms. The discriminatory nature, in its view, of some of the clauses in those treaties has prevented my country from acceding to them. However, France, as it has stated, intends to act as though it were a signatory. France is fully aware of the responsibilities attaching to the status of a nuclear Power which is our status and believes with the majority of nations that the proliferation of nuclear weapons should be avoided. My Government has already made known its intention to take part in this work. I can confirm this today and state our wish to participate in every genuine effort liable to bring about real and controlled reduction, and relieve mankind of the burden and threat of the arms race.
67.	A world which, thanks to genuine disarmament and the adoption of peaceful means of settling disputes, would finally be freed from those haunting fears would be able to devote its efforts to developing its resources, its production methods and its way of life.
68.	For 30 years we have been living with the obsession of a nuclear nightmare; but is not mankind also in danger of perishing from lack of oxygen or water, packed as we are together on a planet which has become too small for us? Such prospects no longer belong just to the realm of science fiction, because we are entering the age of finite resources and we must realize the present inability of our world community to deal with those fundamental problems. Surely it is time for us to put our heads together and take joint action to remedy this situation.
69.	The excesses and lack of foresight of industrial civilization have other more subtle aspects just as potentially tragic. We are jeopardizing with reckless arrogance the balances established by nature for millions of years. That is just one more worldwide problem that should be considered by the United Nations.
70.	The development of the productive forces of mankind should be placed at the service of all men. We agree on the need for reorganization in order to put an end to intolerable inequalities. Hundreds of millions of people in the world are threatened by hunger; the majority of mankind live in a state of destitution unworthy of human beings. The continued expansion of the world economy is therefore indispensable. Nevertheless, we must not allow ourselves to be swept away by the mystique of production and consumption, nor must we forget our ultimate mission: the spiritual and intellectual development of man. Let us not become the agents and ultimately the slaves of a voracious economy. We must above all tackle the major problem of growth in its two aspects: the means of ensuring balanced expansion and the goals at which the arduous labor of man must be aimed.
71.	The topics for study which I have just suggested are directed to a fundamental concern that is basically the justification of any genuine policy respect for and development of the human personality. This concern has continually guided our Organization, which has achieved much in the field of human rights. But the battle for recognition of and respect for fundamental rights is far from won. We must fight it with determination until victory is ours.
72.	In times of change and crisis one can always distinguish two main trends: towards movement and towards immobility.
73.	Because it is France's tradition, its mission, and because France itself deeply feels the need for change, it is ready to put its resources, its imagination and its generosity to work for the emergence of a more just, more peaceful and more united world.
74.	Our Organization and all its Members can count on the active contribution of my country in this vital task of striving for world solidarity.
Mr. President, I should like to join my colleagues in saying how very pleased I am that we are meeting this year under your distinguished presidency. Those of us who have worked with you in the European Community know your qualities of wise judgment, combined with great insight and cool decision, and we are very glad that this year those qualities of yours are placed at the disposal of the United Nations. We look to your presidency because we believe it will strengthen the United Nations and we hope your term of office will add distinction to an already distinguished career and will do honor to Luxembourg.
58.	Britain extends a welcome to the newly independent countries of Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe and Papua New Guinea, which are this session assuming their places as full and equal Members of our Organization. To them I wish all success.
59.	I should like too to thank our Secretary-General for his valuable and balanced report on the work of the Organization. The burdens on the Secretary- General grow no lighter, and I am glad that at this difficult time we have in that vital position a statesman of such proven diligence and dedication.
60.	There is a certain resolute tenacity with which the major problems cling to the agenda of the General Assembly. They are a reminder of the limitations of the machinery of the United Nations in achieving a peaceful settlement of disputes unless the will is present to come to an agreement.
61.	But the thirtieth year has not been barren: in fact, it has been a better than average year for the negotiators, as opposed to the war makers.
62.	At the seventh special session and elsewhere, the Member nations have firmly committed themselves to try to bring about a world in which men and women will be made more equal through constructive policies of co-operation, rather than hurling threats and counter-threats at each other. The special session was an event of great significance, and I pledge that the United Kingdom will co-operate fully in the tasks ahead. While at this General Assembly we discuss the broad political questions that face us, my country will not forget the need to respond with urgency and a sense of justice to the manifest social and economic inequalities in the world today, despite the burdens that the world economic recession is imposing on the inhabitants of the advanced industrial countries. In return we ask the oil-producing countries not to impose additional burdens on our economies, for what the world needs is a period of prolonged expansion. Despite our hopes, it is not yet certain that the expansion will endure, but it will certainly be set at risk if heavier burdens are thrust on to those more advanced countries which must be the pace setters.
63.	In the weeks and months to come, my Government would like to see progress in the military and political fields of potential conflict.
64.	In the Middle East, for the first time, there is a break in the ice. For the first time, Israel and one of its Arab neighbors have concluded an agreement which was not forced upon them by military constraints. For the first time they have jointly stated that the conflict between them shall not be resolved by force, but by peaceful means. I should like to express my admiration for the courage and statesmanship which President El-Sadat of Egypt and Mr. Rabin of Israel have shown in the negotiations which led up to the agreement. I should also like to congratulate the United States Government, and in particular President Ford and Mr. Kissinger, on their perseverance and their skillful diplomacy. I should like here to express our thankfulness that President Ford was spared yesterday, and to say that our thoughts are with Mrs. Ford, too. The agreement which Egypt and Israel have concluded is not only to their mutual benefit; it benefits the rest of the world as well.
65.	The progress that has been made does not mean that peace is around the corner. It is not. The problems which still remain are much larger than those which have been solved. Chief of these is the problem of the Palestinians, which has not yet been touched. What, then, is the way forward? First, in our view, a complementary step on the Golan Heights must be achieved, and achieved soon, to provide the proof that the latest agreement was not an end in itself but part of a continuous process leading to a comprehensive settlement. The commitment to further negotiations that has been spelled out in this newest agreement must be fulfilled. Syria and the other Arab States need to be convinced of the benefits of peace and that will require a further negotiating round. Following that must come the central problem of the Palestinians and the future of the West Bank, and at this point we shall be attacking the problem of a comprehensive settlement, and for this task a comprehensive forum, such as Geneva provides, would seem to be required. But if all the parties show the same resolution, perseverance and, not least, the flexibility that were shown in the recent negotiations, I am convinced that an ultimate solution could be reached that would ensure security for the State of Israel and justice for the Arab people.
66.	The dilemma which faces the parties in the Middle East is a familiar one. On the one hand, any attempt to reach a full settlement all at once is likely to founder because the gap between the positions of the two sides is too wide to be bridged. On the other hand, any partial resolution of the problems may appear to favour one side at the expense of the other in the stages before a full settlement is reached, and therefore arouses opposition.
67.	The new agreement between Israel and Egypt is important, not only in its practical effects though I would not wish to belittle them as in its example. Israel and Egypt have demonstrated to others that mutually beneficial agreements can be reached in the Middle East without sacrificing the interests of either party.
68.	As this agreement matures it will give the Israelis cause to believe that they can put trust in the word of Egypt; and the Egyptians and after them others  will have cause to believe in the goodwill of Israel. This is the lesson and the real achievement of the recent negotiations. It provides a new foundation on which it should be possible to build, and a demonstration of the value of compromise.
69.	We shall need a combination of methods. Problems on which partial steps can be taken should continue to be handled in that way. But the core of the problem, namely, the settlement of the Palestinian people, may well need a wider negotiation leading to a comprehensive solution. We know that it will be very difficult to achieve a peace which fulfills everyone's needs, but history has proved that peace is indivisible and the world cannot afford to settle for an incomplete solution,
70.	As regards Cyprus, I note with regret that the talks that have been pursued intermittently during the last year between the parties have made very little progress despite the patient efforts of Mr. Wald- heim, to whom we extend our grateful thanks. The British Government adheres to resolution 3212 (XXIX) and affirms that its implementation would assist the process of reaching a settlement. If a solution is to be acceptable to both sides it will require to deal with the settlement of the refugees, the constitutional relationships between the parts of the island, the powers of the central Government, and the nature and physical delimitation of whatever zones are agreed upon.
71.	A solution based on such an agenda is difficult, but not impossible; but it does mean that a declaration of independence by any part of the island is ruled out. Such a declaration would perpetuate the conflict and result in continuing tension that could spread wider than the island itself, Therefore we call upon both sides to resume their discussions and to come forward with positive proposals for a solution.
72.	Despite the lack of progress made so far in these direct talks, we are not convinced that any different forum is likely to be more successful. We wish to see the direct talks renewed, together with the continuing presence of a mediator to assist the parties. But in the end the main responsibility for success will rest with the Turkish and Greek Cypriots themselves.
73.	On Namibia we share with the international community a deep concern that the inhabitants of the Territory as a whole should be given the opportunity to express their views freely on their political and constitutional future. All political groups must be allowed to take part peacefully in the process of self- determination, and above all there must be a real sense of urgency.
74.	As a member of the Security Council, we have joined with France and the United States in making formal demarches to the South African Government. 
We observe some signs that the South African Government is taking a new look at its policies towards Namibia, but it is clear that the movement is not taking place quickly enough. We look to South Africa to make clear and positive progress without delay.
75.	For our own part, Britain has contributed to the United Nations Fund for Namibia, to the proposed Institute for Namibia at Lusaka, to a United Nations Children's Fund project for aid to Namibian refugees; and we are one of the largest contributors to the United Nations Educational and Training program for Southern Africa, which includes provision for scholarships for Namibians. We have also provided funds to enable the South West Africa People's Organization to send students to Britain for English-language training, which will enable other forms of educational assistance to be given. In Namibia, as elsewhere in southern Africa, we shall continue in co-operation with other countries to work for self-determination, justice, racial equality, independence and peace.
76.	Turning to Rhodesia, I should like, first, to pay tribute to the efforts which the Presidents of Botswana, the United Republic of Tanzania, Mozambique and Zambia have made during the last year in conjunction with the Prime Minister of South Africa to promote a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. It is a matter for regret that so much effort has not met with greater success, though some progress has been made and a first meeting between the regime and the African National Congress at Victoria Falls did reach agreement on a number of points.
77.	I see two prerequisites for further progress towards a negotiated solution. First, the Europeans, and particularly Mr. Smith, Prime Minister of Rhodesia, should realize that to rely on disunity among their political opponents as a justification for postponing essential changes is to invite disaster as history has frequently demonstrated. Second, there must be a clear and unified leadership on the African side; and that is something which the Congress itself must achieve.
78.	We believe that agreement on the change to majority rule in Rhodesia is essential if peace is to be maintained in the area. If this is not achieved there will be a long slide into armed struggle and irreparable damage will be done to the country and to its neighbors.
79.	To prevent such a disaster I call upon both sides to resume their discussions, and I urge the four Presidents and also the South African Government not to be discouraged by the difficulties which have arisen. I trust they will resume their efforts. We for our part remain ready to play our full part. Meanwhile, until a just settlement is achieved, the United Nations sanctions must continue to be applied effectively as one of the instruments for maintaining pressure on the illegal regime.
80.	. Now I turn to disarmament. The Secretary- General, in his report, has reminded us of our responsibility for disarmament. Every year the nations pile up more and more arms. Every year the arms bill grows larger. Every year the capacity for destruction more frightening. In some parts of the world such as the Middle East, competition for arms is never ceasing. Hardly any continent is exempt from the pressure. No one who cares for the progress of the human race towards decent standards of living can help but be appalled at the enormous waste of resources on weapons of destruction. A number of countries, some of whom are among the poorest, are now spending as much as 10 per cent of their gross national product for military purposes. What a boost it could give to the world's hopes if all of us could agree to limit to a maximum of even 5 per cent the amount of our gross national product we allocate for defense. This would presuppose that countries would move step by step to such a figure and would need to enter into serious multilateral negotiations with one another for reductions in their military establishments. That is indeed what we are doing in the negotiations that are now beginning on force reductions in Central Europe. If these negotiations could be paralleled in other regions of the world it would be a hopeful beginning.
81.	Probably the greatest potential risk that faces us is the nuclear danger. Of course, we welcome the steps that are being taken to control nuclear arms by the United States and the Soviet Union. We believe there should be no insuperable difficulties in bringing the arrangements made at Vladivostok to a successful conclusion. We look forward to a new strategic arms limitation agreement being signed before the end of this year. But that agreement, although important, does no more than put a brake on the present nuclear arms race. It is necessary to move onwards to an actual reduction in the number of nuclear weapons, and we ask both the United States and the Soviet Union to press to a successful conclusion the next round of talks on this subject that is due to take place in 1977.
82.	The Soviet Government has put forward a proposed draft treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests [A! 10241, annex]. The United Kingdom has consistently supported this goal. We wish the initiative well. However, I cannot fail to point out that it will require the adherence of all the nuclear-weapon States and provision for verification, and that so far it has not been possible to meet these conditions completely.
83.	We should also examine with care the proposal made by the representative of the Soviet Union at the preceding meeting [A/10243, annex] in the document that was circulated among us.
84.	But even before we solve these problems a new danger is coming to view that I now wish to discuss. It arises from the overlap between the desire of certain countries to use nuclear material for civil purposes and the increasing risk that such material may be employed for military purposes. The metals uranium and plutonium are used not solely in nuclear reactors to produce power for civil purposes, for highly enriched uranium and plutonium can also be used to make nuclear weapons. Those who possess a nuclear reactor have already taken the first step to being able to pro-duce a nuclear weapon. If they then move from that to the second step and acquire plants to enrich their uranium and to reprocess the fuels that have already been used in their nuclear reactors, then they will be a long way down the road to producing nuclear weapons. Up to the present, it is the nuclear-weapon States that alone possess such plants, namely, the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, France and China. But other countries are now beginning to consider whether they, too, should order reprocessing and enriching plants. If and when they do so, and the plants are in working order, they will be able to produce weapons material at a rate which would enable several thousand nuclear weapons a year to be produced. To give a comparison, the present nuclear programs will accumulate more than 1 million 1 million kilograms of plutonium within the next 10 years; and by contrast, the bomb which fell on Nagasaki and created such havoc and such destruction was the equivalent of no more than about 10 kilograms. A million kilograms within the next 10 years  and 10 kilograms destroyed Nagasaki. The spread of these plants would enable the whole of mankind on this planet to destroy itself. Clearly, the statesmen of the world assembled here have a moral duty to act before it is too late.
85.	The United Nations should concern itself with this problem immediately and add vigor and impetus to the work that is being done in the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA],
86.	I put forward five points for consideration, to try to contain this problem. First, the Members of the United Nations should solemnly affirm that each and all of them will not convert nuclear materials from civil use to military use. Secondly, this solemn declaration should be reinforced by an agreement to accept a common system of international inspection through the IAEA. There should be one set of rules for all countries in the world. Thirdly, all civil nuclear materials and facilities should be brought within the common inspection system. Fourthly, the IAEA should assume responsibility for inspection of enrichment and processing plants, in addition to its present task of safeguarding nuclear reactors. Fifthly, the new set of common rules should be based on monitoring nuclear material and accounting for its use at all stages through the life of the fuel.
87.	Britain intends to make a specific proposal along these lines to the IAEA. In this way we shall follow up the intentions of the recent conference on non- proliferation, although our proposals are not based on that Treaty and have a wider purpose. They are intended to give practical expression to the pledges that have already been made by many Governments that they will not convert nuclear material from civil to military purposes, and I hope that the General Assembly will give support to them.
88.	Thirty years ago at the very first session of the General Assembly in London my great predecessor Ernest Bevin pledged that the British Government would use to the full every instrument created by the United Nations and give it its whole-hearted support. I was present when he made that speech. Looking back, I believe my country, as a permanent member of the Security Council during the whole of that period, has faithfully redeemed the pledge that Ernest Bevin gave. Now, today, I repeat that undertaking at a time when the potential dangers facing the world are at least as great as they were when the United Nations was founded. None of us expects the United Nations miraculously to solve all the world's problems. But patient effort, understanding of each other, a consciousness that we are all citizens of the same world, and that none of us can escape the consequences of each other's actions this, I believe, will enable mankind of all colors and all creeds to do as the founders of the United Nations did, and as our forefathers did, to rise to the challenge of our times.




81.	 It is my privilege and pleasure, on behalf of my delegation and myself, to extend to you, Mr. President, our warm congratulations and good wishes on your election as President of the thirtieth regular session of the General Assembly. You have assumed this high office at a very significant moment in the history of this world Organization, when we are at a turning-point in the thirtieth year of its life. We are fortunate indeed to have the benefit of your outstanding ability, wide experience and dynamism in directing our deliberations during this important session. Your election is also a tribute to your country and its people and to its traditional policy of conciliation and co-operation. I assure you of my delegation's full support in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities.
182.	Your predecessor, the Foreign Minister of Algeria, Mr. Bouteflika, will be long remembered both for his able direction of the twenty-ninth session and for the constructive achievements of the seventh special session. Under his leadership we were able to accomplish much that is valuable and of lasting significance.
183.	To the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, we should like to express our appreciation for his ceaseless energy and total dedication to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. His wise counsel and his gentle persistence in drawing attention to the fundamental problems facing mankind have enhanced the prestige of the United Nations. We extend to him our continued support.
184.	Anyone who has the privilege of standing at this rostrum to address the General Assembly must be keenly aware of a special sense of responsibility, because the United Nations is an instrument for shaping the destiny of mankind. How we fulfill this responsibility will depend upon the perception of our common mission and our firm resolve to implement our decisions. Our mission, as expressed in the Charter of our Organization, is to secure peace and justice for all mankind. Our duty is to the peoples of all nations and our objective is the molding of a world based on peace and co-operation, not on its division into three or more worlds separated by conflict and inequality. The growing awareness of interdependence between peoples and nations, each conscious and responsive to the basic needs and legitimate aspirations of the other, marks the hopeful beginning of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
185.	Three decades ago our founding fathers conceived of this Organization as a means for harmonizing the views and actions of States in a common effort "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war" and "to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom". An embittered world, shattered by the destructive fury of war, was soon enmeshed in the hostile confrontation of opposing military alliances. The cold war threatened to nullify the hopes enshrined in our Charter. Vast numbers of people still lived under colonial subjugation  and for them the Charter could have no meaning until they were freed from foreign domination.
186.	Many old empires have since been dismantled and colonial rule has been ended in most parts of the world, signifying the victory of the forces of national liberation. The United Nations has made its own contribution to expediting this process. More than half of the delegations present here represent countries liberated from colonial rule. We have watched with profound satisfaction the Organization move steadily closer to its goal of full universality. We are happy to welcome among us this year delegations from the sovereign States of Mozambique, Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe. We are confident that their participation in our work will add to the strength of our Organization. We look forward to welcoming Papua New Guinea in the very near future.
187.	We have before us a heavy agenda, which illustrates the principal problems facing the world today. Some items have remained on the agenda year after year, testifying to their complexity and intractability. Other items are relatively new, which is an indication of the growing awareness of a rapidly changing world. It is not my intention on this occasion to express our views on all these problems. My delegation will have other opportunities for making our views known during this session. The very fact that these global problems are before us is evidence of the reality of the interdependence of peoples and nations, and a recognition that the United Nations constitutes the appropriate forum for their solution through our collective efforts. Mere recognition of this fact is not enough, however, and, in the words of the Secretary-General in the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization "... we must now go forward from deliberation to action, from confrontation to co-operation and from eloquently expressed allegiance to principles to the far more difficult task of making those principles a reality." [AllOOOIIAdd.l, sect. XXI.]
188.	Many newly independent nations of the world, including my own, repudiated the concept of the cold war and chose the path of non-alignment and peaceful coexistence. Today there is widespread understanding and acceptance of the policy of non-alignment and its relevance and importance. In the United Nations the non-aligned countries have consistently worked to democratize international relations and to move from confrontation and deadlock into new fields of co-operative endeavor. The foreign ministers of the non-aligned countries, meeting in Lima last month, pledged themselves afresh to continue their efforts to achieve a new world order based on justice and equality.
189.	The maintenance of peace must be our first objective, and problems related to this question must continue to occupy our minds with a sense of urgency. Peace reigns today in Indo-China after many years of war, and this is indeed a matter of great satisfaction for all of us. However, the legacy of the past seems to cloud the vision of some. The rejection by the Security Council of the requests of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam to join the United Nations adds to the sorry record of United Nations inertia on Viet Nam. There is no doubt about the eligibility of those States for admission; we should welcome them to this Organization, which will benefit from their co-operation. The international community should do all it can to heal the wounds of war and assist in the reconstruction of the shattered economies of the countries of Indo-China. India is willing and prepared to make its contribution to this effort.
190.	The situation in the Middle East remains critical. There can be no enduring peace in the region until Israel vacates all the Arab territories it occupied by aggression and until the national rights of the Arab people of Palestine are restored. Meanwhile, an agreement has been reached between Egypt and Israel for a limited further Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai. This will be an important and positive development, provided it contributes to the reduction of tensions in that area and leads to the speedy resolution of the basic problems. However, the intransigent and obstructive attitude of Israel, which is receiving a considerable amount of sophisticated military hardware, gives cause for serious concern. It is the clear duty of the United Nations, in conformity with the provisions of the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, to explore all avenues open to it for securing the removal of the Israeli presence from Arab territories. It is also our duty to continue our efforts to restore to the Palestinian people their national rights. We firmly believe that the unity of the Arab countries, together with the continued supporting action of the international community, would enable them to regain their lost territories and secure the restoration of the rights of the Palestinian people.
191.	In Cyprus, too, there is still an uneasy stalemate the continuance of which may well endanger its territorial integrity. Prolonged neglect of the underlying causes of inter-communal differences has led to external interventions and the virtual partition of the country, resulting in thousands of people leaving their homes in search of safety. At the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly last year, we unanimously adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX), which established an agreed framework for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from the island and the settlement of the problems between the two communities. Progress in its implementation, however, has been slow, even though the leaders of the two communities have held talks under the auspices of the Secretary-General. Given good will and practical good sense, the problem can be resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the two communities and without prejudice to the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-alignment of Cyprus. We have every confidence that the Secretary-General will persevere in his efforts to bring the two communities together to seek a mutually acceptable solution.
192.	The continuance of multilateral military alliances conceived in the context of great-Power rivalry and the induction of vast quantities of military hardware into countries belonging to these alliances is a source of continuing tension and instability in the Indian Ocean area. The expansion of the Diego Garcia base, against the declared wishes of the littoral States of the Indian Ocean, is of serious concern. We urge the great Powers and other major maritime users to respect the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace, in conformity with the Declaration adopted by the United Nations in 1971 [resolution 2832 (XXVI)]. We also call for the early dissolution of the military pacts conceived in the context of great-Power rivalry and the dismantling of foreign military bases established in that context.
193.	We have continued to make every effort to strengthen our friendship and understanding with the countries of our region. India is ready, within the limits of its means, to contribute to the development of our region through trade and closer economic links. We have .continued to implement the Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972-'' both in spirit and in letter. It is our earnest hope that we shall achieve in the near future the objective of peace and co-operation among the States in the subcontinent.
194.	The decolonization of the Portuguese empire has proceeded with commendable rapidity. We rejoice in the notable successes achieved by the national liberation movements. However, the process of national liberation is as yet incomplete, and we must address ourselves to the problems in the remaining Territories whose people are still living under colonial and foreign domination.
195.	The transition of Angola to independence has been marked by violent clashes between liberation movements. We have followed these developments with concern, because in the last analysis it is the people of Angola who will be the victims of the struggle for power between political parties. We hope that the Organization of African Unity will find it possible to establish a basis for peace and co-operation among the different liberation groups.
196.	In southern Africa we are nowhere near a solution of the triple problem of securing the independence of Namibia, the rule of the majority in Zimbabwe and the eradication of the policy of apartheid. These are all interrelated questions and they have to be tackled together. The presence in Namibia of the administration of the white racist regime of South Africa has been declared illegal. The United Nations has been standing ready to take over temporarily the administration of Namibia pending transfer of power to the people. And yet the South African Government flagrantly continues to defy the United Nations. There is no clearer case for intervention by the United Nations and we would call for effective and resolute United Nations action against South Africa.
197.	The illegal minority regime of Smith in Zimbabwe evidently continues to be bolstered by the support of the South African Government. There is no honorable way out for this regime except to release all political prisoners, convene a constitutional conference of the legitimate leaders of the people and make arrangements for the inevitable transition to majority rule. The United Kingdom has a special responsibility in this regard and we hope that it will play an effective role. Unfortunately, even the imposition of sanctions by the Security Council has not brought about the desired result, although they may have had some impact. There are reports that the Smith regime is arranging meetings with national political leaders with the purpose of dividing them and compelling them to agree to unacceptable settlements. It is clear that the United Nations should continue to lend all support to the liberation movement in Zimbabwe.
198.	The question of apartheid has been before the United Nations in one form or another since 1946, and the appeals of the General Assembly have had no effect whatsoever on the racist regime in South Africa. This regime has remained indifferent to the diplomatic isolation in which it finds itself. We deplore that the trade boycott and arms embargo imposed by the United Nations have been ineffective. As a result, South Africa continues to pursue its pernicious policy of segregating the tribal people in separate bantustans, forcibly removing them from their homes and subjecting them to humiliating restrictions. South Africa's continued enforcement of the apartheid system in total disregard of United Nations resolutions led to the rejection of the credentials of its representatives and their consequent exclusion from the current session of the General Assembly. Even this has had little effect on the white racist regime in Pretoria, or indeed on its supporters. There is no alternative but to strengthen the hands of the fighters for freedom and liberation from this iniquitous regime.
199.	I have referred to matters that are at present, the focus of international tension where critical situations prevail. Certain hopeful developments in Europe may also be noted. We welcome the signature on 1 August by 35 Governments at Helsinki of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which establishes the basis for the preservation of peace and future co-operation in that continent. Since Europe has been the historical spawning ground for world wars in the past, this agreement has great significance. However, detente in Europe can have real meaning for the rest of the world only if this process is extended to other continents, and particularly to the crisis situations of today.
200.	The full potential of detente cannot be realized until there is a transfer of real resources from military expenditure to areas that are of vital concern for the general well-being of mankind. The very first resolution adopted by the first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations concerned disarmament. That was only natural, as the question of disarmament was an important preoccupation of the League of Nations and it was inevitable that its successor, the United Nations, established in the wake of the last world war, should as a matter of first priority concern itself with disarmament. In the 30 years since the creation of this Organization and despite the regular annual appeals for disarmament, especially nuclear disarmament, there has been virtually no progress. Instead, we have been witness to an incredible arms race involving the stockpiling of nuclear weapons and other means of mass destruction on a scale that brings into question the sanity of such measures. The global expenditure on the arms race is on the order of $300,000 million per annum, when the world is crying out for resources to relieve hunger, poverty and social injustice. We are nowhere near even considering any serious measures concerning nuclear disarmament, which clearly deserve the highest priority. We have had world conferences on food, population, the environment, industrialization, the law of the sea, the role of women and so forth, but we have not yet been able to agree on a world conference on disarmament. This is truly a tragic commentary on the state of the world, which has lost its awareness of and sensitivity to the dangers facing it.
201.	Peace is the foundation for progress. At the same time, an enduring peace cannot be achieved until the growing economic disparities in the world have been overcome. We are now in the middle of the Second United Nations Development Decade, and, despite the various measures recommended by the United Nations, the vast majority of developing countries are still facing unfavorable trade patterns and extremely heavy debt burdens. Such inequalities among nations are the cause of our present discontent. These have to be reversed if we are to move on to true interdependence as between equals, which is the compelling need of today. It is true that the reality of the interdependence of all nations is coming to be recognized more and more, but the problems it poses are only just beginning to be appreciated. The Declaration and Program of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, adopted at the sixth special session [resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S- VI)], and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, adopted at the twenty-ninth session [resolution 3281 {XXIX)), are important milestones in our journey towards the goal of interdependence. They call for measures of unprecedented scope, the most important of which, if I may say so, is bridging the gap between the minds of the developed and the developing countries.
202.	The seventh special session has made a serious attempt to identify problems in detail, to locate some available resources, to pursue further studies of important questions and above all to engage in negotiations with a view to exploring whether a meeting of minds is possible. The achievements of that session should neither be overestimated nor underestimated. Developing countries cannot look upon the final document of the seventh special session [resolution 3362 (S-VII)] with unmixed satisfaction. However, it is an opening, and if the decisions are implemented in good faith and speedily, further fruitful dialog can be continued on the outstanding issues so that the world economic imbalance can be redressed and the terms of trade for developing countries can be really improved. The status quo should change in the direction of a new and equitable economic order, and proof of this has surely to come from the concrete actions of the developed countries.
203.	The problem of under-development is as important in the economic and social field as decolonization is in the political field and constitutes a challenge facing the United Nations in the years to come. The United Nations is a unique instrument for fostering co-operation based on equality, and its structures and procedures need to be adapted with wisdom and vision to meet the unprecedented challenges of the future.
204.	I should like to conclude by recalling the words of my Prime Minister in her address to this Assembly on 23 October 1970, when she emphasized India's profound commitment to peace and the evolution of a new world order. She said:
"We have always affirmed that the way of the world should be not power but peace, not confrontation but co-operation. The world is not for destruction; it is for development. . . .
"The irony is that we have the means and we see the vision, but we lack the will and the trust to take the one big step forward. . . .
"In the years to come let the United Nations strive to bring about an era of international transformation by consent, a new era of justice and peace."4



33.	 Mr. President, it is with pleasure that I join the many representatives who have spoken before me in congratulating you most warmly on your election to the presidency of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly. You bring to this high office qualities of integrity, intellect and experience which have already carried you to the summit of political responsibility in your own country as well as on the wider European stage. The General Assembly is indeed fortunate that its leader for the coming 12 months will be a statesman deeply loyal to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
34.	The annual general debates at the General Assembly provide an occasion for a survey of the working of the international system during the preceding year, and for the public expression of the hopes and fears, the expectations and anxieties, of the Governments representing almost the totality of the population of the world. The present debate seems to me an appropriate opportunity to go a little further to look back at the 30 years of the life of the United Nations, and to try to appraise its achievements against the standards set by the founders of the Organization when they adopted the Charter in San Francisco on 26 June 1945.
35.	The United Nations was born amidst the ruin and devastation of the most terrible war experienced in the recorded history of mankind, a holocaust in' which tens of millions of men, women and children lost their lives, among them one third of the Jewish people. Its primary purposes, therefore, were to save succeeding generations from similar catastrophe and to build a better society in which fundamental human rights, equal justice before the law and economic and social advancement would be universally assured.
36 As is inevitable in human affairs, the record is uneven The most spectacular achievement of this period is unquestionably the virtual disappearance of the classic colonial system. More than half of the present Members of the United Nations, including Israel were colonial dependencies before 1945; four Cape Verde, Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, and Papua New Guinea achieved independence in 1975 and have been or are being admitted to membership at this session. On behalf of the people and the Government of Israel, I am happy to wish them well.
37.	The United Nations system, through the United Nations Development program and its forerunners and through the specialized agencies, has also registered noteworthy achievements in many branches of economic development, in agriculture, health, labor, transport and other practical fields. The new impetus in the development and codification of international law would hardly have been possible outside the United Nations framework; while the financial and economic organs of the United Nations family, among which one might include the recent seventh special session of the General Assembly which may well presage a new era of international economic co-operation, have become almost indispensable for the proper conduct of the world's business. Those are all positive contributions to the welfare of mankind, even though it is clear that there is still a long way to go.
38.	This is unfortunately not the case in other areas. The United Nations has manifestly not saved this generation from the scourge of war. The graves of the millions of victims of armed conflicts in Asia, in Africa, in the Middle East and even in Europe bear anguished testimony to this massive failure; while the lofty sentiments and exhortations of a multitude of conventions, declarations and resolutions have had little impact on the flagrant abuse of fundamental human rights and freedoms in vast areas of the globe.
39.	It is common form to claim that the fault does not lie in the United Nations system, but in its Members; that the world Organization merely reflects the frailties, the stupidities, the lethargy and the evils of the world itself. This is, of course, true, but it is equally true that a system that encourages contention rather than compromise, extremism rather than tolerance and confrontation rather than negotiation is hardly suited to a world as diverse in race, religion, tradition, geographical circumstances, and social and political practices as is ours.
40.	The experience of Israel is a valid example. We belong to no bloc and no alliance. We can count on little support in this Assembly, not because our cause is unjust, not because our views do not meet with sympathy, but because of considerations of unprincipled expediency. We are assaulted every year in language so venomous and vile as to defy all canons of civilized behavior. In Assembly session after Assembly session in recent years, in conference after conference, resolutions are adopted by automatic majorities, demanding that we submit to this abusive tyranny, that we, in effect, dismantle our State, and that we commit national suicide. No regard whatsoever is paid in these resolutions to truth or to reality.
41.	Israel is a democratic State, where, in accordance with our ancient tradition, all individuals and communities enjoy equality before the law and the plenitude of their human rights; yet a resolution of a United Nations body will assert the very opposite as an incontrovertible fact and condemn Israel on the basis of that falsehood.
42.	When a World Health Organization expert finds that the medical services provided for the population in the territories under Israeli administration since 1967 are as good as those of any other civilized country and that the people are healthy, a resolution of the General Conference of that specialized agency will declare that they are ridden with disease and bereft of medical attention. When a certified lunatic, not a Jew and a foreigner to boot, sets fire to part of a mosque in Jerusalem, a resolution of the Security Council condemns Israel for the deliberate desecration of that Holy Place. When highly qualified United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization experts establish that Israeli archaeological research in Jerusalem represents a notable contribution to the cultural heritage of mankind, including that of a glorious period of Islamic history, does not contravene the applicable international law and does not endanger other monuments and sites, resolutions adopted by that organization simply ignore those findings and for good measure add sanctions to the routine condemnation. And when Israel, rightly and inevitably, refuses to take notice of these fantasies, as any other Member State would do in its place, it is once again condemned for being awkward and recalcitrant and for flouting the will of the international community.
43.	Surely there is something seriously wrong with a United Nations system which is so easily subverted for political blackmail; which, instead of being a center for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the objectives of the Charter, has become a propaganda battlefield; and where abuse and not reason has become the language of debate. It is surely not beyond the wit of man to arrest this hypocritical and dangerous course before it is too late.
44.	In the course of my address to the General Assembly last year, I dwelt on the positive features of the separation of forces agreements which had been concluded earlier that year between Israel and Egypt and Israel and Syria in the wake of the Yom Kippur war of October 1973.1 I expressed the view that those two agreements represented the first steps, small and hesitant though they may have been, away from the triple negatives adopted by the Conference of Arab Heads of State or Government, held at Khartoum, on 1 September 1967: no peace with Israel, no recognition, no negotiations.
45.	Those who sincerely seek peace in the Middle East will surely find cause for satisfaction in the new agreement between Egypt and Israel which was negotiated through the good offices of the President and the Secretary of State of the United States and concluded in Geneva last week. That agreement marks an important step forward. It has much greater political significance than its predecessor.
46.	I should like to draw the attention of the Assembly to some of the major provisions of this agreement:
"The Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Government of Israel have agreed that:
"The conflict between them and in the Middle East shall not be resolved by military force but by
peaceful means. 
"The parties hereby undertake not to resort to the threat or use of force or military blockade against each other. 11
"This agreement is regarded by the parties as a significant step toward a just and lasting peace. It is not a final peace agreement.
"The parties shall continue their efforts to negotiate a final peace agreement within the framework of the Geneva Peace Conference in accordance with Security Council resolution 338 (1973).
"This agreement shall enter into force upon signature of the protocol and remain in force until superseded by a new agreement."
47.	The significance of the agreement does not lie only in the pledge of the parties to continue to observe the cease-fire and to refrain from all military or paramilitary action, or in their undertaking not to resort to the threat or use of force or military blockade, or in their recognition of the essential role of the United Nations Emergency Force and the necessity that it continue its functions, or in the provision concerning the passage of non-military cargoes to and from Israel through the Suez Canal, or even in the renunciation of war as a means to settle the differences between them; rather its significance lies in the belief that it opens a new chapter in the relations between the two countries. Israel for its part will do all it can to ensure that this new chapter will indeed be one of peace. And beyond that we hope that this agreement will pave the way to better relations and peace with all our neighbors.
48.	It is a proper opportunity to stress here that the agreement, in all its particulars, was concluded, in response to the free will of two sovereign States. If Egypt and Israel consider that the agreement is advantageous to them and, moreover, it is a step not directed against any other party nobody in this General Assembly has the right to censure it or to set himself up as an arbiter of the interests of the parties directly concerned.
49.	As I have already stated, both parties to the agreement have recognized the essential role played by the United Nations Emergency Force and I wish to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to the officers and men of the Force, who are performing a difficult and delicate task in an exemplary manner; to Lieutenant General Ensio Siilasvuo, who has been identified with the peace-keeping efforts of the United Nations in the Middle East for many years and who has gained the respect and regard of all parties; and to the Secretary-General, who is ultimately responsible for this successful United Nations enterprise. I wish to include in this tribute the commanders, officers and men of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, who also play an important role in the area, and to the Governments which have contributed their personnel to all three United Nations forces.
50.	As far as we are concerned, the new agreement is not an end, but the beginning of a process of peacemaking. We do not delude ourselves that this will be a simple undertaking, for the making of peace after
so many years of hostility and 
suspicion will call for qualities of moral courage, understanding and tenacity far greater than those needed for the waging of war But the beginning must be made-for the sake of this generation and for the sake of the Israeli and Arab children who were surely born to live and create and not to die on the battlefield.
51.	Security Council resolution 338 (1973) calls for "negotiations . . . between the parties concerned aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in 'the Middle East". From this rostrum I declare that Israel is ready to enter into such negotiations with each and every one of the neighboring States. I note with regret repeated statements made by the leaders of Syria which reject the whole concept of a genuine peace treaty with Israel. Nevertheless, I should like to hope that this is not their last word. And for our part I solemnly reiterate that the Government of Israel is ready and willing to enter into peace negotiations with Syria without prior conditions, as called for by Security Council resolution 338 (1973), at any place and at any time.
52.	In this connexion I wish to emphasize that as far as Israel is concerned the Geneva Peace Conference can be reconvened whenever the parties are ready for it, following adequate preparation. Moreover, in principle, Israel is in favor of any mechanism which will advance the process of negotiation between the parties to the conflict. It will therefore give the idea put forward by the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger, for an informal multilateral consultation most earnest consideration.
53.	As I emphasized in my statement at the General Assembly last year, it is self-evident that genuine peace in the Middle East must include a just and constructive solution for the Palestine Arab problem, Israel is fully alive to this problem, probably more so than the majority of those who pronounce freely upon it, and we do not require persuasion of the need to solve it peacefully and honorably. Indeed we insist that this be done. For far too long now the Palestinian Arabs have been used as a pawn on the chess-board of inter-Arab politics; throughout the years they have been the victims of Arab extremism. The solution to their problem therefore demands a change of attitude in the Arab world. The Palestine Arab problem should and can be solved in the context of a peace agreement between Israel and Jordan, which constitutes the major part of the area of historic Palestine on both sides of the river as well as being the homeland of the great majority of the Palestine Arabs.
54.	Thus if the matter at issue is a fair and constructive solution for the problem of Palestine Arab identity. Israel's response is emphatically positive. But it is categorically negative about the absurd pretensions of the so-called Palestine Liberation Organization to speak in the name of the Palestine Arabs. This congeries of feuding terrorist gangs, whose principal victims are the Arabs of Palestine themselves and whose primary aim is the annihilation of the State of Israel and the genocide of its people, is neither a valid representative of the Palestine Arab community nor a valid interlocutor for Israel.
55.	It should cause no surprise that at the spearhead of the frenzied efforts of the extreme regimes in the Arab world to prevent a political settlement of
the Middle East dispute, and to disrupt the recent agreement between Egypt and Israel, is precisely the PLO.
56.	There is nothing more fraudulent than the scheme of this faction to establish, naturally on the ruins of Israel, a so-called democratic secular State in which Moslems, Christians and Jews would, as it were, live in amity and equality. This facile slogan, this transparent propaganda gimmick, has somehow found support among naive and well-meaning people. What is the pattern which the progenitors and supporters of this idea propose to follow? For lack of anything more promising they themselves have put forward the example of Lebanon: Lebanon, which since April of this year has been torn apart by a vicious, sectarian civil war between its Moslem and Christian communities. The latest published estimate of the casualties during these past six months is more than 5,000 killed and nearly 18,000 injured. The material damage is estimated at $2,500 million. The PLO knows what it means when it talks about the democratic and secular State of Palestine. So do we. We have only to look at the more than 800,000 Jews who have left, or have been driven out of, the Arab countries of the Middle East and North Africa since 1948, or at the tortured existence of the 4,500-odd Jewish hostages left in Syria today, to know what the fate of the Jews of Israel would be if the PLO nightmare were realized. But we know and they know that this will never be.
57.	It is one of the anomalies of our times that Israel, which is rigorously excluded from the Middle East region in all that concerns the civilian pursuits of the United Nations and its specialized agencies such as health, education, meteorology, trade and civil aviation is emphatically held to be a part of the Middle East region when the discussion turns to military matters, including the supply of arms. If one were cynical one might almost suspect that the reason, in both cases, is to weaken Israel in one case by boycott, and in the other by depriving it of the means of defense.
58.	Be that as it may, the problem of arms control in the Middle East is real and urgent. The area is being swamped by a flood of new and sophisticated military hardware, such as it has never known in all its long history. Each month that passes raises the level of technology, and the price. Tens of billions of dollars which might otherwise be spent on economic and social development and it must be realized that the population of large parts of the Middle East is among the poorest in the world are drained off to pay for these instruments of human destruction.
59.	Israel is forced to take part in this senseless competition because, given the circumstances in the area, if it did not it would invite immediate aggression. But Israel is ready at any time, even before peace is made, to consult with its neighbors on measures to limit the arms race, with all its dangerous consequences, without materially affecting the relative defensive capacity of any of the parties to the consultation.
60.	Israel supports the proposal for a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East and will be ready to enter into negotiations with all States concerned in order to attain that objective. By negotiations we mean a process of
intergovernmental consultation similar to that which preceded the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) and other international instruments of like character. We do not think that so grave a matter can be settled by correspondence through the Secretary-General.
61.	Israel welcomes the signature of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which gave formal expression to the spirit of detente. Only the future will tell if this instrument will serve as a guide for the conduct of the nations in the years to come, or whether it will remain a compilation of pious hopes, like so many international instruments which have been adopted since the end of the Second World War.
62.	In this connexion we have of course noted the following passage in the address of the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union to this Assembly on 23 September: "Assessing highly the results of the Conference, the Soviet Union believes that the main task now is to translate the understandings reached into deeds . . .". [2357th meeting, para. 128.]
63.	As far as Israel is concerned, we have two criteria for judgment: one, that detente must apply to the Middle East no less than to Europe and to other areas of the world and so far we have seen no evidence of this; two, that the humanitarian provisions of the Final Act signed at Helsinki must be scrupulously applied. The United Kingdom Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Wilson, expressed this eloquently in his address to the Conference in these words:
"Our work here will be judged not only by the spirit of 'live and let live' which this Conference asserts. It will be judged by how that spirit is reflected in the lives of ordinary families, by such issues as the reunification of families ... I hope that what we have each today committed ourselves to within Europe can apply also to those within our countries who want to go to start a new life outside Europe, whether in the Middle East or elsewhere."
64.	None of the noble provisions of the Final Act have yet been applied to the Jewish national minority in the Soviet Union. For them the Helsinki agreement is still a piece of paper, and detente is still far over the horizon. I hope that the Soviet Union will live up to the spirit of this historic agreement and will enable the Jews who aspire to be reunited with their brethren in their ancient homeland to do so without hindrance. For us this is the touchstone.
65.	Finally, in addressing the General Assembly I cannot ignore a grave development which affects the Jewish people wherever they may be. This is the mounting of a despicable attack on Zionism by associating it with abhorrent political concepts.
66.	Let me state categorically that anti-Zionism is but a euphemism for anti-Semitism. Subscribing to a resolution condemning Zionism means an endorsement of anti-Semitism and the legitimization of aggression against Israel. Let me state with equal emphasis that, on this the thirtieth anniversary of the liberation of the survivors of the gas chambers and the concentration camps, the Jewish people will not tolerate a revival of the cancer of anti-Semitism. One cannot
here escape a tragic reflection how many of the 6 million victims of the Nazis would be alive today if it had been given to the Zionist movement to create the State of Israel before that catastrophe?
67.	It is painful to me to see a group of nations, many of which were recently liberated from colonial rule, deriding one of the most noble liberation movements in this century a movement which not only gave an example of encouragement and determination to the peoples struggling for independence but also actively aided many of them during their period of preparation for independence and immediately thereafter.
68.	What is the essence of Zionism? Zionism, in a nutshell, is the modern expression of the ancient Jewish heritage. Zionism is the national liberation movement of a people exiled from its historic homeland and dispersed among the nations of the world. Zionism is the redemption of an ancient nation from a tragic lot and the redemption of a land neglected for centuries. Zionism is the revival of an ancient language and culture, in which the vision of universal peace has been a central theme. Zionism is the embodiment of a unique pioneering spirit, of the dignity of labor and of enduring human values. Zionism means creating a society, however imperfect it may still be, which tries to implement the highest ideals of democracy political, social and cultural for all the inhabitants of Israel, irrespective of religious belief, race or sex. Zionism is, in sum, the constant and unrelenting effort to realize the national and universal vision of the prophets of Israel.




 I am glad indeed to have this early opportunity to congratulate Mr. Thorn on behalf of New Zealand on his election as President. New Zealand's relationship with Western Europe is of great importance historically and because of our close trade links, which we intend to preserve. We have been involved in negotiations with the European Economic Community which are basic to the well-being of our people. For the spirit of friendly understanding in which these negotiations have been conducted, New Zealand owes a great deal to him personally. We are confident that the same competence and understanding will distinguish Mr. Thorn's present term of high office. He can be assured of our fullest co-operation in his difficult task.
216.	This thirtieth year of the existence of the United Nations has been a year of unprecedented economic and social activity. It has been a year when more than half of the world's population, that half which consists of women, has been reasserting its unanswerable claim to equal status and opportunity with men. For far too long women have been forced to carry an undue burden of the world's poverty and prejudice. And for them, quite rightly, words are no longer enough.
217.	It has been a year also in which the poorer developing nations have been pursuing with great
vigor their unanswerable claims to fairer terms of trade to enable them to earn a better life for their own people. And for them, quite rightly also, words are no longer enough.
218.	The shocks and economic pains of the last two years have shown as never before the urgent necessity for practical steps to achieve change, Nations which for long have called for a new economic order are now at last being joined by others which are realizing that change is in their interests also. The growing interdependence of all nations is more apparent. We welcomed the general political commitment to change firmly and unanimously adopted at the seventh special session. We welcomed the new spirit of conciliation and compromise. Even more, we welcomed the obvious strong determination to go beyond words and votes and get down to practical action. The effectiveness of the United Nations will be judged not by its words, votes or hopes, but by its practical achievements in helping to bring about a better life. The record of words and resolutions of 30 years of United Nations existence would fill many warehouses; but the practical achievements can be quickly listed. So we must achieve a better balance, a balance that would provide new life to the United Nations and justifiable new hope to the peoples of the world,
219.	The next steps are crucial. We now have a map showing the possible roads to the objective of a new world economic order. But the new rules of the road must be worked out and agreed upon to ensure that fast travelers do not monopolize the highways. Those who started late and those who wish to travel more slowly must have their fair share of the road also. They must be given the right of way at times so that they, too, can reach the destination that they desire for themselves. Difficult economic and political decisions will have to be made by developing and developed countries alike. It will take a new political will assisted by popular backing for the measures that are necessary in the wider interest. A task as far-reaching as this will never be easy; it never has been, nor will it ever be so. But, at least, we are committed to try.
220.	Last year, on behalf of my Government, I stressed the folly of squandering vast resources on the armaments race, which is now estimated to cost $300,000 million a year over $75 for every man, woman and child living on this earth. This is a frightening thought, when we know that over 1,000 million people have less than $200 a year to live on. It is an appalling waste of resources considering the desperate need to use all the skill and capital investment available for developing new sources of energy to help provide the increasing supply of food that is urgently needed to prevent much of the world's population growing, up with stunted bodies and minds.
221.	The ever-growing trade in arms is another intensely disturbing development. Arms must not be treated as a normal means of earning money for the export trade. Those nations which contribute to the $20,000 million total of the world's arms trade surely bear a heavy responsibility to review their arms sales policies. This needs to be done on a joint basis for at present we find countries sheltering behind the sad argument that if they do not supply arms some competitor will.
222.	My country views with special concern the constant growth of nuclear weaponry, with all its unthinkable consequences. And now as never before we require urgent agreement on a comprehensive test-ban treaty, a treaty that will put an end for all time to the further development and testing of new and even more terrible methods of mass destruction. But, beyond that, we need measures that will actually stop and reverse the build-up of nuclear weapons.
223.	The New Zealand Government acknowledges with satisfaction the decision taken by the French Government a year ago to end its Program of testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere, of which due note was taken by the International Court of Justice in its decision last year. We, the Government of New Zealand, acknowledge with satisfaction the decision of the French Government at that time. At the same time, let it be clear that New Zealand regrets that all nuclear-weapon States continue to test nuclear weapons, whether in the atmosphere or underground.
224.	We regret that a number of States with the capacity to develop nuclear weapons have not yet signed the non-proliferation Treaty. We regret the unwillingness of some countries to agree to international control and supervision of peaceful nuclear explosions.
225.	We believe we must have a comprehensive test- ban treaty. We believe that all countries must ratify and carry out the non-proliferation Treaty. Each day that passes when those steps are not achieved, more and more people view the continued piling up of nuclear arms with fear and horror. But if those steps were taken, it would help create the confidence on which greater measures of disarmament would be built.
226.	As long as there is no comprehensive test-ban agreement, as long as there is no visible sign of progress towards such an agreement, it is natural that groups of like-minded neighboring States should try to reduce the legitimate anxieties of their peoples. New Zealand is attempting to do this by approaching the problem of nuclear disarmament on a partial and regional basis.
227.	A remarkable feature of the disarmament debate at the twenty-ninth session was the upsurge of interest in nuclear-free zones. At the Review Conference to the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons held at Geneva last May the value of this approach was fully recognized in the Conference's Final Declaration [A IC. 111068, annex /}. The Secretary-General, in an important passage in the introduction to his report this year, emphasized that nuclear-weapon free zones provide the best and easiest means by which those States which neither possess nor want to possess these weapons can, by their own initiative, interest and effort, ensure the total absence of nuclear weapons from their territories and enhance their mutual security [Aj 10001 lAikl.I, sect. VIII].
228.	As the Secretary-General pointed out, the Latin American countries have already made substantial progress towards this objective in a large and populated part of the globe [ibid.]. For some years my Government has believed that the independent and self-governing nations of the South Pacific might emulate the example of their Latin American neighbors in an adjoining area. Although the South Pacific contains a vast expanse of ocean, it also comprises many islands and the inhabitants of these islands are deeply concerned about the nuclear threat. Last July, the idea of a nuclear-weapon-free zone was discussed further at the South Pacific Forum by the Heads of Government of Australia, the Cook Islands, Fiji, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Tonga, Western Samoa and Papua New Guinea, whose independence and forthcoming membership in this Organization we greatly welcome. These nine South Pacific countries agreed unanimously that the concept of a nuclear- free zone in the South Pacific should be studied further and that, as a first step, the General Assembly should be asked to endorse the concept of such a zone. Accordingly, two members of the Forum which are also Members of the United Nations, Fiji and New Zealand, have proposed for this session an item on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Pacific [item 120], We appreciate that it is a complex question, and we are, of course, anxious to consult all countries which might be affected by the proposal. This process of consultation has already begun.
229.	We hope that Members will recognize this proposal as a positive response to a widespread desire to extend the application of the nuclear-weapon-free zone concept, and we ask you to accept this action as contribution to nuclear disarmament and the strengthening of peace. It is on that basis that I ask with confidence for the support of all Members of this Organization .
230.	The house of peace will be constructed from many building blocks. The great Powers have offered us no final blueprint. Sometimes we have no choice but to start building, setting some blocks in place without knowing precisely what the final structure will look like. But we do believe that all who can must start building those blocks now, in the knowledge that they will ultimately be used to build the house of peace that we all seek. My Government, for its part, will support any constructive proposal which offers the prospect of early progress towards disarmament.
231.	My Government regrets that the question of the admission of new Members to the United Nations has again become a matter of controversy. The early history of this matter was an unhappy one: for many years, well qualified applicants were denied admission through the use or, rather, the abuse of the veto power. Eventually, a large number of longstanding applicants were admitted together, in what was described at the time as a "package deal". What was done then strained the provisions of the Charter, but my country actively worked for a positive result, believing that it was intolerable to exclude qualified applicants indefinitely and that exceptional measures were required to solve the problem.
232.	After the log-jam was broken in 1955, applications, for the most part, were dealt with promptly and on their individual merits; a large number of new Members were admitted without difficulty. The divided States Germany, Korea and Viet Nam  were the main exceptions, and they were recognized as a special problem. Then, just two years ago, the two Germanys were admitted simultaneously. We hoped that this welcome development would be followed by agreed solutions in respect of Korea and, following a peace settlement, in respect of Viet Nam. Unhappily, this has not proved possible. On the contrary, a situation has arisen which seems likely to provoke more controversy and bitterness and which could delay for a long time the admission of several countries which should be Members.
233.	I wish therefore to describe my Government's general attitude towards the question of membership in the present situation. We believe that applications should be dealt with in accordance with the principle of universality. It is true that the present membership provisions of the Charter do not reflect that principle as clearly as we believe they should. In our view, membership in the United Nations is primarily a duty. Membership imposes important obligations, and no sovereign, independent State should be prevented from assuming them.
234.	That is not the only consideration. Membership also exposes countries to the cross-currents of international opinion; it can help to reconcile different views, or at least moderate them; and the benefits of all this can not be lightly disregarded.
235.	My Government therefore favors the admission of North Viet Nam, South Viet Nam, North Korea and South Korea, even though reunification may remain the ultimate objective or even a priority objective in those countries. We recognize that North Korea is not at present pressing its application, which it first submitted some 25 years ago. But that is not a valid reason, we believe, for not admitting South Korea. There has been criticism of one of the permanent members of the Security Council for linking the application of South Korea with those of North and South Viet Nam. But if that approach is to be deprecated, then equally so is the attitude of those who insist that an application from South Korea can be considered only in conjunction with an application from North Korea in other words, that both States must apply together. If linking is wrong in the one case, it is equally wrong in the other. My Government regrets that the Security Council did not approve the applications of North and South Viet Nam. We hope it will reconsider their applications and consider that of South Korea as well at an early date.
236.	My Government believes that in order to bring about universality the Charter provisions concerning admission should be simplified. In our view, the unanimity rule should not be applicable to membership applications in the Security Council and should be replaced by a suitable qualified majority. The criteria for admission should be the generally accepted criteria of independent statehood.
237.	There is a further consequence of our philosophy of universality, and this concerns Members which do not live up to their Charter obligations. In my country's view, the philosophy of universality is opposed to the tendency which has recently become evident to invoke the expulsion provision in Article 6 of the Charter. We regard expulsion as a last resort, and one of doubtful practical value. It would be a substantial improvement if provision could be made for a variety of sanctions against a Member which persistently violated the Charter, including suspension from the exercise of some or all of the rights and privileges of 
membership. The Member wh.ch is subjected to these measures should not, however, be relieved of the obligations of membership. In our view, that is a serious drawback to the present expulsion provision.
238.	New Zealand is a firm supporter of the process of decolonization and of the principles of racial equality enshrined in the Charter. During the past year we have followed the developments in southern Atrica with close concern. My Prime Minister welcomed the opportunity to discuss the situation in southern Africa with the Heads of Government of the African countries which are members of the Commonwealth when the Commonwealth Heads of Government met in Kingston in May. New Zealand fully subscribed to the views expressed by Commonwealth Prime Ministers, including those relating to sanctions against the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia and on the question of aid to the many indigenous peoples of southern Africa.
239.	In southern Africa there has been since last year's session of the Assembly encouraging progress in some areas, but disquieting developments in other areas, and in still other areas a disheartening lack of forward movement.
240.	Following the admission to the United Nations a year ago of the first Portuguese colony to be liberated, Guinea-Bissau, three more newly independent African States which were formerly under Portuguese rule have now taken their place among us. I take this opportunity to say a special word of welcome to the representatives of those countries. My country is conscious of the special problems which these new Governments face after a long period of struggle for their freedom and independence.
241.	The decolonization of Portugal's African colonies has brought about a fundamental shift in the balance of forces in southern Africa. With this change has come new hope for a solution of the problems of southern Rhodesia and Namibia. In Southern Rhodesia the goal of independence on the basis of majority rule has at times during the year seemed closer. It remains the earnest hope of my Government that this goal will be achieved quickly and peacefully. We trust that the Smith regime will take full advantage of what may well be the last opportunity to achieve a negotiated settlement. As the Commonwealth Heads of Government pointed out at Kingston, if peaceful avenues are blocked by the Smith regime, a stepping-up of armed struggle seems inevitable.
242.	Towards the end of 1974 the Prime Minister of South Africa asked that his Government be given six months to demonstrate its determination to make progress on the issues which caused the Assembly to reject the credentials of the South African delegation at the twenty-ninth session. Those six months have elapsed, and the United Nations is entitled to ask what progress has in fact been made. On the positive side, let us acknowledge that the South African Government played a constructive role in bringing Mr. Smith to the conference table with the leaders of the liberation movements in Southern Rhodesia. On the negative side, I think we must acknowledge that there has been little indication of any intention on the part of the South African Government to abandon its intolerable policy of apartheid. For the non-white majority of its people, South Africa continues to be a police State in which racial discrimination is not simply a matter of ignorance and prejudice but a fundamental doctrine embedded in the basic political and legal system.
243.	South Africa's position in regard to Namibia is equally indefensible. South Africa has no legal claim to the Territory. The situation is a simple one, where the people of Namibia as a whole should be given the opportunity to exercise the right of self-determination as soon as possible under United Nations supervision. In the absence of a change of heart on these issues, South Africa cannot expect to resume its rightful place in the international community.
244.	Since east and south-east Asia is an area of prime concern to New Zealand, I cannot conclude without commenting briefly on some of the important events that have taken place in this region during the past year.
245.	In Indo-China the prolonged military struggle is over. Political power there is in new hands, and whatever views we may hold about this we must all be grateful that the conflict has ended. There are lessons to be learned from the Indo-China experience if we, the international community, are prepared to heed them. It is not recrimination which is called for now, but a spirit of reconciliation and a readiness to help with the task of reconstruction. Some of the international agencies have already been engaged in this task, and their support has been invaluable. My Government is playing its part. We are willing, if so requested, to help with development Programs here as elsewhere without considerations of ideology.
246.	Elsewhere in South-East Asia the changes may not have been as dramatic as they have been in IndoChina. But developments are under way which promise to be just as significant for the region's future. We have been heartened above all by the growth of a genuine regional spirit. This is best seen in the progress of the Association of South-East Asian Nations. The five members of the Association have displayed a sense of cohesion and common purpose in seeking new solutions to old problems. New Zealand has been pleased to offer support, in practical ways, for their collective efforts. We look forward to the day when with them, and with the countries of Indo-China we will work together as a partnership in a wider scheme of regional co-operation, for this is the way ahead.
247.	My Government finds the trends in Asia encouraging. The situation in Korea, however, remains a source of serious concern. The continuing tension there, to which accusation and counter-accusation, threat and counter-threat, contribute, is a relic of another era.
248.	The Korean question has been on the Assembly's agenda for a quarter century. Korea may seem remote to some countries and the history of events there may be growing dim. But in considering this item it would be folly to forget that the interests of many Powers are involved. It has been the scene of a terrible war. With irresponsible handling it could be the scene of another. The supreme interest of the United Nations is peace. It is our duty to make decisions that contribute to peace and reconciliation rather than to insecurity and continued bitterness. It is my Government's earnest hope that this year a solution will be found that is acceptable to all parties and particularly, of course, to the two Korean States. If such a solution requires that the United Nations Command be dissolved, then we have a responsibility to ensure that adequate arrangements remain to safeguard peace and the well-being of the Korean people.
249.	In conclusion, the general debate with which we open each session of the General Assembly gives each Member small or large, poor or rich an equal opportunity to speak out honestly and frankly on matters it regards of vital concern. Indeed, it is more than an opportunity; it is a right and a responsibility. Each Member equally has a responsibility to help solve the problems facing the United Nations, and to contribute a share of the needed resources in proportion to its means. New Zealand has spoken out on the issues of most concern to us. I renew our pledge to play our part in finding fair and constructive solutions.


104.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to the high position of President of the General Assembly for its thirtieth session and I wish you full success in the discharge of this most important function.
105.	For three decades now, regular sessions of the General Assembly have been held towards the end of each year. And each session becomes a significant event in international life. Indeed, the United Nations activities are focused on the most important and acute problems.
106.	If we try to visualize with our mind's eye the work of our Organization over all these years, we shall see a vivid picture of the concerns and anxieties, aspirations and hopes of mankind, permeated by a desire, common to all peoples, for peace and for material, social and spiritual progress.
107.	Whether or not international developments are in line with that desire, this should be, above all, the starting-point in analyzing the state of affairs in the world. It is from this angle that the Soviet Union views the situation in which representatives of States have gathered for the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.
108.	The main feature of the situation is that the process of relaxation of international tensions is gaining in scope, and detente itself is increasingly gaining substance. This finds its expression, in particular, in the conclusion of a whole number of agreements between States, including the well-known Soviet- American agreements, which are ot great importance for the cause of peace and international security.
109.	And though the process of improving the political climate is still being influenced by various, sometimes conflicting, factors, it can be definitely stated that in the past year a new significant step has been taken along the path leading, towards a more durable peace.
110.	The peaceful foreign policy of the USSR, a policy of socialism, is aimed at those objectives, at the strengthening of international security. Those objectives were set forth by the great Lenin himself, back in the early years of the existence of the Soviet State, and our country has been invariably guided by them throughout its historical march.
111.	Following this course, a course embodied in the Peace Program adopted by the Twenty-Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the USSR is an active participant in, and in many instances a sponsor of, efforts radically to improve the international situation.
112.	In present-day conditions, we believe it feasible, though not at all easy, to carry out a restructuring of relations among States such as would leave no room for wars between them and would secure respect for the rights of all peoples, large or small, to free and independent development.
113.	The principled foreign policy line of the USSR will, no doubt, be reaffirmed and expanded in the decisions of the forthcoming Twenty-Fifth Congress of the Party of Soviet communists early next year. All those who fight for the peace, national independence and social progress of peoples can continue to count on our solidarity and active support.
114.	In pursuing its policy of peace, the Soviet Union acts in the world arena in close unity with the fraternal socialist countries. And we are proud that the peaceful policies of the socialist countries are in keeping with ti.s aspirations of all peoples.
115.	This yea.' will remain in the memory of the peoples as the year of the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The Final Act of the Conference, to which the signatures of top leaders of 33 European countries, the United States of America and Canada were affixed in Helsinki, in one of the most outstanding documents of our times.
116.	The peoples of Europe to a very large extent pinned on the Conference the hope that the European continent would be able, at last, to break out of the vicious circle of its history where every post-war period turned into a pre-war period, to be followed by a war unleashed by aggressors. The peoples of Europe expected that the Conference would work out and adopt important decisions in the interests of ensuring their security and agree on the main directions for equal and versatile co-operation. Everywhere in Europe people wished the Conference to succeed.
117.	The participants in the Conference succeeded through intense collective efforts in achieving important results, which have been clearly recorded in the Final Act.
118.	This concerns, above all, the political sphere —the working out of principles governing relations among the participating States. Provided they are strictly observed by all States, the threat of war will be excluded from the life of the peoples of Europe and an atmosphere of trust in the peaceful development of each country will come into being on the continent.
119.	This is also true and applicable with regard to the stability and confidence measures agreed on at the Conference, which are designed to promote a reduction of the risk of armed conflicts in Europe.
120.	A positive role is to be played by the understandings reached at the Conference on co-operation in the fields of trade, large-scale industrial projects, science and technology, and the protection of the environment.
121.	A substantial contribution to the development of co-operation between the States participating in the Conference are the understandings reached on questions of co-operation in the fields of culture, information, contacts and education, and their significance will be ever increasingly felt as detente deepens and develops.
122.	It is not without a sense of satisfaction that I note that the success of the Conference was largely facilitated by the efforts of the socialist countries, which invariably seek to switch international relations on to the track of peaceful coexistence. This success became possible also because in Western countries the well-founded conviction is gaining strength that it is necessary to adopt a constructive approach to the solution of problems that arise in Europe instead of aggravating and inflaming the situation, which in the past often reached dangerous levels.
123.	The understandings reached as a result of the Conference are based on the recognition by all its participants of the absolute truth that respect for the sovereign equality of States, the non-use of force, the inviolability of frontiers, territorial integrity, nonintervention from outside in the internal affairs of States as well as other basic principles are laws which no one may transgress.
124.	What are the implications of the result of this joint work of 35 States for the peoples of Europe and indeed of the entire world?
125.	The answer is provided by the experience of the past, when a desire to seize others' territories and brute force raised to the level of State policy acquired the character of criminal claims to world domination and developed into the brown plague of fascism, racism, direct aggression and the tragedy of world wars. Now 35 States which took part in the Conference have assumed, jointly and before the whole world, the obligation to build their relations on the principles of peace, and peace alone, and of deeper co-operation.
126.	The results of the Conference constitute a carefully weighed balance of the interests of all its participants, and they reflect generally acceptable understandings and well-founded compromises. We have every reason to state that the experience of the Conference should be used most extensively for the settlement in general of the pressing problems of today.
127.	In short, as was stressed by L. I. Brezhnev in his speech at Helsinki:
"The results of the prolonged negotiations are such that there are neither victors nor vanquished, neither winners nor losers. This is a victory for reason. Everyone has won the countries of the East and of the West , the peoples of socialist and capitalist States, parties to alliances and neutrals, large and small. This is a gain for all people who hold dear the cause of peace and security on our planet.
128.	Assessing highly the results of the Conference, the Soviet Union believes that the main task now is to translate the understandings reached into deeds, and to advance towards new milestones in the struggle for a lasting peace. This is the course the Soviet Union follows and will continue to follow, and this is what we also expect others to do.
129.	Who would contest that the year 1975 will go down in history as the year of the triumph of the just cause of the peoples of Indo-China? Triumph crowned their liberation struggle that had been carried on for almost 30 years against colonialists and aggression.
130.	Those people sustained tremendous losses, but their will for freedom was never broken. The victory won by the peoples of Indo-China is above all the result of their own efforts. At the same time, it is also a major and common success of all the peace-loving and progressive: forces which invariably demonstrated their solidarity with the struggle of the patriots of Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia, and provided them with moral and material support.
131.	The Soviet Union as the whole world knows has fulfilled its internationalist duty to the Vietnamese people. It has sought persistently the elimination in
Indo-China of one of the most dangerous hot-beds of war which troubled international relations.
132.	Understandably, the removal of that hot-bed was welcomed everywhere with a sense of relief. Now that freedom and peace have dawned over the whole of Indo-China, favorable prospects are opening up for its peoples to begin healing the wounds of war and building a new life, which they are doing with the dedication and heroism so characteristic of them.
133.	Having defended their sovereignty and independence in the long struggle, the Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam now express their willingness to participate within the framework of this world Organization also in efforts to develop international co-operation. We are convinced that the admission to the United Nations of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam and the Republic of South Viet Nam would be fully in keeping with the lofty purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter; and the Soviet Union supports the request of their Governments to that effect. No one who stands for peace should fear such a decision of the United Nations.
134.	The lessons of Indo-China are simple and obvious. The struggle of peoples for freedom, national independence and social progress is invincible. It cannot be destroyed by bullets or fire. The outcome of many years of conflict in Indo-China is a convincing case in point. It is also clear that any attempt to dictate or to impose one's will on other peoples by force of arms is untenable and in the final account doomed to failure.
135.	This is a good lesson, in the sense that the policy of acting from "positions of strength", which has now been rejected also at the conference table in Helsinki, should be relegated to the archives of history, never to be revived.
136.	The radical change in the state of affairs in Indo-China creates more favorable prerequisites for establishing peaceful co-operation in Asia as a whole. Practical steps in this direction would serve the interests of the settlement of urgent problems and the strengthening of security throughout the continent of Asia which of course requires, as in Europe, collective efforts by all States concerned, both large and small. And it is through such efforts, and subject to strict compliance with the principles of equality and non- use of force in any guise in resolving disputes between States, that a most effective solution of the problem of Asian security can be found. Let no one think that the Soviet Union would benefit from such a turn of events in Asia to a greater extent than some other States. Not at all; objectively all countries of Asia are equally interested in this.
137.	The entire course of world events in recent times confirms the conclusion reached a long time ago by all those who stand on the ground of reality, that only the policy of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems can have a future and is in keeping with the interests of the peoples.
138.	Our country, the Soviet Union, which is faithful to the legacy of Lenin, carries on a tireless struggle for the further establishment of these principles as a generally recognized rule of international relations. In our relationships with countries of different social systems 'here are a good many positive elements which serve both our interests and those of our partners in corresponding agreements and understandings. This finds its expression in particular in the development of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America in recent years, primarily as a result of Soviet-American summit meetings, which favorably influences the situation in the world as a whole.
139.	A joint search for solutions of urgent problems, including their consideration at the very highest level, the development of political contacts, the expansion of economic, scientific, technological and cultural exchanges have already yielded tangible results which have a positive impact on the general state of international relations and strengthen the spirit of trust in them, without which relations among States cannot be built on a solid basis.
140.	The Soviet Union continues to consolidate friendly relations with developing countries with which we are united by a common desire for peace and progress. We have invariably rendered and will continue to render support to the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America and to the movement of non- aligned States in their struggle to consolidate their national sovereignty and economic independence, to overcome the grim legacy of the colonial past, and against intrigues aimed at undermining their independence and infringing upon their legitimate rights.
141.	Step by step the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America are freeing themselves of the consequences of the "cold war" and its distortions in politics. In this respect the decision by Latin American States to put an end to the policy of boycotting socialist Cuba, a policy imposed upon them, was an important event.
142.	It is quite natural that it should be precisely in the present-day situation that the last pillars of colonialism, built up over centuries, are falling down. Quite recently, Mozambique, Cape Verde, Sao Tome and Principe, the Comoros and Papua New Guinea have joined the ranks of independent States. Our country welcomes the victory of the just cause of their peoples.
143.	We congratulate the representatives present in this Hall of the Republic of Cape Verde, the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe, and the People's Republic of Mozambique, which have become full-fledged Members of our Organization.
144.	Of course, the completion of the process of decolonization is not proceeding without difficulties. The events in Angola, for example, testify to this. The forces hostile to the liberation struggle of peoples do not surrender their positions without fighting. They sometimes find accomplices also among those who like to pose as zealous champions of the good of oppressed peoples while in practice they are in collusion with the oppressors.
145.	But in spite of all difficulties, the struggle for the elimination of the vestiges of colonialism, for the uprooting of racism, is now closer to final victory than ever before.
146.	The States of Asia, Africa and Latin America constitute a great and active force in world politics, and this imposes on them a grave responsibility for the state of affairs in the world. We view with understanding the fact that these countries, still suffering from the consequences of exploitation, discrimination and economic coercion, are today participating in the work of putting forward and elaborating proposals to establish such international economic relations as would be based on equality and justice.
147.	The solution of those questions, too, is inseparably connected with the further relaxation of political tensions in the world. The Soviet Union is fully aware of the legitimate interests and demands of the developing countries, and it based itself precisely upon such positions in the course of the recently concluded seventh special session of the General Assembly, the results of which we assess positively, although it is quite clear to everyone that much has still to be done before the relevant problems are actually solved.
148.	Thus, the past was marked by significant inter-national events of a positive nature. It is not for us, the socialist States, to underestimate the significance of successes in the international arena. Their contribution to the struggle for those successes is common knowledge.
149.	At the same time, one should be clearly conscious of the fact that detente is not a process which develops by its own momentum. For detente to move ahead, ever new impulses must be given it. A continuous day-to-day struggle must be conducted for it in international forums and from parliamentary rostrums. Each State, each Government, should realize that it can and should make its own contribution to detente.
150.	We deem it necessary to state this from the rostrum of the United Nations because, as facts prove, it would be wrong to underestimate the resistance of the enemies of detente.
151.	Designs dangerous to the cause of international co-operation continue to originate in their camp. And in this connexion no small arsenal of means is put into action, ranging from the direct use of force against other countries and peoples to demagoguery which exploits the tenacity of the "cold-war" dogmas and sows doubts as to the benefits of detente for all peoples.
152.	The same forces which once in the past sought to thwart the convening of the all-European Conference, and later on tried to prevent it from succeeding, attempt to question the effectiveness of its results.
153.	However the problem does not only lie in tendentious propaganda campaigns against detente and international actions aimed at deepening it; what is even more dangerous is the continuous policy of interference which endangers the independence of States, even though such a policy may be camouflaged words in defense of the ideals of freedom and democracy. Two years ago, this policy paved the way for the bloody Fascist coup in Chile. Today, almost the same methods are used to exacerbate the situation concerning some other countries.
154.	The world is deeply concerned over the blatant attempts to bring outside pressure to bear on Portugal, clearly made with the intent to compel the Portuguese people to abandon their chosen road of free development.
155.	The interests of solving the complex political and economic problems faced by Portugal require that a calm situation be ensured with regard to that country. No one can be allowed to flout the inalienable right of the Portuguese people to determine its destiny independently and without outside interference. Such is the position on which the Soviet Union has proceeded and will continue to proceed.
156.	Opponents of the process of detente will try to slow it down. But if we ask all those who, overtly or semi-overtly, today come out against the line of lessening international tensions what alternative they offer, they cannot come up with anything intelligible. In reality, their policy has but one answer, an answer which would tend to reserve this process and bring it back to the times of the "cold war".
157.	Herein lies the watershed between those who in practice stand for peace, for the improvement of relations between States and for the development of peaceful co-operation in all fields and they are backed by the peoples and those who reject this course in the development of world affairs, who would rather push the world towards the old path of tension, clashes between States, and an unrestrained arms race with all the ensuing dangers.
158.	All participants in this world forum of States would probably agree that one of the main tasks in the international sphere remains the elimination of the hot-beds of armed conflict. One need not dwell on the gravity of the threat when in this or that hot-bed the conflict suddenly flares up and again produces a crisis. The world has repeatedly faced such a turn of events and knows full well how hard it is to put out the flames of war.
159.	This, above all, concerns the Middle East, where a dangerous situation has persisted for many years.
160.	The essence of the conflict, its origins and causes are well knwon. What is required for the solution of the problem is no secret either. Only those do not see it who do not wish to. To establish a just and lasting peace in the Middle East in the interests of all States of the area and peoples inhabiting it, it is necessary that Israeli forces be withdrawn from all the Arab territories occupied by them in 1967; to ensure the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their right to establish their own State; to guarantee the rights of all the countries of the Middle East to independent development. I repeat, "all" the countries of the Middle East.
161.	A Middle East settlement cannot make headway if those crucial problems are left unsolved. Without their solution a settlement in the Middle East can only be delayed indefinitely, with increasing dangers for the situation. No palliative measures or camouflaging can change the substance of the matter.
162.	The problem of the Middle East must be free from an approach based on momentary considerations and publicity. It can be solved in the interests of the security and independence of all the countries of the region only in conditions of a serious and responsible approach to its solution.
163.	From all appearances, the circles which determine the political course of Israel have not yet realized that it is impossible to ensure the security of the country while trampling upon the legitimate rights of other countries which are jits neighbors. That policy naturally meets with broad condemnation. The Soviet Union, too, decisively condemns it.
164.	The main problems of the Middle East are still awaiting solution. There is appropriate machinery for their examination the Geneva Peace Conference. The Soviet Union stands for the reconvening of the Conference with the participation of all—and I stress "all"—parties concerned, including representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization. It will be recalled that the General Assembly at its twenty- ninth session reaffirmed by an overwhelming majority the right of the Arab people of Palestine to self-determination and national sovereignty [resolution 3236 (XXIX)\. The solution of the Palestine problem is an integral part of an over-all settlement in the Middle East. Today this is axiomatic and politicians cannot pretend that they do not see it.
165.	The main thing with which the participants should come to the Conference is a firm desire jointly to seek acceptable solutions. The Soviet Union, for its part, is ready to continue to do everything so that the Middle East may become an area of lasting and durable peace. That is what we mainly want to see in the Middle East, an area adjacent to the southern borders of our country.
166.	The Soviet Union consistently pursues a policy of friendship with the Arab countries, which are defending their just cause. This friendship is deeply ingrained and we do not believe that anyone will succeed in undermining it. The Soviet Union will continue to do everything in its power to consolidate this friendship on a basis of justice and principle.
167.	The situation in and around Cyprus still remains complicated. To satisfy interests alien to Cyprus the sovereignty of that small country and the inalienable rights of its people have been trampled upon for more than a year.
168.	The Soviet Union has consistently come out in defence of the independence and the territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the island, and for the settlement of the internal matters of their State by the two communities, Greek and Turkish, themselves. In other words, we are for the implementation of the well-known United Nations decisions on Cyprus. It is only on such a basis that a just settlement of the Cyprus problem and the elimination of this hotbed of tension will be possible.
169.	The precarious state of armistice obviously does not ensure the stabilization of the state of affairs on the Korean peninsula. The need to create conditions for establishing durable peace on the Korean peninsula and speeding up the peaceful reunification of Korea has long been pressing.
170.	Those goals would be served by a cessation of outside interference in the internal affairs of the Korean people and, in the first place, the withdrawal from South Korea of all foreign troops stationed there under the United Nations flag, as well as by the conclusion of a peace treaty. It is the duty of the United Nations to assist in every possible way in taking such steps. This can be done on the basis of the proposals put forward at the current session of the General
Assembly by a large group of States, including the Soviet Union.
171.	The process of lessening tensions in the world, the very logic of its development, pose most acutely the question of the need to curb the arms race. The measures taken in this direction in recent years are to be commended. We attach great importance also to the negotiations now under way aimed at working out a new long-term agreement between the Soviet Union and the United States of America on the limitation of strategic offensive weapons. Its conclusion will be a new and major step forward, not only in bilateral Soviet-American relations, but in a wider international context as well.
172.	Hardly anyone would dispute the fact that everything that has been achieved in the field of disarm-ament so far represents but the first steps. Indeed, mankind so far has been unable to check the arms race or even substantially to slow down its pace. It goes on in the direction both of developing ever more destructive means of warfare and of building up the total volume of armaments.
173.	The Soviet Union is convinced that in the conditions of a relaxation of tensions in the world the prerequisites have been created for the implementation of effective measures which would end the arms race. In other words, it is now not only necessary but also possible to supplement political detente with military detente. The States participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe unanimously pronounced themselves in favor of this in the Final Act.
174.	The Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, held last May at Geneva, came out for the implementation of broad measures for the limitation of the arms race ana fcr disarmament. It is precisely such specific steps towards easing the burden of armaments that become the touchstone for testing the genuine readiness of States and Governments to pursue the course of peace.
175.	The struggle for disarmament has always been and continues to be an integral part of the foreign policy line of the Soviet Union. The USSR is a permanent and active participant in negotiations on various aspects of the disarmament problem.
176.	We attach great importance to the lessening of military confrontation in areas where it is especially dangerous. Now, following the conclusion of the all- European Conference, one of the primary tasks is to find ways towards agreement on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in central Europe, without infringing the security of anyone. The Soviet Union will contribute in every way to the success of the talks on this problem currently under way in Vienna.
177.	Within the framework of the United Nations we have on more than one occasion already stated in detail our position on disarmament questions. And we have not merely stated it. The Soviet Union has put forward a large number of specific proposals many of which have formed the basis of important decisions adopted by the United Nations. We have consistently supported their implementation. This applies in particular to the resolution of the twenty- seventh session of the General Assembly on the non-use of force in international relations and the simultaneous permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)].
178.	Another question raised by the Soviet Union the reduction of the military budgets of States permanent members of the United Nations Security Council also retains the utmost importance..
179.	We consider it important speedily to conclude an international convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of techniques to influence the environment. The conclusion of such a convention would be not only a means of limiting the sphere of the arms race, but also an important means of preserving the environment, which would meet the vital interests of all States and peoples. We would like to express the hope that agreement will be reached on this matter in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament, where a relevant draft is under consideration.
180.	In the field of disarmament, as in other matters, the Soviet Union adopts a realistic approach. It is constantly seeking areas of disarmament and arms- race limitation in which it is feasible to find commonly acceptable agreements.
181.	At the same time, we have never overlooked the main objective general and complete disarmament. We are of the view that this problem should be in the forefront of the attention of the World Disarmament Conference. The United Nations has already approved the idea of convening it. In that forum all countries of the world could, on an equal footing and freely, set out and compare their positions and outline ways and means of limiting and arresting the arms race.
182.	It is high time that efforts were made to complete preparations for the conference and to convene it. As is well known, this is something in which the Soviet Union will not be, and has not been, found wanting.
183.	The Soviet delegation would like to draw your attention to two aspects of the disarmament problem on which, in our view, decisions are required and can be taken in practice at the earliest possible date.
184.	We all realize the importance of scientific and technological progress. The mission of science is noble and humane in essence. It expands the horizons of human knowledge, makes knowledge a powerful force of economic development, of raising the well- being of peoples and their cultural levels, and links countries together by bonds of peaceful co-operation.
185.	Quite recently the entire world was given new proof of this. We are referring to the outstanding international experiment in outer space, the docking and joint flight of the Soviet and American space craft, "Soyuz" and "Apollo". The • handshake in orbit, as this experiment is now known, has rightfully become a symbol of the fruitful union of scientific achievements and the policy of peaceful coexistence.
186.	The USSR is a consistent champion of the use of science exclusively for peaceful purposes and in the interest of mankind, and is prepared for wide, large-scale co-operation in the sphere of science and technology with all States interested in this.
187.	However, the experience of the past shows that achievements in science and technology can be used for dangerous, even criminal purposes.
188.	With today's rapid development of science and technology in various countries new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction could emerge in various places. One can assume with a high degree of certainty that they would be even more ominous than those existing at present.
189.	None of this can be ignored. Further, it is well known how difficult it is to withdraw any weapon that has already been developed from the arsenals of States, and consequently how much safer and more reasonable it is to prevent its emergence in advance. If things are viewed from that angle, the need for, the urgency of, effective measures to prohibit the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction should become absolutely evident.
190.	Proceeding from this, aware of its responsibility as a permanent member of the Security Council, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly as an important and urgent matter of item 126 entitled "Prohibition of the development and manufacture of new types of weapons of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons".
191.	We propose that States, and first of all the major Powers, conclude an agreement based on an undertaking neither to develop nor to manufacture new types and new systems of such weapons and not to assist in or encourage any activities in that direction.
192.	The need may arise to be more specific as to the categories of weapons which should be covered by the ban. The Soviet Union is prepared to take part in a detailed examination of this question in the course of appropriate negotiations. It is ready to speak out on the substance of this matter and to put forward most concrete proposals.
193.	The draft agreement which we submit to the General Assembly [see A/10243, annex] is worded in such a way that, while banning the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction, the agreement would not at the same time impede the economic, scientific and technical development of States parties and would not infringe their right to make use of scientific research and discoveries for peaceful purposes, for the benefit of people and without any discrimination.
194.	Such an international agreement would make a major contribution to the cause of limiting the arms race and to the cause of further easing international tensions. We should like to express our hope that our proposal will find support from the participants in this session and that other countries will join us in our initiative.
195.	In submitting^ our second proposal we were moved by the same concern, that of delivering mankind from the danger of war; by the desire to curb the race in the most pernicious weapons at present in the arsenals of States, nuclear weapons. Its purpose is to end completely nuclear weapon tests and thus radically to limit the practical possibilities for perfecting it further.
196.	Major steps have already been taken towards this aim: the 1963 Moscow Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water," and the 1974 Treaty between the USSR and the United States of America on the limitation of underground nuclear weapons tests.2
197.	_ In our view, conditions are ripe at present for the final step along this road: to conclude a broad international agreement imposing a ban on all nuclear weapon tests without exception.
198.	In line with this approach, the Soviet Union has already proposed the inclusion in the agenda of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Conclusion of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests" [item 122].
199.	In accordance with the draft treaty which is submitted for the consideration of Member States [see AH0241, annex], its adherents would undertake from now on not to manufacture nuclear weapons and to prohibit and prevent any test explosions of nuclear weapons in any environment, including the underground environment. Such an obligation must, of course, be assumed by all States, including all nuclear Powers.
200.	While outlawing all nuclear weapon tests, the treaty must not at the same time deny access to the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear explosions for both nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon countries.
201.	We hope that the General Assembly will support our initiative for the conclusion of a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests.
202.	The implementation of the proposals submitted by the Soviet Union for consideration at the present session is in our view an integral part of the fulfillment of the general task which life itself has today made the corner-stone of all United Nations activities. The essence of the task is to promote the further development of the positive processes taking place in the world and to make them irreversible.
203.	We are convinced that the United Nations is equal to that task. Our world Organization has accumulated enormous experience in the multilateral co-operation of States. That valuable asset can and must be constantly employed for the benefit of peace.
204.	The successful fulfillment of its lofty mission by the United Nations as an important instrument for consolidating international security, particularly in the present-day most responsible period, presupposes constant enhancement of the effectiveness of its work. That need is ever greater, since some useful decisions of the United Nations still remain unimplemented, and that plays into the hands of those who would like to maintain hotbeds of the danger of war, colonial domination and remnants of racism.
205.	It would do no harm to recall once again from this rostrum that, as regards the obligation to comply strictly with the provisions of the United Nations Charter, there can be no exceptions for any of its Members. The Charter is the foundation of the entire structure of the United Nations. It has stood the test of time, and fully retains its significance for the future.
It is in the strict observance of the Charter, rather than in its revision, that one should look for resources for the further enhancement of the effectiveness of the United Nations and the strengthening of its authority.
206.	The lofty purposes and principles proclaimed in the Charter are an embodiment of the collective quest of the peoples for peace and progress. They were born out of the flames of the greatest tragedy that has ever befallen mankind. Celebrating this year the thirtieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War, the peoples look to the future with hope.
207.	The greatness of the exploits performed in the struggle against fascism and aggression by the peoples of the Soviet Union and the peoples of all countries who, during the years of war, combined their efforts in the name of victory and founded the United Nations, setting themselves the task of saving present and succeeding generations from the scourge of war, will never fade.
208.	In the three decades since the end of the Second World War a great distance has been covered in the struggle for international security. Particularly impressive are the successes achieved in recent years, which graphically prove that the prevention of wars between States is not a Utopian but an attainable goal. However, that must not be a source of complacency. There is still much to be done to achieve a truly stable peace on earth.
209.	As for the Soviet Union, we wish to see no stops on this road, no zigzags and, above all, no reversals. Substantial steps in that direction can be made here, at this General Assembly, and we are willing to take a most active part in this common endeavor.



At the outset, let me say how pleased we are that our deliberations this year take place under the presidency of the Prime Minister of Luxembourg. His contribution to European co-operation, his diplomatic skills,
' his devotion to democracy, give us confidence that this thirtieth session will be marked by a constructive and creative spirit.
63.	I want also to pay a tribute to the Secretary- General, whose fairness, leadership and tireless efforts are dedicated to carrying this Organization forward into a new era of co-operation for world peace.
64.	This century has seen war and cataclysm on an unprecedented scale. It has witnessed the breakdown of established patterns of order and practices of international conduct. It has suffered global economic depression and cycles of famine. It has experienced the birth of thermonuclear weapons, and the proliferation of armaments around the planet.
65.	But this century has also seen the triumph of the principle of self-determination and national independence. A truly global community has begun to evolve, and this development is reflected in a multitude of institutions of international co-operation. We have shaped new methods of peaceful settlement and of arms limitation, and new institutions to promote economic development and to combat hunger and disease world-wide.
66.	As we deliberate the future, an event of potentially vast implications has just been achieved in this Organization: the unanimous agreement produced by the seventh special session of the General Assembly on measures to improve the economic condition of mankind [resolution 3362 (S-VII)].
67.	Despite differences of ideology and of approaches to economic development, the nations assembled here began the move towards the recognition that our interdependence spells either common progress or common disaster; that in our age no nation or group of nations can achieve its aims by pressure or by confrontation and that the attempt to do so would damage everyone. They agreed to transcend the stereotypes of the past in the search for a co-operative future. The seventh special session forged a sense of common purpose based on the equality and co-operation of States. Now we must dedicate ourselves to the implementation of this consensus.
68.	Let us carry forward the spirit of conciliation into the deliberaDigitiZed by Dag HammarSkjoid LibraryLet us address the issues of world peace the foundation of all we do on this planet with this same consciousness of our common destiny. It is our duty to avoid empty slogans and endless recrimination.
69.	Only in a structure of co-operation can disputes be settled and clashes contained. Only in an atmosphere of conciliation can the insecurity of nations, out of which so much conflict arises, be eased, and habits of compromise and accommodation be nurtured. Social progress, justice and human rights can thrive only in an atmosphere of reduced international tension.
70.	The United States stands ready to dedicate itself to co-operative efforts to harmonize the different perspectives of the world community in creating a new sense of security and well-being. We do so, not out of fear, for we are better able to sustain ourselves in situations of confrontation than most other nations. Nor do we do so out of a sense of guilt, for we believe that on the whole we have used our power for constructive ends.
71.	We affirm our common destiny because of our recognition of global interdependence and because global peace requires it. Indeed there is no realistic alternative to shared responsibility in dealing with the international agenda of peace, security, economic well-being and justice.
72.	Let me set forth the views of the United States on the work we face in each of these areas.
73.	Our first and transcendent concern is for peace in the world. Peace is never automatic. It is more than the absence of war. And it is inseparable from security, A world in which the survival of nations is at the mercy of a few would spell oppression and injustice and fear. There can be no security without equilibrium and no safety without restraint.
74.	Only when the rights of nations are respected, when accommodation supplants force, can man's energies be devoted to the realization of his deepest aspirations.
75.	The United States will pursue the cause of peace with patience and an attitude of conciliation in many spheres. We shall nurture and deepen the ties of co-operation with our friends and allies. We shall strive to improve relations with countries of different ideology or political conviction. We shall always stand ready to assist in the settlement of regional disputes. We shall intensify our efforts to halt the spiral of nuclear armaments. We shall strive to improve man's economic and social condition and to strengthen the collaboration between developed and developing nations. And we shall struggle for the realization of fundamental human rights.
76.	America's close ties with the industrial democracies of North America, Western Europe and Japan have been the corner-stone of world stability and peace for three decades. Today, looking beyond immediate security and defence, we are working together on a range of new issues. Through our consultations, we have begun joint efforts to ease inter-national tensions; to co-ordinate our national policies for economic recovery; to work together on common challenges such as energy and the environment; and to address the great issues that concern the developing countries.
77.	In the same spirit, the United States has opened a new dialog with its neighbors in Central and Latin America. We have taken important steps towards resolving major political problems; we have begun close consultations for co-operation in promoting economic and social development. Alliance relations in the Western Hemisphere have a long history and great promise for the future. With imagination and dedication, we can make inter-American co-operation on the tasks of development an example to and a pillar of the global community.
78.	Peace, to be secure, must place on a more durable and reliable basis the relations between the nations possessing the means to destroy our planet.
79.	In recent years, the bipolar confrontation of the last generation has given way to the beginning of dialog and an easing of direct conflict. In this body, of all organizations, there is surely an appreciation of the global importance of lessened tension between the nuclear super-Powers. All nations have a stake in its success. When weapons of mass destruction can span continents in minutes, nuclear conflict threatens the survival of all mankind.
80.	We recognize that the suspicion and rivalry of a generation will not be swept away with a document or a conference. Real ideological and political differences exist. We shall firmly defend our vital interests and those of our friends. But we shall also never lose sight of the fact that in our age peace is a practical necessity and a moral imperative. We shall pursue the relaxation of tensions on the basis of strict reciprocity. We know the difference between posturing and policy; we will not encourage the belief that anyone can benefit from artificial tensions. We are deeply conscious that we owe it to future generations not to be swayed by momentary passions.
81.	The state of United States-Soviet relations today and just a decade ago presents a dramatic contrast. The world is no longer continually shaken by chronic and bitter confrontations. Periodic consultations including those held at the highest level encourage restraint and amplify areas of mutual interest. The forthcoming meeting between the President of the United States, Mr. Ford, and the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Mr. Brezhnev, should strengthen this process.
82.	Principles of mutual restraint have been enunciated at various summit meetings; they were reaffirmed by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe two months ago. These principles provide a standard of behavior by which our actions will be tested. If they are observed as we insist and if neither side seeks unilateral advantage, the specter of general war will be lifted not only from our own peoples but from all nations. There can be no more important task before us.
83.	We have likewise pursued more constructive and beneficial relationships with the countries of Eastern Europe. The United States has many traditional and deep-rooted bonds of friendship with the proud peoples of that region. We see widening possibilities for practical co-operation as the barriers between East and West in Europe diminish.

84.	There is no relationship to which the United States assigns greater significance than its new ties with the People's Republic of China. We believe that the well-being and progress of a quarter of humanity is an important element in global stability. The hostility of decades between our two nations has been replaced by a relationship of mutual respect which is now a durable feature of the world scene. It serves not only the interest of our two countries but also the broader interests of peace and stability in Asia and around the world. President Ford plans to visit the People's Republic of China later this year to confirm the vitality of our relationship and to advance the ties between us on the basis of the strict implementation of the Shanghai Communique. We take seriously the process of normalizing our relationship. We are dedicated to pursuing it.
85.	The world community must find a way to contain or resolve regional conflicts before they spread into global confrontation. Nowhere has the danger been greater than in the Middle East. Nowhere has the need for persistent and imaginative negotiation between suspicious rivals been more evident. Nowhere is there greater promise of moving from perennial crisis towards peace. Nowhere has the Security Council established a clearer framework than in its resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
86.	The road towards a lasting peace stretches long and hard before us. The Middle East has seen more than its share of dashed hopes and disappointment. But the conclusion of the recent Sinai agreement1 marks a major step forward. It is the first agreement in the long and tragic history of the Arab-Israeli conflict which is not the immediate consequence of hostilities. It could mark a turning-point.
87.	The agreement deserves the support of all the countries assembled here because every nation here has an interest in progress towards peace in the Middle East. It is another step in the process launched by Security Council resolution 338 (1973). The alternative was a continuing stalemate which would have led over time to another war creating a serious threat to world peace and the prospect of global economic confrontations.
88.	Neither fear of the future nor pride should obscure the fact that an unusual opportunity for further progress on all issues now exists. But opportunities must be seized or they will disappear. I want to emphasize that the United States did not help negotiate this agreement in order to put an end to the process of peace, but to give it new impetus.
89.	President Ford has stated that we will not accept stalemate or stagnation in the Middle East. That was true before the Sinai agreement was signed; it remains true today. The objective of our policy is not merely to create another temporary truce but to sustain the momentum of negotiations. The United States is determined to take every feasible step to help promote further practical progress towards final peace.
90.	As a first step, it is essential that the Sinai agreement be carried out impeccably, within the terms and the time-frame that are stipulated.
91.	In the improved atmosphere thus created, the United States stands ready to participate in any promising initiative towards peace at the request of the parties concerned.
92.	We have made clear that we are prepared to make a serious effort to encourage negotiations between Syria and Israel.
93.	We also intend to consult over the coming weeks with all concerned regarding the reopening of the Geneva Conference which met at an early crucial phase. As co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference together with the Soviet Union, our two countries have special responsibilities in this regard.
94.	We are prepared also to explore possibilities for perhaps a more informal multilateral meeting to assess conditions and to discuss the future.
95.	The United States seeks no special benefit; we do not attempt to exclude any country. We will cooperate with any nation that is willing to make a contribution. We have no preference for any particular procedure. We will support whatever process seems most promising. Our approach will continue to be both flexible and determined.
96.	The search for final peace must be conducted on a wide basis. We are in frequent touch with Governments in the Middle East. We have begun discussions with the Soviet Union with a view to assessing the current situation and weighing possible diplomatic approaches to bring about a just and durable peace in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). While we have had important differences with the Soviet Union, our two countries have held parallel views that the situation in the Middle East poses grave dangers and that partial steps must be part of and contribute to progress towards a comprehensive settlement.
97.	The role of the world Organization remains essential. If this Organization had no other accomplishment than its effective peace-keeping role in this troubled area, it would have well justified itself. These soldiers of peace, wearing the blue beret of the United Nations, as members of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine, the United Nations Emergency Force, and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force have become indispensable to the maintenance of the two 1974 disengagement accords as well as the Sinai agreement. I want to take this occasion to salute the Secretary- General, Mr. Waldheim, and his staff, and General Siilasvuo, the Chief Coordinator of the United Nations peace-keeping missions in the Middle East, and all the men and women from many countries who have served in these forces which have no enemy.
98.	The deliberations of this Assembly regarding the Middle East also play a central role. They can encourage progress or exacerbate tensions. Procedural decisions can be based on the recognition that dialog requires universality of membership, or they can fuel a futile, self-defeating effort to discriminate in violation of the Charter against a Member State whose participation is vital for a solution.
99.	The Middle East will continue to be an area of anguish, turmoil, and peril until a just and durable peace is achieved. Such a peace must meet the principal concerns and interests of all in the area; among and security and the legitimate interests of the Palestinians.
100.	In the Middle East today here is a yearning for peace surpassing any known for three decades. Let us not doom the region to another generation of futile struggle. Instead, let the world community seize the historic opportunity before it. The suffering of all the peoples of the Middle East cry out for it; the hopes and interests of all the world's peoples demand it. The United States promises its full dedication to further progress towards peace.
101.	The contribution of the United Nations to the process of peace is essential in Cyprus as well. The Secretary-General has the responsibilities of organizing the peace-keeping forces on the island and of facilitating the talks between the leaders of the Greek and Turkish communities.
102.	Strict maintenance of the cease-fire is imperative. For this we look to the restraint of the parties and the efficacy of the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
103.	We know that the world community shares our sense of urgency that the negotiating process be resumed and that the parties demonstrate flexibility and statesmanship. The status quo on the island must not become permanent; a rapid and equitable solution is essential. The Secretary-General has worked tirelessly and imaginatively under the most difficult circumstances to narrow the differences. He deserves the full support of the parties and of every nation here.
104.	The details of a Cyprus settlement are for the two communities themselves to decide. However, in keeping with United Nations resolutions which the United States has fully supported, the following principles are believed by my Government to be essential:
(a)	A settlement must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It must ensure that both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot communities can live in freedom and have a large voice in their own affairs.
(b)	The present dividing lines cannot be permanent. There must be movement from these lines to agreed territorial arrangements which reflect the economic requirements of the Greek Cypriot community and take account of its self-respect.
(t ) There must be provision for the withdrawal of foreign military forces other than those present under the authority of international agreements.
(id) There must be security for all Cypriots; the needs and wishes of the refugees who have been the principal victims and whose tragic plight touches us all must be dealt with speedily and with compassion.
105.	Another area where this Organization will be called upon to take responsible actions is the Korean peninsula. This requires, above all, maintenance of the armistice, pending agreement by all of the parties most directly concerned to replace it with a new arrangement. The existing Armistice Agreement is the only legal instrument committing the parties to maintain the peace. It is a carefully designed structure for monitoring and policing the military demarcation line.
106.	The United Nations Commander-in-Chief is a signatory to that Agreement. The armistice machinery functions daily. None of the signatories has repudiated it. Nor could they do so without serious risks to the peace of the world.
107.	Since 1972, South and North Korea have pledged themselves to enter into a dialog and to seek unification without resort to arms. This Assembly in 1973 and 1974 encouraged this process first in a consensus supporting talks between the two sides, then in a resolution [resolution 3333 (XXIX)] which looked towards termination of the United Nations Command. The United States agrees that 20 years after the end of the Korean war it is timely to terminate the United Nations Command. We have, in fact, sponsored a draft resolution to that effect which is now before you.
108.	It would be foolhardy, however, to terminate the United Nations Command without new arrangements to preserve the integrity of the Armistice Agreement. In the interest of peace, the United States cannot accept any solution which fails to provide for the continuing validity of the Armistice Agreement.
109.	The Republic of Korea and the United States have stated their general readiness to meet with representatives of the other side and with other members of the Security Council to discuss the termination of the United Nations Command while preserving the Armistice Agreement.
110.	Today I can be more specific. The United States and the Republic of Korea, looking forward to the time when a lasting solution of the Korean problem can be achieved, are herewith proposing to the parties to the Armistice Agreement the convening of a conference to discuss ways to preserve it. At such a meeting we would also be prepared to explore other measures to reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula, including the possibility of a larger conference to negotiate a more fundamental arrangement.
111.	It would be in keeping with this spirit of dialog for this body to open its doors to full membership for the two Korean Governments. The United States supports the dual entry of both South and North Korea into the United Nations without prejudice to their eventual reunification. For our part, if North Korea and its allies would move to improve their relations with the Republic of Korea we would be prepared to take similar reciprocal action. It goes without saying that no proposal for security arrangements on the Korean peninsula which attempts to exclude the Republic of Korea from the discussions can be accepted by the United States.
112.	The United Nations can contribute significantly to the process of peace on the Korean peninsula by supporting a responsible approach.
113.	Over the past year the United States has followed carefully and with great sympathy the efforts to reach peaceful settlements in southern Africa.
114.	We welcome the statesmanlike efforts of both black and white African leader: who are seeking to prevent violence and bloodshed and to promote a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia. The differences between the two communities in that country, while substantial, have been narrowed in the last decade. Both sides in Rhodesia, and Rhodesia's neighbors,
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
war. The United States will support all efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement.
115.	In underlining our goal of peaceful change for southern Africa, I want to emphasize the importance of an early settlement in Namibia. My Government's opposition to South Africa's continuing occupation of Namibia and our rejection of South Africa's apartheid system are well known. The United States has consistently conveyed our position on this subject to South Africa. We will continue to do so.
116.	We believe that the people of Namibia should be given the opportunity, within a short time, to express their views on the political future and constitutional structure of their country, freely and under United Nations supervision.
117.	Peace in the world will be fragile and tenuous without a curb and, eventually, an end to the arms race. This is why the United States has embarked, with the Soviet Union, upon the difficult and complex negotiation to limit strategic arms. Our objectives are to prevent unchecked destabilizing competition in strategic armaments; to achieve reduction of these arms; to lessen further the likelihood of hasty decisions in times of crisis; and to ease the economic burden of the nuclear arms race.
118.	The Vladivostok accord of last autumn marked a major step towards achieving these goals. When this agreement in principle is translated into a treaty, agreed ceilings will be placed on strategic force levels for a 10-year period. This unprecedented step will slow the pace of new arms programs, especially those driven by fear of major deployments by the other side.
119.	The United States is actively engaged in other amis control negotiations. Together with the Soviet Union, we have made progress towards establishing a regime for peaceful nuclear explosions, and we have agreed to set a threshold on the underground testing of nuclear weapons. These are significant steps towards a. verifiable comprehensive test ban.
120.	In addition, the United States and the Soviet Union have presented to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament identical drafts of a convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques [A/10027, annex II, documents CCDI47I and CCD/472]. Misuse of this knowledge might open new avenues of military competition and wreak untold and irreversible harm upon all humanity. We urge the Conference to complete its consideration rapidly.
121.	Another urgent task is a substantia] reduction in the high levels of military forces now confronting each other in various parts of the world. The United States believes that the time has come to give new impetus to the negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions in central Europe. The significance of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe depends to an important extent on whether we can achieve progress in this area. An agreement that enhances mutual security in central Europe is feasible and essential. We will work towards that goal.
122.	The world faces a paradox with respect to the proliferation of nuclear energy. Men have fashioned from the atom weapons which can in minuter end the civilization of centuries. Simultaneously, the atom is fast becoming a more and more essential source of energy. It is clear that the cost and eventual scarcity of oil and other fossil fuels will increasingly spread nuclear power around the world in the decades ahead.
123.	But the spreading of nuclear power poses starkly the danger of proliferating nuclear weapons capabilities and the related risks of the theft of nuclear materials, blackmail by terrorists, accidents or the injection of the nuclear threat into regional political conflicts. Now is the time to act. If we fail to restrain nuclear proliferation, future generations will live on a planet shadowed by nuclear catastrophe.
124.	Over the past year the United States has repeatedly urged new efforts among the supplier States to strengthen and standardize safeguards and controls on the export of nuclear materials. We must not allow these safeguards to be eroded by commercial competition. We must ensure the broad availability of peaceful nuclear energy under safe, economical and reliable conditions.
125.	The United States has intensified its efforts within the International Atomic Energy Agency [IAEA ] and with other nations to broaden and strengthen international standards and safeguards, and has proposed an international convention setting standards to protect the physical security of nuclear materials in use, storage and transfer.
126.	The United States continues to urge the widest possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] and the associated safeguard measures of the IAEA.
127.	The greatest single danger of unrestrained nuclear proliferation resides in the spread, under national control, of reprocessing facilities for the atomic materials in nuclear power plants. The United States therefore proposes, as a major step to reinforce all other measures, the establishment of multinational regional nuclear fuel-cycle centers. These centers would serve energy needs on a commercially sound basis and encourage regional energy co-operation. Their existence would reduce the incentive for small and inefficient reprocessing facilities, limit the possibility of diverting peaceful nuclear materials to national military use, and create a better framework for applying effective international safeguards.
128.	We urge that groups of nations begin now to explore this concept and that all States support the work of the IAEA in this field.
129.	In the last two years the world community has been reminded dramatically to what extent economic relations are an essential foundation of the economic order. It would be one of history's most tragic ironies if, at a time when .. i are putting behind us the tensions of the cold war, we were to enter a new period of conflict between North and South, rich and poor. At the recently concluded seventh special session, the United States called for an end to the sterile confrontations of the past. We stated that, when the ancient dream of mankind, a world without poverty, becomes a possibility, our moral convictions also make it a duty. And we emphasized that only co-operation, not extortion, can achieve gives us ground for hope that, at least for the immediate future, a choice has been made to turn away from confrontation towards co-operation. The United States is proud to support the final document [resolution 3362 (S-VII)], which is the product of the arduous effort and dedication of so many in this chamber.
130.	The United States considers the achievements of the seventh special session a beginning, not an end. As recommended in the final report, we must now move forward in available forums to give reality and content to the objectives on which we have agreed. In the difficult negotiations ahead my Government will participate energetically, in a co-operative and conciliatory spirit.
131.	Beyond peace, security and prosperity lies a deeper universal aspiration to dignity and equal opportunity. Mankind will never be spared all the tragedies inherent in the cycle of life and death. But we do have it in our power to eliminate or to ease the burden of social tragedy and of organized injustice.
132.	The United States has traditionally been an advocate of extending the reach of international law in international affairs. We have offered our help to the victims of disease and natural disaster. There is no longer any dispute that international human rights are on the agenda of international diplomacy.
133.	The reach of international law must extend to the last frontiers of our planet, the oceans. They are the common heritage of mankind, but they can turn into arenas of conflict unless governed by law. They hold untapped sources of energy, minerals and proteins; their environmental integrity is crucial to our survival.
134.	The United States welcomes the United Nations mandate for a comprehensive treaty governing the use of the oceans and their resources. Last month at Montreal I set forth our approach to this negotiation and urged that next year's session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea move matters to a rapid and successful conclusion. No international negotiation is more vital for long-term political and economic stability and the prosperity of our globe.
135.	International law must also come to grips with international terrorism. Innumerable innocent lives have been lost as a consequence of the lack of internationally accepted standards specifically designed to avert unlawful and dangerous interference with civil aviation. The hijacking of aircraft, the kidnapping and murder of innocent civilian victims for presumed political gain remain a plague on civilized man. This remains one of the under-developed areas of international law which merits the most urgent attention of this Organization.
136.	Compassion for our fellow men requires also that we mobilize international resources to combat the age-old scourges of mankind: disease, famine and natural disaster.
137.	The great human rights must be recognized, respected and given reality in the affairs of nations. The earliest United Nations declarations and the recent Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe leave no doubt that these are matters of international concern. The United States will support these principles. Throughout the world, in all continents, violations of human rights must be opposed whether they are inflicted by one race upon another or upon members of the same race. Human rights must be cherished regardless of race, sex or religion. There can be no double standard.
138.	The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has taken its first steps against gross violations of human rights where serious and reliable allegations are submitted by individuals. We support those steps. The organized concern of the world community can be a potent weapon in the war against degradation of human values.
139.	One of the most persistent and serious problems is torture, a practice which all nations should abhor. It is an absolute debasement of the function of government with  its overwhelming power is used not for people's welfare but as an instrument of their suffering.
140.	The United States urges this Assembly to adopt the draft Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, recommended for adoption by the Assembly by the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Geneva recently.4 In addition, we propose that this General Assembly establish a group of experts, to be appointed by the Secretary-General, to study the nature and extent of torture in the world today and to report back to the next session of our Assembly.
141.	This Organization was created in the belief that the universality of the human race can be reflected in the conduct of international affairs. This Chamber symbolizes the hope that mankind places in the force of nations working together in the common interest, with reason, responsibility and mutual respect.
142.	The problems we face are complex and perilous. The sterile slogans of yesterday, the solutions of the past, the dwelling upon old resentments, can only widen the gaps between us and allow the dangers to peace and the well-being of our peoples to fester and to grow.
143.	We have it in our power to prove to future generations that the last quarter of the twentieth century was not an era of violence and conflict, but one of the creative epochs of world history.
144.	My country's history tells us that it is possible to fashion unity while cherishing diversity; that common action is possible despite the variety of races, interests and beliefs we see here in this Chamber. Progress and peace and justice are attainable.
145.	So we say to all peoples and all Governments: let us fashion together a new world order. Let its arrangements be just. Let the new nations help shape it and feel it is theirs. Let the old nations use their strengths and skills for the benefit of all mankind. Let us all work together to enrich the spirit and to ennoble mankind.
