We, the delegation of the People's Republic of China,
have come to attend the present session of the United Nations General Assembly today at a time of immense grief for the people of all nationalities in China. Chairman Mao Tsetung, the most esteemed and beloved great leader and teacher of the Chinese people, passed away on 9 September The passing of Chairman Mao Tsetung is a loss beyond measure to the 800 million Chinese people. But for Chairman Mao, there would have been no victory of the Chinese revolution. But for Chairman Mao, there would have been no new China of today. Without the victory of the Chinese revolution under the leadership of Chairman Mao the world would not have changed so vastly as it has. Hie extremely sorrow-stricken Chinese people are determined to turn grief into strength, to carry out Chairman Mao's behests and to carry through to the end the cause of the proletarian revolution in China which Chairman Mao pioneered. The Chinese people's revolutionary cause has worthy successors. Chairman Mao Tsetung has left us forever, but the magnificent contributions he made in revolutionary theory and practice are immortal. The radiance of Mao Tsetung thought will always illuminate our road of advance.
21	Here I Wish to express once again, on behalf of the Chinese Government and people, our deep gratitude to the representatives of many countries who have at various meetings of the United Nations tendered condolences on the passing away of Chairman Mao Tsetung.
22	Chairman Mao Tsetung drew a whole series of profound conclusions from the contemporary international situation The complete correctness of these conclusions is being more and more corroborated by the developing situation.
23. Back in the early 1960s, Chairman Mao Tsetung vividly portrayed the contemporary world situation in these verses:
"The Four Seas are rising, clouds and waters raging, The Five Continents are rocking, wind and thunder roaring."
The world situation has been in a stats of great turmoil. All the political forces in the world have undergone drastic division and realignment as a result of prolonged contests of strength and struggles. On the one hand, there is the rise of the third world; on the other hand, there is the rivalry tor hegemony between the two super-Powers-the Soviet Union and the United States. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution -this has become an irresistible trend of history. Looking around the globe, one cannot find a single place of tranquility. "The wind sweeping through-the tower heralds a rising storm in the mountains." The factors for both revolution and war are increasing. As Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out, the current international situation is characterized by great disorder under heaven, and it is excellent: this great disorder is a good thing, and not a bad thing, for the people. It throws the enemies into disarray and divides them, while awakening and tempering the people, thus pushing the international situation to develop further in a direction favorable to the people and unfavorable to imperialism and social-imperialism.
24. Making a penetrating analysis of all the basic contra-dictions of our time and the division and realignment of all the political forces in the world, Chairman Mao Tsetung advanced his great strategic concept of the three worlds. He pointed out that the United States and the Soviet Union make up the first world; the developing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America and elsewhere constitute the third world; and in between the two is the second world composed of Europe, Japan, Canada and other countries. Lenin once said: "Imperialism is the progressing oppression of the nations of the world by a handful of great Powers; it is an epoch of wars among these Powers for the extension and consolidation of national oppression." At present, the Soviet Union and the United States, the two super-Powers constituting the first world, are the biggest international oppressors and exploiters of our time and they are the sources of a new world war. While the developed countries of the second world oppress and exploit third-world countries, they themselves are at the same time subjected to super-Power oppression, exploitation, control or threats. The numinous third-world countries are most heavily oppressed and exploited by colonialism and imperialism; they are the main force in the fight against imperialism, and particularly against super-Power hegemonism.
25. Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out: "Who are our enemies? Who are our friends? This is a question of the first importance for the revolution."' Chairman Mao s concept of the three worlds provides orientation for the workers and oppressed nations and oppressed peoples of the world in their fight in the realm of international class
struggle.
26 In the past year, the struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism waged by the people of the third-world countries has made great progress, though it suffered temporary setbacks in individual places These people have further awakened and have strengthened their unity in struggle. The heroic people of Egypt, unable to bear social-imperialist bullying and oppression any longer, resolutely abrogated the Egyptian-Soviet treaty. The Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries withstood outside pressure and maintained the position of opposing imperialism, and particularly super-Power hegemonism. The people of Asia, Africa and Latin America have come to see more and more clearly the true colors of social-imperialism. The great African people are now launching an offensive on barbarous racism, and the handful of colonialists have been cornered m southern Africa. The situation there is complicated owing to the meddling of the two super-Powers. But the long- tempered African people are clear-headed. They do not believe the nice words of imperialism and social- imperialism, nor are they intimidated by their bluster. They will surely win their liberation by relying on their own armed struggle, strengthening their unity and persisting in this course. Chairman Mao Tsetung said:
"The evil system of colonialism and imperialism arose and throve with the enslavement of Negroes and the trade in Negroes, and it will surely come to its end with the complete emancipation of the black people."
The future of Africa is infinitely bright.

27. Strategically, Europe is the focus of contention between the Soviet Union and the United States for world hegemony. The so-called "European Security Conference" was in fact a "European Insecurity Conference". There are always some people in the West who want to urge social-imperialism eastward and divert this peril towards China, thinking it best if all is quiet in the West. The "European Security Conference" reflected such a Munich line of thinking. After the Conference concluded last year, these people thought that henceforth there would be peace and tranquility in Europe. But since that Conference, the military threat posed by the Soviet Union against Western Europe and its political subversion there have been on the increase, and Europe is not more secure, but in greater danger. The desire of the European people for peace is understandable. But the Soviet Union has played up the "European Security Conference" with ulterior motives. It attempts thereby to put Western Europe off guard, divide and crush it piecemeal and ultimately seize the whole of Western Europe. The fact that strategically Europe is the focus of contention between the two hegemonic Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, is determined by their fundamental interests. Some people take the lead hi appeasing and making concessions to the expansionists, attempting to shift this strategic focus by recognizing their sphere of influence and giving them small favors. But such an attempt cannot be realized. The continued pursuit of such a policy will result in lifting a rock only to drop it on one's own feet. Forces opposing appeasement are now rising in the West. The unity of the West European countries has made new progress. We support the unity of Western Europe and wish to see Western Europe grow strong.
28. The rivalry between the two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and She United States, extends to all parts of the globe. The United States has vested interests to protect around the world, and the Soviet Union seeks expansion. This state of affairs is unalterable. In this world-wide rivalry, the expansionist activities of the Soviet Union are all-pervasive. A Soviet leader has openly declared that there is no corner of the earth that is not taken into account by them. Now more and more people have come to realize that the so-called "irreversible process of detente" constantly peddled by Soviet social-imperialism is but a fraudulent and hollow phase; every day it talks "peace" but practices expansion; every day it talks "disarmament" but practices arms expansion. Soviet social-imperialism is the biggest peace swindler and the most dangerous source of war today. The continued fierce rivalry between the two super-Powers is bound to lead to war some day. This is independent of mail's will. The so-called "balance of power" is only a temporary, superficial and even deceptive thing. It cannot be relied upon to maintain peace. As Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out, in an era when classes exist, war is a phenomenon between two periods of peace. The danger of a new world war is visibly growing, and the people of all countries must get prepared.
29. There is now a strange phenomenon in the world. Some people are terrified at the mention of the Soviet Union, thinking that it cannot be touched. This is superstition. Soviet social-imperialism is nothing to be afraid of. It is outwardly strong but inwardly weak. Alienated from the people, it is essentially feeble, it faces economic difficulties and ever-sharpening class contradictions and contradictions among its nationalities. Carrying out expansion everywhere and committing all sorts of evils, it has affronted the people of the East European countries and of the world. Its offensive posture bears the seed of defeat. Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out long ago: "All reactionaries are paper tigers.""The revisionist Soviet Union is a paper tiger too." All the countries that are subjected to super-Power aggression, subversion, interference, control or threat should unite and wage a tit-for-tat struggle against it. "The people, and the people alone, are the motive force in the making of world history." The destiny of mankind is definitely not to be decided by any super-Power.
"People of the world, be courageous, dare to fight, defy difficulties and advance wave upon wave. Then the whole world will belong to the people. Monsters of all kinds shall be destroyed."
30.	Following Chairman Mao Tsetung's teachings, the Chinese Government and people firmly and unswervingly support the just struggles of all oppressed nations and oppressed peoples. Now, I would like to state our consistent position on some of the issues to be considered by the current session of the General Assembly.
31.	We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania in their just struggle against white racism and for national liberation. We warmly support the relevant resolutions adopted by the recent Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity and the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries [see A/311197], We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe in their armed straggle against the Smith white minority regime. We firmly support the people of Namibia in their aimed struggle against forcible occupation by the reactionary authorities of South Africa ai d for national independence. We warmly hail the powerful mass movements of the people of Azania against racial discrimination and apartheid. We strongly condemn the Soviet Union for disrupting the unity of the Angolan national liberation movements and carrying out armed intervention in Angola. We are firmly opposed to the rivalry between the two super-Powers in southern Africa, and especially to social-imperialist attempts to seize the opportunity to sow discord and carry out armed intervention while pretending to support the national liberation movements.
32.	We firmly support the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle for the restoration of their national rights and the recovery of their lost territories and against the rivalry between the super-Powers for hegemony in the Middle East. We sincerely hope that the various political forces in Lebanon, together with the Arab States concerned and the Palestinian people, will set store by the national interests of Lebanon and the militant unity of the Arab countries and find a reasonable solution to their temporary differences through peaceful consultations free from super-Power interference.
33.	We firmly maintain that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus should be respected. We earnestly hope that the Greek and Turkish communities of Cyprus and the countries directly concerned will guard against super-Power meddling and gradually eliminate their differences through patient consultations on the basis of equality and in the spirit of mutual understanding and mutual accommodation.
34.	We firmly support the Korean people in their just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland. United States aggression and its interference in Korea are the main cause for recurrent tensions in Korea and for the failure to achieve an independent and peaceful reunification. The United Nations Command must be dissolved, and the United States armed forces must be withdrawn from South Korea. The division of Korea must end, and the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea must be realized. This is not to be hindered by any force on earth.
35.	We firmly support the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations. The United States threat to use the veto is utterly unjustifiable. We firmly support the just struggle carried on by the people of East Timor under the leadership of the Frente Revolucionaria Timor Leste Independente [FRETILIN] in defence of the independence and territorial integrity of their country chainst foreign aggression. We hold that the position of the Association of South-East Asian Nations for the establishment of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality free from interference by foreign Powers should be respected.
36.	We firmly support the proposal of the Government of Sri Lanka to declare the Indian Ocean a zone of peace.4 We firmly support the proposal of the Government of Pakistan to establish a nuclear-free zone in South Asia.s We firmly support the solemn statement of the King of Nepal declaring Nepal a zone of peace. We firmly support the reasonable position taken by Bangladesh on the question of sharing the water of the Ganges river.
37.	We firmly support the just struggle of the third-world countries for the establishment of the new international economic order. To attain this aim, the third-world countries have, since the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, made many efforts at various international conferences. But owing to obstruction by the super-Powers, these efforts have so far not achieved the progress they ought to have. Facts prove that the superPowers will never lightly give up their prerogative of exploiting and plundering the developing countries. We approve of dialogue, but first of all one must be strong. The developing countries can wrest back, step by step, positions on the economic front occupied by the super-Powers only if* they maintain independence and self-reliance, fully exercise their state sovereignty, take firm hold of their national resources, develop and expand their national economies, consolidate and expand the associations of raw material-producing countries and strengthen their mutual help and co-operation.

38.	As for the question of disarmament, our consistent position and views are known to all. The Soviet representative puts forward in this forum every year a sham disarmament proposal of one description or another to achieve a demagogic effect. It is not worth while here to comment on such old stuff in new concoctions.
39.	The Chinese Government and people are determined to carry on the cause left behind by Chairman Mao, to adhere to the basic line of our Party and to keep to Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs. This has been solemnly declared in the message to the whole party, the whole army and the people of all nationalities throughout the country issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China, the Council of State of the People's Republic of China and the Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and in the memorial speech by Comrade Hua Kuo-feng, First Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and Premier of the Council of State, at the mass memorial meeting to mourn our great leader and teacher, Chairman Mao Tsetung. The revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs laid down for us by Chairman Mao personally are a beacon that has illuminated and will forever illuminate the successful advance of our external work. The Chinese Government will continue unswervingly to implement Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs, keep the people in mind, place hopes in them, uphold proletarian internationalism, and never seek hegemony or to be a super-Power. We will strengthen our unity with the international proletariat and the oppressed nations and oppressed peoples the world over, our unity with the people of the third-world countries and our unity with all the countries subjected to aggression, subversion, interference, control or bullying by imperialism or social-imperialism so as to form the broadest possible united front against imperialism, and particularly against the hegemonism of the two superPowers, the Soviet Union and the United States. We consistently maintain that all countries, big and small, should be equal. The affairs of any country should be managed by its own people; world affairs should be managed by all countries in the world. As in the past, we will establish or develop relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
40.	Chairman Mao Tsetung taught us that "In our inter-national relations, we Chinese people should get rid of great-Power chauvinism resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely."  We will follow this instruction of Chairman Mao in handling all our foreign relations. China is still a developing socialist country. However great our future achievements in national construction, we will keep firmly in mind Chairman Mao's teaching always to be modest and never become arrogant, not even after a hundred years, and never become cocky, not even after the twenty-first century.

41.	China is a vast and richly endowed country with a population of 800 million. Chairman Mao Tsetung taught us: "China ought to make a greater contribution to humanity." At present, under the leadership of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the Chinese people are taking class struggle as the key-link, keeping to the Party's basic line and policies for the entire historical period of socialism, persevering in the continued revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat, consolidating the great unity of the people of all nationalities under the leadership of the working class and based on the worker-peasant alliance, deepening the struggle to criticize Teng Hsiao-ping and repulse the rightist deviationist attempt to reverse correct verdicts, consolidating and developing the victories of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, combating and preventing revisionism, consolidating the dictatorship of the proletariat, working hard independently and self-reliantly, to build China into a powerful socialist country, and striving to make a greater contribution to humanity. Following the consistent teachings of Chairman Mao, we are determined to strengthen our preparedness against war, heighten our vigilance and be ready at all times to wipe out any enemy that dares to invade China. We are determined to liberate Taiwan. Under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, we Chinese people are fully confident that we will triumph over domestic and foreign enemies, overcome all difficulties and achieve our objectives.
42.	Surveying the whole world, we see that there is great disorder under heaven and that the situation is excellent. The way ahead is tortuous, but the future of mankind is bright. The people of China are ready to join hands with the people of all other countries in our common endeavor.
The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany is pleased that this thirty-first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations meets under the chairmanship of a man who belongs to one of the leading nations of the group of non-aligned countries. He has acquired the highest personal respect among our nations both in his capacity as spokesman of his country at the United Nations and as President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, one of the most important conferences of our time.
60.	I combine my congratulations for the new President with my thanks to the outgoing President, the Prime Minister of Luxembourg, Mr. Thorn, who gave exemplary and balanced guidance to the work of our Assembly and whose country and personality symbolize the best traditions of a Europe that stands for peace and justice.
61.	I am furthermore pleased to welcome the Republic of Seychelles to our midst. With the admission of this one hundred and forty-fifth Member, the United Nations has taken a further step towards universality.
62.	This General Assembly of the United Nations, like the previous one, must continue to promote the idea of co-operation between all States of the world. Co-operation means combining all our efforts in the search for peaceful solutions to the problems that make it so difficult for the peoples of this globe to live peacefully together. Let us not forget that at the end of this century the world will have twice as many people to feed and twice as many jobs to find.
63.	In the year that has passed since the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, it has been possible to lead the world economy out of the deepest recession since 1930, but the world is still far away from lasting, stable growth and continuing acceleration. In the past year international peace has been maintained, but the conflicts in the Middle East, in Cyprus and elsewhere continue to smolder, and in southern Africa the task is to avoid a racial war. At the same time, new forms of illegal force, such as the seizing of hostages, have been developing into a world-wide plague. Whereas old conflicts basically remain unresolved and new ones are already pushing their way to the surface, the potential of destructive weapons in all parts of the world is growing and so is the capability of manufacturing nuclear weapons.
64.	The year 1975 brought no progress towards accomplishing so urgent a task as reducing military expenditure. On the contrary, we are faced with the threat of another build-up in the arms race.
65.	This year the International Covenants on Human Rights entered into force, but in many parts of the world the individual is still denied the most elementary human rights: his right to life and to personal safety, his right to equality without regard to race, his right to move freely, his right to free expression, and his basic economic and social rights.
66.	In a world threatened in this way it is our duty to create durable foundations for peace and co-operation. The one needs the other: we cannot achieve peace without the will to co-operate beyond frontiers, and co-operation will remain ineffectual without peace. Thus the future of this planet really does depend on whether we achieve a break-through to that co-operation.
67.	Awareness of this began to dawn following the crises of recent years, and this gives us good reason to be hopeful. It is significant that the Conference of non-aligned States in Colombo and, similarly, the Conference of the Group of 77 in Mexico  have so unequivocally supplemented the principle of national sovereignty and independence by the principle of international co-operation "as the basis of a secure world order". My Government has made this view the guideline for its action in international relations.
68.	The Federal Republic of Germany will therefore continue at this session, as at previous ones, to pursue a policy aimed at safeguarding peace and securing international co-operation. The foundations and objectives of our policy remain unchanged: European union; our firmly rooted position within the Atlantic Alliance, which ensures the balance of power and is thus the prerequisite for peace in Europe; the policy of detente towards the States of Eastern Europe, and partnership and an equitable reconciliation of interests with the third world.
69.	The members of the European Community have made encouraging progress towards creating stable structures for co-operation in a spirit of solidarity. For centuries the history of Western Europe was a series of wars. Even in this century it has been the source of two world wars. Today, however, the people in the European Community see their future as a common future-so thoroughly has the situation changed within the span of a single generation. Outside Europe this may not seem an earth-shaking event, but all, I am sure, should be able to judge from it what can be achieved through goodwill in relations between peoples.
70.	The members of the Community have set themselves the task of together putting into practice the great historic concept of freedom and human dignity. We adhere to the aim of European union. Yet the Community is not inward-looking. It is not a closed community whose responsibility stops at its own front door. It actively supports efforts towards peace and justice and towards a world economy that is open for trade and investment. It is the biggest trading partner in the world. And it is, in particular, a partner of the third world: as the most important source of investment capital and technology, as the most important trading partner, and as a pioneer in the creation of equal, balanced relations between industrialized and developing countries.
71.	The previous speaker, the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, who spoke on behalf of the nine member States of the European Community, has been able to show how far our common aims extend in foreign policy as well.
72.	The Federal Republic of Germany is a member of the North Atlantic Alliance. It understands that alliance and its role in it as a contribution to the safeguarding of peace in our region. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] is a pact for peace, and it is in line with that understanding of its role that it renders an active contribution of its own to detente. This alliance testifies to the close and manifold ties existing between Western Europe, the United States and Canada.
73.	On the basis of the European Community and the Atlantic Alliance, a policy of realistic detente towards the East became possible for Western Europe, That policy starts from the following consideration: if we cannot remove the ideological division and the basic differences between political and social systems in Europe, then it is all the more urgent to resolve conflicts by negotiation or at least to mitigate them and to discover areas where co-operation between East and West is possible, to the mutual advantage of both and for the benefit of the peoples of both sides.
74.	The policy pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany in concluding treaties with the Soviet Union, the Polish People's Republic, Czechoslovakia and the other members of the Warsaw Pact serves this very aim. We attach special importance to the further development of the relationship between the two German States on the basis of treaty arrangements. The policy of detente pursued by the Federal Government is a long-term policy and it consistently continues the policy initiated by Willy Brandt and Walter Scheel.
75.	The nations of Europe, the United States and Canada held the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. They laid down principles for peaceful relations and agreed on a whole series of specific arrangements. Among other tilings, these arrangements are intended to foster economic and scientific co-operation, regulate humanitarian questions and facilitate contacts between people in East and West and the exchange of ideas and information; in the military field, they are intended to build up confidence.
76.	All those arrangements must now be put into practice. The more co-operation across the ideological barrier becomes possible and the less energy is wasted in sterile confrontation, the more will the nations of Europe be able to contribute to an equitable reconciliation of interests between the industrialized countries and countries of the third world.
77.	This year, too, we have resolutely pursued our treaty policy. The agreements concluded with the Polish People's Republic have removed burdens of the past and opened up hopeful prospects for relations between the two countries. The relaxation of tension in Europe brought about since 1970 would not have been possible without an improvement of relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the USSR. Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union will also in future be of particular importance for the process of detente. For this reason, great significance attaches to the visit of Mr. Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to the Federal Republic of Germany which is planned to take place in the course of this year.
78.	No nation can be more interested in co-operation across the frontiers of different systems than the German people which is compelled to live in two States. Through Germany runs the frontier which divides Europe. Our negotiations with the German Democratic Republic have also been, and will continue to be, concerned with easing conditions for the people and with further developing co-operation. To pursue a policy of detente in a divided country and for a divided country is a great and, at the same time, a difficult task; but we Germans know that there is no acceptable alternative.
79.	A great deal has been made possible by negotiations between the two German States; much has been achieved in the way of practical improvements; it has been possible to alleviate human suffering; human contacts between Germans have become increasingly possible. But all objectives have not been attained-far from it. As before, the aim of our policy is to overcome the painful consequences of the division of Germany by patient negotiation.
80.	The Federal Government is not resigned to the reality of a frontier where only recently shots were still fired from the other side. This must at last be stopped. The Federal Government will not tire in its efforts to achieve this too by means of its policy of detente.
81.	In the heart of Germany also lies the city which for better or worse, has been a touchstone of detente- Berlin The Federal Government will not relax its efforts to promote the viability of West Berlin. For Berlin, the strict observance and full application of the Quadripartite Agreement of 3 September 1971 is of essential importance. The Federal Government will, as before, ensure that West Berlin continues to be included in international co-operation. The more we succeed in this the less will be the danger of the city's again becoming a source of international crises.
82.	The Federal Republic of Germany, whose foreign policy has been a policy of and for peace from the very first day of its existence, will unflinchingly continue its policy of detente and thus contribute to the safeguarding of peace. It remains its political objective to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. For us, history has not yet passed its final verdict on the division of the German nation.
83.	It will be of decisive importance for the progress of detente whether the current negotiations on the second SALT agreement and on the balanced reduction of ground forces in central Europe prove successful. For nothing could constitute a greater threat to detente than another arms race.
84.	The Federal Government will make special efforts in talks with the United States, the Soviet Union and other countries concerned, to get the stagnant expert discussions on mutual and balanced force reduction in Vienna going again. This was announced by Chancellor Schmidt last week.
85.	Peace itself and efforts to safeguard it by means of more stable structures are jeopardized by unrelenting efforts in nearly all parts of the world to build up arms strengths. Exports of conventional weapons in particular have increased rapidly.
86.	The monstrous waste of scarce resources in the industrialized countries as in the developing countries works to the detriment of the people.
87.	We must not give up hope because of the disappointing results in the field of arms control and disarmament so far. In the process of detente efforts must be redoubled to halt the arms race and, both world-wide and regionally, to translate into reality effective measures of arms control and arms limitation.
88.	Balanced and controlled disarmament remains one of the most urgent tasks. But it is high time words were followed by deeds. The world needs plough and workbench more urgently than rifle and missile.
89.	In Europe, within the framework of the negotiations in Vienna, the Federal Government will continue to seek the establishment of an equal and hence stable relationship of power in central Europe.
90.	The Federal Government welcomes the request made by the non-aligned States in Colombo calling for a special session of the General Assembly to deal with questions of world-wide disarmament [see A/31/197, annex IV, resolution 12] and is ready to play a constructive part in it.
91.	But we still live in a heavily armed world. All the more urgent, therefore, is the one principal task of international politics: to ward off dangers for peace in time, and that means resolving conflicts without war.
92.	Consequently, we look with anxiety towards a region whose unresolved problems are a constant threat to world peace: the Middle East. The guidelines for a solution to the Middle East conflict were mapped out long ago. They are based on resolutions of the Security Council, complemented by a large consensus of international opinion that the national rights of the Palestinian people must also be taken into consideration. Thus, at the 1974 session of the General Assembly,  the Federal Republic of Germany stated that a peace settlement, apart from providing for the termination of the territorial occupation, should make allowance for the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people, including the right to establish a State authority, and for Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries.
93.	It is not a question of keeping on repeating the principles governing a solution; it is a question of putting them into practice. The Federal Republic of Germany, together with its partners in the European Community, has a vital interest in a peaceful solution to the conflict in its neighboring region to the south, and today it is more than ever convinced that a solution is possible.
94.	Our special interest in this region also finds expression in the Euro-Arab dialog. No one can today speak of the Middle East problem without including the tragic developments in the Lebanon. Efforts have been of no avail to stop hostilities that have taken a heavy toll of human life and are destroying a country in which the seed of violence has sprung up. We appeal to all concerned to stop the terrible bloodshed.
95.	A second source of danger for international relations has developed in southern Africa. It is impossible to imagine the consequences which a racial war embracing the whole region would have. All countries in that region are aware of this. The Federal Republic of Germany has, therefore, not abandoned hope of a peaceful solution being achieved.
96.	But it knows that only where no one attempts to hold up a historically necessary change can we expect peaceful developments, can we feel that peace is secure.
97.	Everyone must realize, also in southern Africa, that racism and colonialism no longer have a place in this world. The sands have run out.
98.	Southern Africa, too, must determine its own destiny. There is only one way to attain this: blacks and whites must develop some form of co-operation based on equality, which will prove a sound foundation also in the future;
there must be majority rule, but at the same time safeguards must be provided for the rights of the minority.
99.	In Rhodesia, as we hope, the first and decisive step in this direction has now been taken. This could well be the beginning of an era of people of all races in southern Africa living peacefully together.
100.	Recent developments confirm in an impressive manner the correctness of the position we have always taken: that only the renunciation of force prevents the catastrophe of a racial war which would otherwise be unavoidable. The urgently required changes in southern Africa can be brought about only by peaceful means and by negotiation. A turn of events is foreshadowed for which all concerned deserve thanks and appreciation the Secretary of State of the United States, the British Government, and those African statesmen who are working with perseverance for a peaceful solution of this pressing problem.
101.	As regards the Namibia problem, we reaffirm the demands: that the rule of South Africa should end and the earliest possible date for independence be fixed in a binding manner; that the competence of the United Nations to lead the former Mandated Territory to independence should be recognized; and that in exercising the right of self-determination under the supervision of the United Nations all political groups in the country should participate in the preparations for independence.
102.	Only the speedy fulfillment of all these demands will prevent any further aggravation of the situation. The Federal Government will assist a free Namibia as far as possible in building up its economy.
103.	We appeal to the Government of the Republic of South Africa to give up the policy of apartheid and not to oppose necessary reforms any longer. Only those who are prepared to carry out the necessary changes can preserve the heritage of the past.
104.	We support the appeal of President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia to the white population in southern Africa to join with the other parts of Africa in creating a new society which is not based on color. Only then will it be possible for a new society of black and white Africans with equal rights to master together the great task of developing the continent.
105.	The efforts made by the community of nations to control the use of force must now also include the new illegal forms of force which in recent years have come to be a problem assuming more and more menacing proportions.
106.	The most widespread of these new forms of violence, and one of the most murderous, is the taking of hostages. The growing number of acts involving the taking of hostages has spotlighted the extent of the threat, None of the 500 million passengers traveling on airliners every year can be sure not to be among the next victims.
107.	Acts involving the taking of hostages are not the problem of just one State or another or of any group of States; they are a problem concerning us all. The United Nations bears a special responsibility. The Secretary-
General in his annual report on the work of the Organization rightly pointed that out [see A/31 (1 (Add. 1, sect. VI}.
108.	What is at stake is the protection of human beings, the sovereignty of States, the safety of international traffic and an international order free from violence. The taking of hostages is a particularly cruel act of violence which indiscriminately claims or threatens the lives of helpless people, of women and children. For this reason, the Geneva Convention of 1949 prohibits this act as a means of warfare.
109.	It is an act offending the dignity, safety and fundamental rights of the individual person, that is, basic values the protection of which is proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex].
110.	Those taking hostages attempt to blackmail sovereign States and to confront them with the unbearable choice of either yielding to their demands or risking the lives of the hostages taken. Acts involving the taking of hostages are a threat to international relations. The efforts made by all States to settle international conflicts peacefully and also the endeavors of this world Organization to make peace more secure are placed in jeopardy by criminal acts of violence committed by a few.
111.	International conferences and diplomatic exchanges are thus threatened. In exploiting the particular vulnerability of aeroplanes, the taking of hostages above all imperils international air traffic,
112.	Our peoples expect the United Nations to exhaust all possibilities of checking this method of using brute force. We must face up to this danger which affects us all and initiate an objective discussion on possible steps. After the bitter experiences of recent months, the Governments of all countries should unite in condemning the act of taking hostages as a particularly abhorrent crime and in introducing world-wide measures against it.
113.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany deems it necessary that the United Nations should draft a convention banning the taking of hostages internationally and making sure that the perpetrators are either extradited or brought before a court in the country in which they have been seized. We are convinced that it should be possible soon to arrive at such a convention within the framework of the United Nations. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will therefore request that an item on international action against the taking of hostages be included in the agenda of this General Assembly as an important and urgent matter.
114.	General acceptance of and respect for human rights is an inalienable element of any order of peace and worldwide co-operation.
115.	This is one of the noblest aims of the United Nations. The concept of human rights has played a decisive role in the emergence of the United Nations. The year 1976 is a historic year for human rights and for the United Nations. It is the year in which the international covenants on human rights-the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights- have entered into force. Both Covenants guide our action. The Federal Republic of Germany orients its policy towards the developing countries in keeping with demands embodied in the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
116.	We advocate in the strongest possible terms respect for basic human rights not only in Germany but all over the world. Our policy serves the individual human being; only the realization of his rights and his dignity lends ultimate meaning and purpose to all our efforts to ensure political and economic co-operation. And this includes the right of all men to live under conditions which are really consistent with human dignity.
117.	The year 1976, with its important events in the field of human rights, now confronts us with the task of translating into reality the principles of law which we have worked out. In this new phase too the United Nations must remain the champion of human rights. An institution should therefore be established which should ensure comprehensive and world-wide protection of human rights. What we need is an independent, international authority making objective judgments in order to ensure that human rights are safeguarded in all parts of the world. Such an authority would not be directed against anybody; it would be there for somebody, namely, the individual human being and his rights.
118.	The phase of codifying human rights was long and difficult; it lasted 30 years. The implementing phase will perhaps be even more difficult, but this should not lead us to believe that we can take that much time again.
119.	Much patient negotiating will be necessary. Our aim must be to guarantee the application of human rights throughout the world by means of an institution which would prevent the question of human rights from being abused for political purposes.
120.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is aware that this is a difficult task. But it is convinced that the aim of establishing an international court for human rights can be attained. Its belief is strengthened by its experience with the protective system of the European Convention on Human Rights,  which has proved its value for more than two decades and which will not lose anything of its importance should the United Nations establish an institution along its lines.
121.	I have already pointed out that it is also the application of human rights that makes it incumbent on us to reduce the economic gap between the rich and poor countries. The difference in prosperity between North and South is a threat to peace and stability throughout the world. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany notes with great satisfaction that the will for co-operation which is the prerequisite to any effective action in this field has grown in all parts of the world and is today actually unchallenged.
122.	The seventh special session of the General Assembly last year, the Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris, the fourth session of UNCTAD in Nairobi and also the Conference of the non-aligned States in Colombo have confirmed this principle.
123.	It is a positive sign that such complicated problems as those of raw materials and energy and the reorganization of the law of the sea are negotiated at international conferences. But now it is essential to achieve rapid and concrete results. Solemn declarations of intent are not enough to feed the people in the poorest countries. A hard year lies behind us. In 1975, the year of the nadir of recession, the national products of the free-market industrialized countries fell and, although the developing countries' national products continued to rise, their growth rate declined and, in many developing countries, dropped below the growth rate of the population.
124.	The gap between industrialized and developing countries decreased for the first time, but it decreased because the world as a whole became poorer. The world all of a sudden became aware of the magnitude of the threat. We had to realize that development as such can be accelerated only within an international economy which, as a whole, is expanding. It was this experience that increased the awareness of the need for co-operation and made 1975 the year of a common departure.
125.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany realizes without any illusions that up to now we have come only a short way together, but even along this short distance we certainly have scored results.
126.	First, in 1975 there was a sharp rise in the flow of capital into the developing countries. The countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development increased their official and private capital transfers to the unprecedented amount of $39 billion, which is an increase of 40 per cent. This means that for the first time ever the target of the capital transfer amounting to 1 per cent of gross national product was reached. The Federal Republic of Germany exceeded that target by having attained 1.18 per cent. At the same time, there was an increase in the capital influx from the States, of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries [OPEC].
127.	Secondly, progress was made in the efforts to stabilize the developing countries' export earnings. The International Monetary Fund considerably widened the possibilities of taking up compensatory credits in the event of a decline in export earnings. The European Community in the Lomé Convention set up the world's first stabilizing system for commodity exports from developing countries.
128.	Third, progress was also made in the opening of markets to third-world exports. The multilateral trade negotiations in Geneva have made this objective a focal subject for talks. This year, too, the European Community plans to increase essentially the possibilities for tariff-free imports of industrial goods from developing countries. In 1975 the Federal Republic of Germany increased its imports of manufactures from developing countries by one quarter and that in a year of heavy recession.
129.	Fourth, and finally, to promote the development of agriculture in the third world it was decided to set up a fund which will make available considerable funds to increase agricultural production.
130.	To speed up the development of the third world is the common task of all countries. It requires that the developing countries themselves concentrate their strength and efforts on the development goal. It also requires that they assist one another. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany therefore appreciates it that the Colombo Conference strongly emphasized the idea of collective self-help.
131.	Already now the oil-producing countries substantially contribute to the transfer of resources to developing countries in want of capital. At the latest conference of OPEC they also showed their readiness to share in the responsibility for the world economy as a whole.
132.	But the largest external contribution to development undoubtedly has to come from the industrialized countries. In the past, the free-market industrialized countries have already been a motor of third-world development. The power of that motor must grow even stronger. The integration of the countries with a centrally-controlled economy into the world economic system -an integration which has begun in recent years -now opens up the possibility that those countries, too, will finally become a motor of development. That possibility should, however, be pursued. Trade between free-market industrialized countries and centrally-planned industrialized countries has almost quadrupled during the past four years. It is necessary now to increase trade between centrally-planned industrialized countries and developing countries with similar speed.
133.	The potential is enormous. Whereas free-market industrialized countries absorb three quarters of the developing countries' exports, the share of the centrally-planned industrialized countries in these exports is no more than 4 per cent.
134.	When we look ahead, the question is, What can we and what must we do together now in order to promote the equitable reconciliation of interests between industrialized and developing countries?
135.	First, in the four commissions of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation-on energy, commodities, finance and development - we must quickly find concrete solutions to the problems defined in the initial phase of the Conference.
136.	Second, at the meetings and conferences on commodity problems decided on by the fourth session of UNCTAD we must achieve rapid and appropriate results.
137.	Third, we would like to see all industrialized countries, whatever their economic system, make greater efforts with regard to the transfer of capital and technology to developing countries. The developing countries, for their part, should create the prerequisites for these efforts to be successful.
138.	Fourth, we regard the intensified industrialization of the developing countries as an urgent requirement. We therefore participate in all efforts contributing to that goal and are prepared to open our markets still further. We are aware of the adjustment problems entailed for our own economy and shall be prepared for this.
139.	Fifth, the solution of the problem of indebtedness becomes an ever-more pressing requirement. Like other countries, the Federal Republic of Germany gives the solution of that problem priority attention. In the spirit which has imbued the Federal Republic of Germany in rendering its financial assistance and in continuing to render such assistance, it will, together with other donor countries, use its full energies to help solve the problem of indebtedness. We do this because we have full confidence in the future of the developing countries and their peoples.
140.	The success of our endeavors to build a co-operative world will be decisively influenced by the outcome of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, We have declared the sea the common heritage of mankind. It is now essential to translate this principle into reality, and that means establishing a legal system governing the seas which will take into account the interests of all States in a well-balanced manner. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will actively participate in the work on these problems because it is convinced that the problems of die developing countries are the problems of the industrialized countries as well. That is a new piece of knowledge which all of our citizens do not yet find it easy to accept. In our countries many people still have to learn that their own destiny is connected with that of all others.
141.	In all industrialized countries a great deal of information and education is still necessary to make it understood that the North-South dialog is concerned not with the giving and taking of alms, but with our common future.
142.	The Secretary-General in the introduction to his report to the General Assembly on the work of the Organization correctly defined the role of the United Nations when he characterized our time as a period of transition in which we must overcome the antagonism between the principle of national sovereignty and the regulatory principles governing an interdependent world. Only co-operation can help us steer this development in such a way that it will benefit mankind as a whole,
143.	In this co-operation a central role falls to the United Nations as the only world-embracing organization, a role which no one else and nothing else can play. According to the mandate of the Charter, our Organization is to be the center in which the nations of the world will harmonize their actions to attain the common objectives of peace and progress. Let us at this thirty-first session of the General Assembly fulfill this mandate which the Charter gives us. Let us continue to work on the great task of building a world to conform to the vision of our Charter: a world of peace, a world of economic and social progress, and a world in which the freedom and dignity of man are a reality.
144.	My country is today more convinced than ever that in creating the United Nations mankind endowed itself with a great opportunity. We understand only too well the impatience of many who are waiting for their most elementary rights to come true. Nor do we underrate the difficulties which the United Nations is having in trying to close the big gap between demands and reality. We do not close our eyes to the obstacles besetting the road to an equitable and peaceful world-wide order. Only the spirit of co-operation on a basis of partnership can help us to go forward. Let us therefore use the opportunity we have.
Mr. President, first of all I should like to express to you my warmest congratulations upon your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. The great talent of the Permanent Representative of SriLanka, of the President of the Conference on the Law of the Sea and of the representative in New York of the presidency of the non-aligned countries is known to all. I have no doubt that at this session it will increasingly manifest itself. The co-operation of the French delegation will be yours in helping you to bring to a successful conclusion your difficult task in the next few weeks.
90.	I should also like to pay a tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Gaston Thorn, who at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly displayed qualities of intelligence and character which made him the candidate of the group to which France belongs. An illustrious European and hence familiar with international problems, he found here a scene that' was equal to the exceptional talents and gifts which brought him to the head of the Government of a country united to France both by the ties of history and geography and by those of the heart, will and reason.
91.	Lastly, I am particularly pleased to find here again my friend Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who was so frequently for me a welcoming and understanding interlocutor and to tell him to what extent France appreciates the talent, the authority and the tact with which he accomplishes his lofty and difficult mission. Our confidence in him has never been wanting, and he still has our full support.
92.	It is not without some emotion that, after having been twice accredited to the United Nations and, just recently, the Permanent Representative of France for more than four years, I address the Assembly today in this familiar setting in my capacity as Minister of Foreign Affairs. I recognize the honor but also the weight of the duty which falls to me in this circumstance when once again, this time vested with broader responsibilities, I must make France's voice heard. My task is lightened by the pleasure I feel at seeing so many familiar faces and at drawing on such recent memories.
93.	It will not surprise members of the Assembly that as a former Permanent Representative I am tempted to review the world situation in the light of our Charter. This document, written 30 years ago, is still the basic instrument of international co-operation. Do not its preamble and the purposes and principles it lays down for oar Organization in memorable words contain a statement of the aspirations that should determine the action of peoples and States? A comparison between what should be and what actually is should serve to stimulate reflection and spur efforts so that, in this necessarily interdependent world where we live, war, poverty, intolerance and discrimination will no longer have to be put up with as inevitable ills.
94.	To save succeeding generations from the scourge of war: that is the first goal set by the Charter. Although there is now no military conflict between States in the conventional sense of the word, how can we fail to see that overt or potential hotbeds of crisis persist or have developed quite recently?
95.	The crisis in Lebanon, a country to which France is deeply attached, is a tragic illustration of this fact. That country, once a model of coexistence among different communities, has been subject to uncontrolled outbreaks of violence for more than a year now. An implacable mechanism has consistently kindled new flames from the smoking ashes of each previous outbreak. What is at stake is Lebanon's very existence and the survival of its people in all their richness and diversity. It rests with the Lebanese people themselves to find through dialog a political solution which, alone, can put an end to these fratricidal struggles.
96.	On behalf of the French Government, I should like to express again to Mr. Elias Sarkis, the new President of the Lebanese Republic, our heartfelt wishes for the success of the difficult task he is undertaking and our hope that once peace is restored the Lebanese people will be able to devote their efforts to the necessary work of reconstruction.
97.	I should like to state here that the crisis in Lebanon will be resolved only by a settlement based on the unity, integrity and sovereignty of the country. The French Government, for its part, remains available and, in particular, willing to facilitate any meeting or any search for reconciliation, which obviously presupposes a definitive cessation of the fighting. With a view to this, France is maintaining close contact with all the parties to the conflict.
98.	Deeply moved by the suffering of the entire Lebanese people, we have endeavored to provide humanitarian aid. Assistance has been granted to Lebanese nationals temporarily living in France and large shipments of medical supplies have been sent to Lebanon itself. Moreover, we are ready to lend our help, in conjunction with our partners in the European Community, to the reconstruction of Lebanon.
99.	But the solution of the Lebanese tragedy cannot be separated from the solution of the Palestinian problem and the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. These three questions are in fact inextricably linked. It is for that reason that in the latter two cases we reaffirm both the necessity to implement Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) and the basic nature of the three principles upon which any lasting settlement must necessarily rely: withdrawal from the territories occupied by Israel in June 1967, recognition of the Palestinians' right to a homeland, and the right of all States in the area, including Israel, to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries.
100.	The basis of any just and lasting settlement can be found in the application of those principles, especially as regards the Palestinians. That people, raised in hardship and made strong by suffering, has now taken its place as a necessary partner in any negotiation. It has become quite obvious that no solution to the conflict is possible unless the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to express its national identity becomes a reality. But how can that right be exercised without a territorial base which, at the proper time, could be given the structures of statehood?
101.	Close to the Middle East is another area of tension, Cyprus. The United Nations feels especially responsible because it decided on the framework and guidelines for a settlement there. We are obliged, unfortunately, to recognize that the resolution adopted by our Assembly two years ago [resolution 3212 (XXIX)] has so far remained a dead letter.
102.	Indeed, a settlement can result only from an agreement between the communities of the Republic of Cyprus. The United Nations has never ignored this. France and her European Community partners have, for their part, tried to persuade the parties involved to set aside passion and resentments, even when justified, in order to begin genuine negotiations and reach a settlement in keeping with law and justice. Such a settlement must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and must be acceptable to all Cypriots.
103.	The Secretary-General, who was entrusted by the Security Council with a mission whose importance deserves special emphasis, has tried in every way he has felt possible to carry out this mission successfully. He is striving and will continue to strive with ail his well-known dedication to bring about a real resumption of and progress in inter- communal negotiations and to help them to move forward. We consider his contribution indispensable in attaining the goal we all seek: the restoration of peace in Cyprus and a return to its former prosperity.
104.	I have cited only the examples of Lebanon, the Middle East and Cyprus here, but this by no means implies that the solemn pact that commits us "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another" is being respected everywhere else.
105.	I note, however, that in South-East Asia, where the guns have at last fallen silent, the possibility does exist for the principles of our Charter now to find fruitful application. And what more fervent hope could we have for South-East Asia, so long divided and battered, than that peace should take hold, independence assert itself and co-operation increase in a spirit of tolerance? The recent improvement of bilateral relations among the various States of the region gives ground for hope that the time will come for a free and harmonious concertation; it gives hope that a regional grouping can be formed in mutual respect, a grouping that will make it possible to ensure the neutrality of South-East Asia as a whole and to pool efforts to meet the challenge of development. Who can fail to see how valuable an example the success of such an undertaking would be?
106.	Nobody, of course, should put himself in the place of the nine countries of South-East Asia to assess the timeliness of one move or another or suggest the most appropriate ways in which they might co-operate. But it is our task to increase the chances of success and eventually to uphold the results of any initiative which would spare over 300 million people the dangers of new conflicts and the effects of confrontations which are not their own.
107.	France, which has so many ties with that part of the world and whose sole ambition is to best serve the interests of the countries there, is for its part determined, along with all those who share its concern, to make every effort to further this end.
108.	Peace, the goal which is central to our action, is the product of an equilibrium which is built on the independence of States and nations, to be sure, but it also needs broader foundations. Back in 1945 did we not, after all, proclaim our "faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small"?
109.	Much has been said and done, right here and elsewhere, towards the realization of this noble goal. But we are forced to note that there are distressing situations in the world today which may at times actually jeopardize peace. Those situations arise from the failure to recognize the fundamental rights of the human person.
110.	I am thinking most particularly of southern Africa, where tension and confrontation are becoming more acute. This development justifies the part we are taking and the support we are giving to the efforts to prevent a fatal escalation. It is all too evident that racial discrimination is the underlying cause of the crisis, though situations may differ here and there. France -and I want to say this with the greatest possible emphasis-rejects and condemns the policy of apartheid. The recent tragic incidents should have made South Africa's leaders realize at long last that such persistent contempt for the dignity of the human person in itself constitutes a source of perpetual conflict among men, and this could lock their country in a deadly cycle of unrest and repression.
111.	The fact that France, like other countries, but to a lesser extent than some, maintains commercial relations with South Africa obviously should not be interpreted as contradicting its position on apartheid. The peaceful nature of a recent contract in the electro-nuclear sector has been amply demonstrated, as is witnessed, moreover, by the international guarantees that have been granted by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
112.	The French Government's condemnation of racial discrimination and other aspects of the policy followed by Pretoria led it to adopt an increasingly restrictive policy with regard to the delivery of arms and ultimately to prohibit any new contracts or further sales. I informed the Security Council of this on 19 June in my capacity as Permanent Representative.  I am saying it again here as a member of the French Government.
113.	Elsewhere in southern Africa, the situation is of still more immediate concern. It is a matter of urgency that Namibia should in accordance with United Nations resolutions accede to sovereignty and independence under the supervision of our Organization after a constitutional process in which the political groups, the principal one being SWAPO, should participate. In several instances, we, together with our European partners, have approached Pretoria to that effect.
114.	It is no less urgent a matter for the majority to accede to power in Rhodesia. Accordingly we welcomed 
the announcement in which the illegal regime in Salisbury has at long last accepted that principle following the recent mission to southern Africa by the Secretary of State of the United States, In this matter, as in the question of Namibia, he has had our encouragement. Without concealing from ourselves the difficulties that still have to be overcome, we want to note the decisive step that has been taken and the change in thinking that it shows. In so far as the two communities and the African leaders directly concerned are prepared with the assistance of the administering Power to draw conclusions from this, it seems to us that prospects for a peaceful settlement may be foreseen, in accordance with the wish that France has always expressed.
115.	The right of peoples to self-determination is written into our Charter. It has been the guiding principle through-out our policy on decolonization, and it is still our foremost criterion in defining the future of peoples and the framework for their existence.
116.	With regard to the Comoros, France has scrupulously applied this principle, and we intend to remain faithful to it. Although we have raised no obstacle to the admission of the State of the Comoros to the United Nations, our attitude has frequently not been understood. I do not wish to harp on misunderstandings that I should like to see overcome. What is past is past; we are looking only to the future. I can tell you that the proposal on the status of Mayotte, to be submitted to the French Parliament, will indeed leave open all possibilities for the future, with due respect for the wishes of the peoples.
117.	In the French Territory of the Afars and Issas, France is engaged in a process that will lead in a democratic manner to independence, if such is the wish of the population. Our intentions are, I believe, now understood, especially by those who are concerned most particularly with the peaceful settlement of this question, and under-stood by all those who have wanted to listen to us. We hope that all the States which call for this evolution will contribute to it as the process develops.
118.	At this point I should like to emphasize that the issue of development is one of major importance for the African continent. Absolute priority has to be given to enabling African States rapidly to improve the lot of their peoples. This is one of the governing principles of France's African- policy. Therefore, the President of the Republic recently proposed the creation of a fund for African advancement, an instrument of solidarity for the financing of development projects that are of special interest, particularly for the least favored countries.
119.	The need to give priority to development problems quite naturally leads us to hope that Africa will remain free from ideological conflicts and will not become a pawn of Powers outside the continent. As Mr.Giscard d'Estaing recently said:
"Africa must be left to the Africans, and the only competition that serves its interest is competition, the sole objective of which is the economic, social and cultural development of Africa."
120.	Latin America too aspires to define its identity still more clearly. Its vast reservoir of human and intellectual potential, its rich cultural past and its very considerable resources assure for this continent a promising future. The affinity we have with its peoples makes us particularly sensitive to the respect for human dignity and the tolerance enjoined on us by our Charter, of which, as we know, Latin American nations have so frequently set an example.
121.	Respect for the rights of the human person is not an obligation incumbent on States alone. Our laws and customs impose it on individuals as well. Here I should like to add France's voice to the universal cry of condemnation and anguish that is aroused by acts of terrorism. The point is not to determine whether certain forms of violence generate others, but to condemn such acts in their principle and to repress them because they involve innocent people, without distinction as to age or sex, making them instruments of intolerable blackmail.
122.	The measures that should be taken to end this outrage are part of the yet unfinished labor of defining, and especially of ensuring, proper respect for human rights.
123.	We fully approve of the initiative taken by the Federal Republic of Germany to combat the taking of hostages, and we will support it to the full.
124. But it is not enough to remove the most imminent threats of conflict and the most brutal manifestations of violence or better to guarantee the exercise of justice. The authors of the Charter knew full well that the freedom of mankind is but an empty phrase if the material prerequisites for existence are not satisfied. Hence the ultimate grand design which they assigned to our Organization: namely, to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
125.	Of course, the results achieved cannot yet be considered satisfactory: the intolerable gap between the multitude of poor countries and the small minority of developed countries remains an object of scandal. It explains one of the predominant factors of tension in our world. But the United Nations effort to attain the objective of economic progress and justice deserves recognition. Over the years, right in this very place, I have witnessed the growing importance accorded development and co-operation. The seeds of these concepts were in the text of the Charter. Thirty years later, they have become an imperative.
126.	France, for its part, believed in this effort-an effort made within our Organization, by our Organization. At the early sessions of UNCTAD, France presented specific ideas on the percentage of public aid for development, generalized preferences and the organization of raw-materials markets, which have made considerable headway. France closely associated itself with the elaboration of the Inter-national Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] and confirmed its interest in this collective effort. When it became evident that new relations had to be established between the producers and consumers of energy, the French Government turned first to the United Nations to deal with this problem. Lastly, France has participated unconditionally and without ambiguity in the immense undertaking of joint reflection required to set up a new international economic order. For, indeed, this is precisely what has to be done: to replace the disorder in world economic relations, and the relations of force permeating them, by the quest for rationality and justice; and to ensure lastingly, at the world level, as was stated last year by the President of the Republic, a better balance of trade, economic activity, currencies and revenues.
127.	We are still wide of the mark, but progress has been made. Indispensable transfers of resources from the developed countries to the developing world are on the rise. That will be the case this year for the volume and percentage of French public aid. But what can and should evolve are the very structures of international trade. In this respect, I think that we must not underestimate the positive results of the fourth session of UNCTAD. After years of procrastination, the international community has finally committed itself to work for the organization of markets. France, whose delegation to that Conference took the initiative of making certain proposals concerning the centralized financing of buffer stocks of raw materials and which participated very closely in the drafting of the fundamental resolutions, is firmly resolved to participate actively and in good faith in the implementation of the principles approved in Nairobi.
128.	The negotiations to begin shortly in Geneva on this vital question and the discussions to be continued on other important problems will require the understanding and patience of us all. Reason and realism preclude recourse to slogans and rejection of the facts. This law of life is even more binding in debates on the full range of economic problems, from energy to development, as is the case in the only forum with such a complete agenda- the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, which is being held in Paris at present.
129.	It is only natural that the tensions of international life should be reflected in the work of that Conference since the justifiable impatience of the third world is so keen and since it is so difficult to define truly valid solutions in these diverse areas, even when agreement can be reached on the principles to be respected and the goals to be attained.
130.	But the instrument is there if we want to, and if we can, go further. It is a unique instrument, with advantages recognized by all the participants, an instrument that can easily be used to complement the large meetings of the United Nations.
131.	The world conferences held in recent years have broadened our field of action. I will mention, in particular, the United Nations Conference on the. Human Environment, held in Stockholm last year, the Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in Lima last year, and, more recently, the International Labor Organization's Tripartite Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labor. As the goals defined by Governments in their successive assemblies acquire world-wide importance, the variety of means and solutions must also grow. No prejudices should be allowed to limit the choice of methods needed to attain the desired goals.
132.	The specific role of the United Nations is not to tackle each and every problem. It is still less to serve as an arena for conflicts in which the stakes would be the ephemeral, and useless, victory of one ideology over another. As the Charter says so well, the Organization must be "a center for harmonizing the actions of nations" for purposes they hold in common. What we expect from it, through reflection, discussion and practical action, is that it arrive at and constantly perfect an overall strategy to build this more effective, more equitable economic order.
133.	There is no doubt that laying the foundations of this new order will be a lengthy task, because it involves nothing less than getting the world started in a new phase of organization and setting up a global system that reconciles the liberal principles of the old order with new measures governing structure and organization.
134.	The basics are already present, namely, each nation's acceptance of this common endeavor of justice. As for concrete measures, we must still avoid getting bogged down in facile ultimatums and ready-made solutions. We have yet to listen to our partner, and confirm our faith in negotiation and co-operation, as the Economic and Social Council asked us to do at its session this summer in Abidjan. In order for us to be faithful to the spirit of the Charter, we must still combine perseverance, courage and realism.
135.	To "live together in peace with one another as good neighbors" is the last great aspiration that the Charter proposes to our peoples.
136.	The organization of regional relations, particularly in Latin America and Africa, corresponds to this desire. I shall refrain from making an assessment which our friends from these regions might find out of place. I shall merely recall the progress made in Europe.
137.	The fratricidal wars of the past now belong to history. The distrust and antagonism of former days have been replaced by entente, co-operation and organization.
138.	The organization is, first of all, that of the Europe of the nine members of the European Economic Community; Year after year, whatever the difficulties, whatever the hazards, which sometimes come from abroad, that Europe is making progress. The United Nations knows this. When I was Permanent Representative and one or another question was being examined, so many people used to ask me, "What are the nine going to do? ". This vitality of the Community stems from its very nature as the framework for reconciliation and co-operation among nations	were once enemies but which have today deeded to work together. For this purpose, there have been set up structures and institutions which, instead of being fixed once and for all, are slowly but surely evolving. "Progress", wrote an author in ancient times, "is when something grows while remaining itself'. This could be the motto of the European Communities. Thanks to the traditions of the States that comprise it, this group of nations has also chosen to be a center of exchange and dialog. Sometimes denounced for being a closed bloc, it has proved its ability to be open towards the rest of Western Europe as well as towards countries to the east of our old continent and, since the Lomé Convention,  towards 46 countries lying across the seas.
139.	The existence and soundness of the Community cannot be demonstrated better than by the passage in the address delivered yesterday by its current President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, on behalf of the member countries. The French delegation fully agrees with everything he said in that capacity about economic and political problems.
140.	Nothing illustrates this better, also, than the role played by the Community here at the United Nations and in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe-the culmination of several years of patient effort to end the divisions caused by the Second World War and a point of departure for a pattern of development which, with time and experience, would reveal a clearer picture of a Europe at last consistent with its geographical designation.
141.	What happens on the European continent does not, however, exempt us from observing that the world is still far from the state of neighborly relations prescribed by the Charter. There has not been a global conflict in 30 years; probably not so much because peace feigns in the full sense of the word as because destructive capabilities neutralize each other.
142.	That is why France believes that, foremost among our concerns, should be the quest for an agreed disarmament between States. That undertaking, which got its start shortly after the Second World War, is marking time. Fifteen years ago the study of general plans for disarmament was in fact abandoned in favor of the study of partial measures. But the agreements reached in that direction-some of which have some merit-should not conceal the unremitting arms race, which leaves an awesome threat weighing on the world.
143.	Nevertheless, some initiatives are taking shape to revise the very structures of the disarmament effort. My Government is following them with interest. It is prepared to support any proposal aimed at genuine disarmament, that is, at the effective destruction of weapons of all types, nuclear and conventional, in accordance with a reasonable time-table and under effective international control.
144.	Since the very birth of the United Nations, it has ' been fashionable to criticize and even lampoon our Organization for its shortcomings and relative ineffectiveness.
145.	I would like to say here that France does not share that skepticism. It considers the United Nations an in-dispensable and irreplaceable instrument for dialog and co-operation among the peoples of the earth. It realizes that, in the maintenance of peace and in many aspects of economic development, the Organization has rendered services which are so easily forgotten because they were so effective. Lastly, it is aware of the fact that the shortcomings of the United Nations are a product of the political divisions in the world. As a minor, it shows nations their own reflection; as a forum, it allows aspirations to be expressed in a political and diplomatic framework; and as an instrument, it is the natural tool of those who want to use it and who know how.
146.	The Organization today extends, with but a few exceptions, to the dimensions of the globe. Five years ago it took an important step in this direction-although it was merely a reasonable step-by restoring China to its rightful place here. In this way, the representatives of that immense nation were able to bring to us here the echo of the great voice that fell silent early this month.
147.	The Organization must truly become a world body, that is, it must welcome the States which apply for membership once they have met the recognized criteria of international law and once they have declared their willingness to respect the Charter.
148.	Accordingly, while France is pleased to welcome the admission of the Republic of Seychelles, with which it has historical affinities, it hopes that the doors of the Organization will be opened to VietNam -with which it particularly intends to develop its relations-to Angola and, generally speaking, to all those that request membership. By the same token, it speaks out against any attempt to prevent or suspend a State's membership. Whatever complaints are brought against the States thus threatened, such extreme measures would in no way facilitate the search for settlements-quite the contrary.
149.	To find what unites us and overcome what divides us, harness our mutual determination to build and repress the instinct that urges us to destroy, work together for the liberty, happiness and dignity of mankind-that, to my mind, is a program that is just as relevant and imperative in 1976 as it was in 1945. That is also the reason for my country's acceptance of the ideals of the Charter and the action of the United Nations.
150.	This acceptance is no mere formality. It is based on the conviction that, beneath frequently militant positions, there is a large community of needs which is expressed here. Over and above the verbal battles and attempts to gain the advantage, there is a growing recognition of the real ills that set mankind: economic crises, deterioration of the environment, mass poverty, over-population and war. Rooting out those scourges is a long-range task; but the future of coming generations and the survival of humanity are at stake. Such a task demands that concertation win over confrontation, that everyone agree to lend himself to dialog; it demands the patient and resolute efforts of countries which are capable of looking beyond groups and blocs. France intends to be among them.
The thirty-first session of the General Assembly is an auspicious occasion for the Commonwealth. It is particularly gratifying to the United Kingdom that the President of this session should be not only a distinguished and longstanding servant of the United Nations but also an outstanding representative of a Commonwealth country. I extend to you, Mr. President, the warm congratulations of my Government on your election. At the same time, I should like to pay my country's tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, for his unremitting efforts over the last five years to promote peace and international understanding.
44.	I also take pleasure in welcoming here for the first time the Republic of Seychelles, a country whose membership in the United Nations was sponsored by the United Kingdom and by fellow members of the Commonwealth [A/31/L.1 and Add.l and 2]. I take this opportunity to convey my Government's thanks for the kind words of the President of Seychelles in his address to the Assembly last week [1st meeting].
45.	It is self-evident that the British Government's foreign policy should reflect the values of the British people themselves. We in Britain are trying to create a society based on the ideals of morality, equality and justice, the United Kingdom is no less committed to these ideals in its foreign policy.
46.	This is a fundamental fact which shapes my Government's attitude to the great challenges facing the international community today: the search for peace; the establishment of a proper economic balance between developed and developing countries; the promotion of human rights; and the maintenance of the rule of law. It is appropriate that on my first visit to the General Assembly as British Foreign Secretary I should at the outset reaffirm unequivocally my country's commitment to support and sustain the efforts which are being made to meet these challenges.
47.	This is also a pledge of support for the United Nations itself. More than ever before, the problems that confront our societies can be effectively tackled only on a regional, or even a global, basis. "Interdependence" is a fashionable word; it is on everybody's lips these days-but rightly so. There is not a nation represented here today that can confidently assure its security and prosperity in isolation. With universal membership as its ultimate goal, with international co-operation and the peaceful settlement of disputes as its ideals; and with its ability to offer the world's nations a forum in which they can discuss their problems freely and openly, the United Nations is uniquely placed to meet the challenges of an interdependent world. That is why today, as over the last 31 years, support for the United Nations is an axiom of British foreign policy.
48.	It would be invidious to arrange these challenges according to some neat order of priorities. We need to meet them all if we are to create the better world we seek. The deprivation of human rights is just as offensive to human dignity as economic deprivation. The establishment of the rule of law is inseparable from the establishment of conditions of peace and security.
49.	But, this said, the relationship between the developed and developing countries is a matter of particular concern to the international community at the present time. Tue gap between the rich and the poor countries is not just a matter of economics; it is a moral question which requires a firm and principled stand. The United Kingdom's position was demonstrated when, in July, at a time of severe economic pressures, we exempted one programme, and one programme alone, from the widespread cuts in public expenditure-the overseas aid programme. Within this programme, moreover, it is our policy to put increasing emphasis on the poorer countries; and not just the poorer countries, but the poorest people in those countries. For when we say that we want a fair and rational world economic system in the management of which the developing countries will have their proper share, we mean also that the poor countries of the world should obtain a new deal, which enables them to offer their peoples the prospect of lives no longer dominated by hunger and chronic insufficiency.
50. Now we should not belittle what has already been achieved in the comparatively short time since the seventh special session of the General Assembly last year. The Conference on International Economic Co-operation has now resumed its detailed work in the four critical areas of energy, raw materials, development, and finance; and I hope that this work will culminate in a successful ministerial conference at the end of the year and in a major and positive step forward in the north-south dialogue. The fourth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in May, for all the initial difficulties which beset it, also marked a significant stage in this dialogue. Eleven out of 13 resolutions  were adopted by consensus and an important programme of work was set in train to which the United Kingdom is determined to contribute positively. There- have also been major international monetary reforms to the benefit of the poorer countries. So something, though not enough, has been achieved in the past 12 months.
51. It is especially pleasing to the United Kingdom that the European Community has taken effective action in this field I welcome the words of the Netherlands Foreign Minister, speaking on behalf of the Community, when he addressed the Assembly last week [7th meeting]. Of particular significance was his reference to an outward- looking Europe. For Britain, an essential justification for the Community's very existence and for our membership of it is that it should play an active and constructive role in the world, so enabling its member States to contribute more effectively to the solution of international problems than if they were acting on their own. The Community has played just such a role in the dialogue between the developed and developing worlds, deploying its collective economic strength to excellent effect. In his speech, Mr. van der Stoel rightly stressed the importance of the Lome Convention,  which grants, as representatives know, preferential access to Community markets to some 50 developing countries and offers a scheme for the stabilization of export earnings for certain raw materials. In recent years, the Community has also steadily improved its generalized scheme of preferences, a scheme which is revised every year and is now of particular benefit to the poorer countries. And, of course, at the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, the Community speaks for all its nine members.
52. The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has an important contribution to make to the dialogue between the industrialized and developing nations. The concept of an international authority to administer the mineral resources of the deep sea-bed for the benefit of all mankind is bold and imaginative. Her Majesty's Government has played a full part in attempting to promote general agreement on the structure of the authority, on the regime itself, and on the many other issues which are currently before the Conference. But while-and you know better than anyone, Mr. President-the Conference has made progress on other issues, we are disappointed by the lack of movement on this basic question of the deep sea-bed. At the fifth session, some States seemed to abandon their previous willingness to consider possible compromise solutions. The United Kingdom was not among these. We shall persist in our efforts to find solutions acceptable to all, and we hope that, before the next session of the Conference, other States will also consider carefully how we might achieve consensus.
53. It is a measure of the size of the problem that so much still remains to be done before a proper balance is achieved between the richer and the poorer "amongst the nations": a balance which is an essential pre-condition of a more civilized international order. I fully understand the impatience in some quarters: it is, after all, literally a matter of life and death for many people that effective remedies be found for poverty and starvation-and found quickly. But the lesson of the past three years is that no one gains from confrontation: our economies are too closely interconnected. The dialogue must continue, because on its successful outcome depends the ability of the poorer countries to secure the real transfer of resources that they so desperately need. What we are searching for, and must seek with sympathy and imagination, is a new relationship based upon justice and a balance of mutual advantage.
54.	However, the North-South dialogue is about political as well as economic partnership. This brings me to an area of the world in which we find distilled all the challenges that confront this Organization today. I refer of course, to southern Africa. There the need for international cooperation and peaceful reconciliation is overwhelming if multiracial societies are to be able to live in freedom and prosperity.
55.	In Rhodesia, I believe, the acceptance of majority rule by the illegal regime-a turning point the achievement of which is largely due to the skill and energy of the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger-has given us at long last the basis for a peaceful settlement. That, as Mr. Callaghan, my Prime Minister, made clear earlier this year, was the essential first requirement. We must now seize this opportunity to make real progress towards an independent government that will truly represent the peoples of Zimbabwe.
56.	Britain will continue to play a constructive role in this. As you will know, I have agreed, in response to the requests of all the parties concerned, to convene a conference to discuss the early formation of an interim government. I am sure you will agree that Mr. Ivor Richard has all the right qualifications to be chairman of that conference. I may add that his knowledge and experience of the United Nations was an important factor in my choice.
57.	I emphasize that, while we are ready to help in whatever way is appropriate, we look to the parties concerned-the parties on the spot-to work out for themselves the best means of achieving a rapid transition to independence based firmly on majority rule.
58.	All of us hope that the threat to peace and stability which Rhodesia has posed for too many years will soon be at an end. Once the interim government has been established, the justification for the various pressures which have been maintained against the illegal regime should fade away. At that stage there should no longer be any reason for the international isolation of Rhodesia. But until that time comes, it would be right for the international community to continue with the enforcement of economic sanctions. We cannot afford to let the momentum of the present initiative be lost.
59.	I hope that when I next have the honor of addressing the Assembly we shall have seen great progress. We all look forward to welcoming a truly independent Zimbabwe into the international community and to giving it our full support and encouragement.
60.	In South Africa, the rioting which broke out in Soweto in June and which has since spread widely has revealed-if indeed any such revelation were needed-the strength of black African bitterness against the evils of apartheid. Britain has consistently condemned apartheid; we condemn it now. The violence and bloodshed in South Africa have shown in the most tragic way that apartheid is not only unjust; it will not work. There must, and indeed there will, be change. We have always hoped that such change could take place peacefully. But time is running out. We urge the South African Government to accept the need for a fundamental reappraisal of its racial policies, so that a society can be built in South Africa in which all South Africans, regardless of color, can live and work in peace, equality and mutual respect.
61.	In the past year Namibia has rightly remained the subject of extensive debate, both in the General Assembly and in the Security Council. We were pleased to vote in favor of Security Council resolution 385 (1976) of 30 January. This was a constructive attempt to press on towards the common aim of securing South Africa's withdrawal from its unlawful occupation of the Territory. The United Kingdom has been active in a number of contexts and we have repeatedly make our views clear to South Africa, both in bilateral and in multilateral approaches. We hope that Mr. Kissinger's success in producing movement over Rhodesia will be followed by similar success in producing movement on Namibia. We fully support his efforts and those of the African leaders directly concerned to help to bring Namibia to early self-determination and independence.
62.	If our efforts to achieve international co-operation and peaceful reconciliation in southern Africa fail, we face the prospect of a catastrophic conflict that not only will engulf the peoples of the region but could also have serious results for world peace.
63.	We hear much about the need for detente, in the aftermath of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. But recent history has given a forcible reminder to us all-and particularly to those, like the Soviet Union, who disparage the present attempts to bring peace to southern Africa-that, in the pursuit of detente, the need for a sense of responsibility is world-wide and not confined to Europe.
64.	We cannot limit detente by geography or by subject. More important, if we are to achieve a genuine detente on a world-wide scale, we must all as a first step honor the undertakings which we gave when we pledged ourselves to the United Nations Charter. This requires a high degree of restraint and mutual tolerance between nations. We are a long way yet from bringing these qualities to international life. Nowhere is this need for restraint more necessary and obvious than in the field of arms control. It is crucial that the international community take urgent steps to curtail the proliferation of nuclear and conventional weapons. Lord Goronwy-Roberts, my Minister of State, will set out the British Government's views on disarmament at greater length in the First Committee.
65.	The concept of the peaceful settlement of disputes is, of course, far older than that of detente. The United
Nations has from its inception seen continuous attempts to apply it in the Middle East. Yet the unresolved conflict there remains one of the great threats to the peace and prosperity of the world. I endorse everything the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands has said on this subject on behalf of the nine members of the European Community. We urgently want to see negotiations leading to a peace agreement supported and sustained by the world community. It is a tragedy that lack of mutual trust causes both sides to adopt so cautious an approach to negotiation when they both stand to gain so much. Of course no one can guarantee in advance that negotiations will lead to a lasting peace but, unless the opportunity is grasped now, the chances of success will surely diminish as time passes,
66.	An enduring settlement must of course be based on compromise; but that compromise must fulfill the basic aspirations of all the parties and leave no underlying grievances to fester and yet again to threaten the peace of the area. On the one hand, the Arabs must accept that Israel is a fact and that its right to exist is not in question. No peace can survive unless the Arab States give Israel formal recognition, within secure, recognized and commonly agreed boundaries, as a permanent feature of the geography and politics of the Middle East.
67.	On the other hand, if Israel is to obtain this recognition, it must, in a settlement, put an end to the territorial occupation which it has maintained since the war of 1967. The nine members of the European Community have declared that that is an essential element in a settlement. On behalf of the British Government I underline that need today. A settlement must also provide a place for the Palestinians, whose fate is at the very heart of the Middle East dispute. They regard themselves and are now generally recognized as a people distinct from their Arab neighbors, with their own strong aspirations towards nationhood. One essential element in a settlement will be a land for the Palestinians, not necessarily a sovereign State, but a place where they will be free to look after their own affairs.
68.	There are things which both sides can do now to help prepare for the negotiations which must come, and I hope will come soon. Above all, both sides must show restraint: the Israelis, by not seeking to change the situation in the occupied territories; the Arabs, by validating their claims that they really want peace.
69.	In the thirty-first year of its existence, the United Nations has come close to its goal of universal membership. The welcoming of new Member States, a feature of past General Assemblies, will become an increasingly rare occurrence as the age of decolonization draws to a close. Universality will not of itself bring greater mutual understanding; the more diverse the membership, the greater the challenge to consensus. The prospect of universal membership therefore obliges us more than ever to ensure that the Organization functions promptly and effectively in the interest of world peace and harmony.
70.	There are surely a number of ways in which we can increase the effectiveness of the Organization. I have already mentioned the Conference on the Law of the Sea; a successful conclusion of that Conference would bring a vast new area of human activity under international regulation and add immeasurably to the Organization's standing. Again, the activities of the United Nations should be more closely harnessed to the promotion of the international rule of law. There are also specific measures that the United Nations could take to tackle international violence. For example, the Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany has put forward a proposal for a United Nations convention against the taking of hostages [A/31/242]. I strongly support that proposal and hope that other members will do so too.
71. But I want to sound a warning. Sometimes the work of our specialized conferences and agencies is made more difficult by the introduction of divisive political issues into their proceedings. I believe that the huge majority of professionals and experts attending those meetings are becoming more and more concerned at what they regard as unnecessary obstruction of their work. The British Government shares that concern. We want to make the specialist and technical work of the United Nations as effective as we can. In many areas of our shared concern, we cannot afford the luxury of prolonged political debate when the harsh realities of, for example, water shortages, starvation and waste of resources cry out for immediate joint action. Of course the political issues of the day are crucial to us, and must be debated; free debate is the life-blood of this Organization. But at the United Nations we have plenty of opportunities for the political disputes and issues of the day. We have this Assembly and its Committees and we have the Security Council. But we cannot afford to allow those disputes to reduce the effectiveness of specialist international co-operation. If this trend persists, there will be a growing pressure to achieve results outside the United Nations system. And so I appeal to all Members of this Organization to maintain the effectiveness of our work together in the many fields where joint action is in the interest of us all.
72. I also believe that we should identify those areas where our aspirations and standards of conduct are not negotiable and should enjoy the full support of the membership of the United Nations. I refer in particular to the question of human rights. The normative work of the United Nations in drafting instruments has, I think, in general been well done. We already have the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which has been the inspiration of many constitutions and conventions, including the European Convention to which the United Kingdom has long been a party. The year 1976 has now seen the entry into force of the two International Covenants on Human Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXX)]. These give legal force to the rights set out in the Universal Declaration. The United Kingdom's ratification of the Covenants last May reflects the seriousness of its approach. We hope that other States will join us in ratifying and giving full support to the Human Rights Committee, whose task it will be to supervise the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with vigor and impartiality. But vital though it is, legislation alone cannot of course guarantee human rights. We must all approach this question with frankness, with honesty and, where necessary, with self-criticism. Our task is to arrest and reverse the present erosion of human rights in the world. We shall not accomplish this if we allow human rights to become, as is too frequently the case today, a playground for political propaganda, hypocrisy and cynicism.
73.	Our task is to create a world in which all men can live in peace, prosperity and freedom, guaranteed by the rule of law. This is an ambitious goal and some may despair of ever reaching it. But I believe that if we approach the problems that beset us in a spirit of peaceful reconciliation, co-operation and restraint-and if, above all, we display these qualities in our dealings with one another in this Organization-the task will not appear so daunting and the goal will not prove impossible of achievement.
Let me begin by extending to the President my Government's warm congratulations on his unanimous election to be President of the thirty-first session of the General Assembly. We are happy indeed that this high office has been filled by his country this year, and that the choice has fallen on him in particular. It is a mark of international tribute to Sri Lanka and its noteworthy role in the United Nations. It is also yet another mark of recognition of his own wide experience and skill in conference diplomacy. We feel sure that the success of the thirty-first session is in safe hands.
48.	I wish to place on record also our appreciation of the work of his distinguished predecessor, the Prime Minister of Luxembourg who under difficult circumstances maintained a high standard of leadership and objectivity.
49.	It is customary for us to say a few words about our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. He has tried always to represent the United Nations as accurately as possible. He has reaffirmed his faith in the United Nations when it was most needed. His loyalty to the principles and purposes of the United Nations has been demonstrated on many an occasion, when a lesser man might have faltered. We wish him many more years of dedicated service to the United Nations.
50.	We are glad to welcome Seychelles, our youngest Member. The attainment of its independence through peaceful constitutional means is a tribute to the maturity of its people and its leaders.
51.	It is unfortunate that Viet Nam and Angola have not yet' been admitted to the United Nations, despite their clear entitlement to membership. The peoples of these two countries have had to wage prolonged and bitter struggles for winning their national independence, and having won their birthright, their Governments have applied for admission to the United Nations. This is a remarkable manifestation of their belief that the best guarantee of their independence and future development lies in joining the United Nations. And yet, our doors remain closed to them for reasons that do not carry conviction. We feel sure therefore that there will be a change of heart. We reaffirm our support for the admission of Viet Nam and Angola and we have every expectation that they will soon be seated among us.
52.	An important recent event was the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries held in Colombo in August 1976. It was the largest ever of its kind and demonstrated that, despite their diversity, non-aligned countries are united in their struggle for freedom, equality and peace. The fact that most States on attaining independence from colonial rule have joined the non-aligned family is proof of the continued validity and importance of non-alignment. My Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated at the Colombo Conference that in a fast changing world non-alignment remains the bulwark of the ever widening area of peace, a shelter against external pressures and a catalyst for a new world economic order based on equality and justice. The Action Program for Economic Co-operation adopted by the Colombo Conference [A/311197, annex III] is a significant achievement and provides a basis for further collective action.
53.	The United Nations has now been in existence for 30 years and it has seen dramatic changes in the world. It has survived the years of the cold war and has entered a period of detente between the great Powers. It has managed to contain situations of active hostilities and in the process it has acquired useful experience in peace-keeping operations. Its membership has increased rapidly and the United Nations has become a hallmark of independence of countries that have liberated themselves from colonial rule.
54.	The United Nations stands for the promise of peace, equality, justice and full opportunities for the common man everywhere. When one examines the resolutions adopted by the United Nations on a wide variety of subjects, one sees that a quiet revolution has been taking place during the last 20 years- a revolution in the realm of ideas about the quality of peace and the quality of life for all in the future.
55.	On the one hand, the United Nations has been trying to cope with current problems and controversies. Some-times these are issues that could be resolved outside the United Nations by the countries concerned. It is our belief that if the United Nations is to survive and grow into a cooperative organization equipped to deal with problems of the future, we should not unduly burden it with issues that lend themselves to solutions outside the United Nations in conformity with the principles of its Charter. After all, Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter stipulates that all Members shall settle their disputes themselves by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered.
56.	On the other hand, there are other types of issues that concern a number of countries and they seem to need the healing hand of the United Nations. But the experience of dealing with even such issues indicates that in the final analysis it is necessary for the parties directly involved to sit together and negotiate practical and reasonable solutions to their mutual benefit. This is as true of the Cyprus question as it is of the Korean question or any other such question for that matter. We wish to draw attention to this basic fact of life, because it is often forgotten in the early stage of most problems. As a consequence the credibility of the United Nations is placed under increasing strain.
57.	Issues that directly pose a continued threat to inter-national peace and security merit our attention as a matter of priority. The situation in the Middle East has been a source of grave anxiety. Another war in that region will affect all of us in one way or another. It will almost certainly plunge the peoples of that region into disasters of unprecedented magnitude. The continuing civil war in Lebanon makes us very sad, because of the heavy loss of life and destruction of property. It has also added a new dimension to an already complex situation.
58.	There is no doubt that peace must come eventually to that troubled part of the world. The essential ingredients for a peace settlement have already been set out in Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973). In subsequent resolutions the United Nations has recognized the national rights of the Palestinian people and affirmed the vital importance of the exercise of those rights for the maintenance of peace in that region. The root of the problem of course is the continuing occupation of Arab lands and territories by Israel. Ways and means must be found for implementing the Security Council resolutions and a proper climate for their implementation should be quickly created by an early resumption of the work of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East.
59.	The process of decolonization has maintained its momentum everywhere, except in southern Africa. We had hoped that after the withdrawal of Portuguese colonialism, white minority rule elsewhere in southern Africa would quickly yield to majority rule. But it would seem that our hopes were based on wrong premises. The national liberation movements have been left with no option but to resort to armed struggle. It is particularly sad that the peoples of southern Africa should have to make many more sacrifices before winning their freedom, because it is within the competence of the United Nations to prevent them by taking enforcement action.
60.	In Zimbabwe the time is overdue for the introduction of majority rule. The question of a constitution, safeguards for minorities, etc. surely must follow the establishment of majority rule. Diplomatic efforts are being made by front-line African States and others to resolve the problem democratically and peacefully through negotiations. The regime of Ian Smith clearly has no basis in law or in the will of the people, and it must yield to majority rule without any delay, if further bloodshed is to be avoided. The United Kingdom, whose legal responsibility continues, could play a helpful role at the present juncture.
61.	It is necessary to remind ourselves that the Territory of Namibia has international status and that South Africa's presence there is illegal. South Africa's open challenge to the authority of the United Nations has remained unanswered in effective terms. Almost every Member of this Organization agrees that steps should be taken to retrieve in practice what the United Nations legally holds in trust, which is the Territory of Namibia and the destiny of its people. But nothing has been done so far except to adopt recommendatory resolutions. Nothing could cause greater harm to the credibility of the United Nations than its failure to assume in practice responsibility for what belongs to it in law. The implications of this should be squarely faced by those countries that support the legal position but are not prepared to enforce it. Here again, diplomacy seems to be at work to bring together representatives of the people of Namibia to discuss and agree upon the process towards their independence within a short period of time. The United Nations cannot afford to fail in Namibia, because the Members of this Organization have a collective legal responsibility for its independence.
62.	The infamous policy of apartheid, which is the device employed by the white minority regime in South Africa to perpetuate its rule, has been roundly condemned by nearly all Members of the United Nations. That policy, racist in concept and rooted in slavery, contains within it the seeds of its own violent destruction. It is a flagrant violation of the concept of equality of human beings regardless of color or race. We see already the beginnings of its end and we hope it will be peaceful. We extend our sympathies to the victims of racist oppression in Soweto and Cape Town.
63.	We hope that the white rulers in South Africa, in order to avoid further loss of life and property, will give up the policy of apartheid and replace it with a forward-looking enlightened policy that will enable all persons, regardless of race or color, to live together on a basis of complete equality. The intention of the white South African Government to grant so-called independence to Transkei sad to create similar "bantustans" is no solution. It is nothing more than the logical extension of the policy of apartheid and is intended to create satellite black areas without any real independence. It will intensify racial discrimination rather than eliminate it, and it should be rejected by the United Nations.
64.	Turning now to some other important problems, may I mention that while we have welcomed the state of detente in East-West relations, we have always stressed that efforts to consolidate and intensify detente should respond positively to the anxieties and aspirations of the rest of the world. This can best be done through meaningful disarmament measures, through implementing agreed measures for securing a rational and equitable new economic order, and through non-interference in the internal affairs of developing countries. It is only through such steps that detente can spread to all regions and create its own momentum for establishing mutually co-operative and beneficial relations between all States.
65.	The frightful dilemma facing mankind today is the incredible accretion of enormous military power by a few countries and their seeming inability to deescalate the arms race. They seem to be under a strange compulsion to race faster and faster in order to remain in the same position of parity. The price of this parity is reported to be Of the order of $US 300 billion per annum at present. Despite the astronomical waste involved in the diversion of vast resources for achieving the so-called balance of strategic power or mutual deterrence, war continues to remain a likely consequence. It is significant that the United States Secretary of State should have cautioned that any one of the current regional crises could blossom into a larger conflict [11th meeting].
66.	The rest of the world cannot remain insensitive to this prospect. It seems unlikely that there will be significant progress in social reform and economic development in developing countries as long as world military expenditure continues to grow at the present rate. My delegation has been among the foremost to propose a variety of disarmament measures since 1950 but it is regrettable that little progress has been made. The need for a world disarmament conference has become increasingly urgent. It might be useful by way of preparation to have a special session of the General Assembly to be devoted exclusively to disarmament. If we can have world conferences on space, atomic energy, environment, human settlements, trade and development, and so on, there is even greater reason and greater urgency for organizing a world conference on disarmament.
67.	Several speakers have referred to the problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. India has consistently supported efforts in the direction of achieving nuclear disarmament. We are surprised that attempts are continuously being made to confuse the question of non- proliferation of nuclear weapons with the legitimate right of all Member States to engage themselves in programmers involving peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We reject the thesis that access to the benefits of nuclear energy should be limited only to a few nations, or that only some countries can be trusted to behave in a responsible manner in embarking upon and implementing programs in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
68.	The initiative of the USSR in proposing a treaty on non-use of force in international relations is a positive step and deserves the most careful consideration by the General Assembly. It is in fact an attempt to elaborate the principle already enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter that all members shall refrain from the threat or use of force in their international relations.
69.	Another initiative of the USSR, which is of direct interest to us, is the statement made by the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union the other day that his country did not have "any intention of building any military bases in the Indian Ocean" [7th meeting, para. 185] and that it was "prepared, together with other Powers, to seek ways of reducing on a reciprocal basis the military activities of non-coastal States in the Indian Ocean and the regions directly adjacent thereto" [ibid., para. 186]. This is a welcome statement. We trust that it will be reciprocated by other great Powers so that existing foreign military bases such as Diego Garcia are eliminated and the Declaration of the General Assembly that the Indian Ocean shall be a zone of peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)] can become a reality.
70.	India attaches great importance to the work of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. While it has succeeded in evolving a consensus on many important issues, the search for a consensus is still continuing on the remaining issues like the system of exploitation of the- international sea-bed area and its resources which are the common heritage of mankind. The developing countries, which have suffered from the consequences of colonial domination and the arbitrary operations of an unjust economic order, cannot be deprived of their legitimate share in the vast sea-bed resources by technologically advanced countries unilaterally exploiting these resources.
71.	I should like to say a few words about a problem that has been recently plaguing many countries and affecting the lives of all travelers. It is the pernicious practice of making hostages of innocent persons for political or other reasons. I feel sure that this practice deserves to be condemned by all States in the strongest terms. But what is more important is that we should all do something more to put an end to it. The initiative taken by the Federal Republic of Germany to propose an international convention against the taking of hostages [A/311242] is timely. The terms of such a convention should be so drafted as to secure the widest possible support.
72.	In our part of the world, India has been pursuing a deliberate policy of normalizing and improving relations with all its neighbors. We intend to continue to persist in developing good neighborly relations with all.
73.	The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan referred the other day [8th meeting] to the so-called dispute relating to Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India. He also referred to the resolutions of the Security Council of 1948 and 1949. Those resolutions were not implemented at that time because Pakistan did not fulfill certain essential preconditions that had been laid down in them. As a consequence the resolutions became obsolete and this was repeatedly made clear to the Security Council. In our opinion it is now entirely unrealistic to hark back to those resolutions. The Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972, however, provides a practical and realistic basis for overcoming all impediments to friendly and co-operative relations between India and Pakistan. The implementation of that Agreement has already resulted in a large measure of normalization of relations in several fields. It is our intention to persist in this process because we believe that it can lead to stability and durable peace in the subcontinent.
74.	With Bangladesh we wish to develop, on a basis of equality, close and friendly relations to our mutual benefit. Unfortunately Bangladesh has chosen to bring before this General Assembly certain misconceived allegations concerning the equitable sharing of the waters of the river Ganga during the lean period of the dry season every year. My delegation expressed our views on this issue when the question of the inclusion of the item came up before the General Assembly [4th meeting], I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate our firm belief that the discussion of this question in the United Nations will only serve to complicate the situation and impede bilateral negotiations.
75.	I should like to turn now to the struggle in the United Nations for a square deal for developing countries-a struggle that has already entered its second decade with no promise or even hope of an early solution. The grievances and expectations of developing countries have been clearly set out in previous sessions of the General Assembly and in various other conferences. But we still seem to be convening one conference after another for no ostensible reason other than to repeat and reaffirm earlier resolutions. Developing countries find themselves in a state of political independence in an economic environment over which they have little control and which they have inherited through historical circumstances. They are in the grip of forces manipulated by developed countries largely for their own benefit. Such a situation is likely to lead to the permanent impoverishment of developing countries, while developed countries continue to prosper at the expense of others. This state of affairs is both immoral and intolerable. Decisions already taken and measures agreed on at earlier conferences should be speedily implemented through constructive negotiations.
76.	The indebtedness of developing countries has exceeded $US 15O billion with repayments increasing every year. Developing countries now face the dilemma of either not paying their debts, or suspending altogether the process and tempo of their national development. This problem can be resolved only if the international community as a whole draws up mutually agreed norms for affording realistic and immediate relief to debtor countries. Even a 5 per cent reduction in the military budgets of developed countries could facilitate the transfer of much needed resources and open for two thirds of mankind vast opportunities for development.
77.	The survival of mankind in all its many splendored diversity depends on planned expansion of areas of equitable interdependence. My Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi observed recently at the Colombo Conference of non-aligned countries:
"The community of nations should jointly and peace-fully achieve that elusive equation between global production and consumption that yields the right share for each nation. Patchwork remedies are no substitute for genuine reform. We need a global perspective plan that would relate resources to human needs and provide a system of early warning of imbalances and disasters. Improved terms of trade and credit, easier access to markets and better value for raw materials and industrial goods are all essential to secure greater equity in the distribution of benefits."
78.	To that end we need to evolve a global ethic, a code of conduct and a set of principles for managing interdependence for the purpose of sustaining economic development. We need also the sort of interdependence among nation States that preserves their sovereignty, transcends political ideologies, harmonizes the actions of States for common ends, strengthens the weak and prevents their exploitation by the strong, prohibits policies which beggar one's neighbor and envisages an equal share in decision-making.
79.	Recognition of this mutuality of interests and of the need to rearrange the present economic system on a more equitable basis should influence the attitudes of the affluent countries in such a manner that their people respond readily and positively to the modest national objectives of developing countries. Unfortunately, the response of the developed countries so far indicates a certain wavering of political will to meet the full dimension of the challenges and opportunities inherent in the present situation, as evidenced by the slow progress made by the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation. Perhaps fear of the unknown future, or reluctance to reduce wasteful consumption, is at the root of their inadequate response.
80.	Surely, they must realize that there can be no freezing of the status quo of dependence between the developed and developing countries. The present situation must inevitably evolve into a new order of equitable interdependence and mutual benefit. Self-serving short-term remedies will not meet the long-term requirements of the present situation. So far as the developing countries are concerned, they should be prepared to safeguard their own interests through a higher level of individual and collective self-reliance as well as mutual co-operation.
81.	The strength of the developing countries rests, of course, entirely on their own unity and their sense of purpose. Theirs is not the strength that comes from numbers alone but rather from the shared awareness that they form the backbone of peace-loving nations. They represent not only the majority of the nation States of the world but also the majority of the world's population. Their aspirations therefore acquire a special meaning for mankind's future, for they represent the hard core of suffering humanity. Their collective position should make an appropriate impact on the attitudes of developed countries and their peoples.
82.	As the United Nations enters the fourth decade of its existence, I would like to recall in conclusion the words of our former Prime Minister and leader Jawaharlal Nehru, who said on the first day of our independence: "Peace is said to be indivisible; so is prosperity, and so also is disaster in a world that can no longer be split into isolated fragments."
Permit me to join the representatives who have spoken before me in the general debate to proffer to you, Sir, the congratulations of the delegation of Israel on your unanimous election to the high and responsible office of President of the General Assembly.
122.	I also tender my delegation's good wishes to Mr. Gaston Thorn, who presided over the deliberations of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly with such distinction, and to our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his devotion and assiduity in the performance of his onerous duties.
123.	What is the aspect of the'United Nations as it enters into its fourth decade? Physically, the Organization works well. One must ask, however, if the principles of the United Nations Charter, as they were determined in San Francisco 31 years ago, have proved equally resilient; if intellectually and morally the United Nations has withstood the test of experience -the experience of a generation which, although it has been spared the devastation of a world war, has still seen major armed conflict, massacre, political terrorism, slavery, tyranny, persecution, hunger and poverty in all too many areas on the surface of the globe for every minute the United Nations has been in existence. Regrettably, the answer must be negative.
124.	It is indisputable that world public opinion has become increasingly disenchanted with the United Nations; increasingly frustrated by the opportunism and hypocrisy of so much of its debates and decisions; increasingly disgusted by the power of a mechanical majority to bend the Organization to its own purposes, by, for example, transforming an initiative designed to outlaw terrorism into an apologia for terrorism; or by converting the Commission on Human Rights into a forum in which the guilty are the accusers and the innocent condemned, In the twisted terminology which is used here a defeated aggressor is portrayed as a victim, a successful defender as an aggressor; those who refuse to treat with their neighbors are hailed as lovers of peace, and those who seek peace negotiations branded as warmongers.
125.	The list of discrepancies between the current practices of the United Nations and what the Charter says is long, and there is no need to labor the point.
126.	To a great extent the General Assembly has become an arena for empty rhetoric and arbitrary recommendations which have little to do with right, justice and international reality. Indeed, there appears to be no limit to the absurdity which the General Assembly, as it operates today, can reach it even achieved a record in futility by adopting, at the same session, two conflicting resolutions on the same subject.
127.	Two further examples from the record of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly demonstrate that clearly. One is the ludicrous and evil attempt to stigmatize the national liberation movement of the Jewish people as racism and racial discrimination; the other is the bizarre episode of the Committee of 20 members, from the resolution which the General Assembly was not competent to adopt; through the biased and non-representative com-position of the Committee itself, to the report of the Committee which is not only a flagrant intervention in the domestic jurisdiction of a Member State but also a prescription for its dismemberment by stages.
128.	History will consign these resolutions to oblivion, and those countries which supported their adoption will bear the shame.
129.	But the United Nations system is an essential feature of the international scene of our times and it is hardly possible to conceive of a world without it. It must be cured, however, of the grave maladies which afflict it: there must be a return to the Charter; there must be an end to the rancorous confrontation which is the dominant feature of our deliberations; consultation and agreement must be restored to their primary place; the United Nations, and particularly the specialized agencies, must abandon the dangerous path of politicization along which they are being dragged by Arab obsessions about Israel, so that they may devote themselves to the social, humanitarian, scientific and technical tasks which they were set up to perform and which they perform very well when they are allowed to do so; and, lastly, there must be full participation of all Members in all United Nations activities on an equitable basis, by strict alphabetical rotation, instead of the discriminatory bloc system.
130.	The effort to bring into being a new order in international economic and trade relations has become a major focus of interest and debate throughout the world and in the United Nations system.
131.	Israel belongs to a small group of countries in the developing world which, though meagerly endowed by nature, have by hard work and the application of science and technology reached a promising level of development.
These countries have a special role to play because they show what can be done even in the most difficult of circumstances.
132.	It is thus important, I believe, that developing countries consider not only what the fortunate countries of the industrialized world can do for them but what they can do for themselves and what they can do for one another. As our sage Hillel taught some 2000 years ago: "If I am not for myself, who will be for me; but if I am only for myself, what am I; and if not now, when? "
133.	For our part we have tried, at the seventh special session and at the fourth session of UNCTAD, to present some ideas which some delegations found useful and constructive.
134.	What we can best do is to put our experience in overcoming some of the major problems which beset a large part of the developing world at the disposal of all who wish to avail themselves of it. For many years now it has been the policy of the Government of Israel to conduct programs of technical co-operation with other emerging and developing countries and, indeed, it is a source of pride to us that, with all the limitations which nature has imposed on us, and saddled as we are with tremendous burdens caused by the absence of a peace settlement in the Middle East, we are at this very moment co-operating in one technical field or another with over 50 countries represented in this hall.
135.	One such important field is water development in semi-arid climates. In view of the forthcoming United Nations water and desertification conferences scheduled to take place next year, the practical experience of Israel in water exploration and management as well as in the development of highly efficient methods of irrigation, which has already aroused much interest in a number of countries with similar problems to our own, might well prove to be susceptible of wider application.
136.	The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has just concluded its fifth session here in New York, and it is a matter of some disquiet that it has not achieved any significant progress in the direction of an acceptable international agreement.
137.	The trend towards unilateral decisions by individual States concerning the increase in the width of their territorial sea or the proclamation of economic zones is asserting itself without a parallel international reaffirmation of proper rules to guarantee the essential freedom of navigation and overflight on the seas and through and over straits. This is a regrettable situation which cannot but result in an increase in international tensions.
138.	Another problem which is still without solution is that presented by the lofty idea that the sea-bed beyond the economic zones constitutes the common heritage of mankind. A realistic compromise between this concept and its practical application for the benefit of all nations is still apparently far away.
139.	A goodly number of representatives who have spoken before me have raised their voices in condemnation of
international terrorism, which these last few years has spread over the face of the earth like a malignant cancer.
140.	There is no excuse for terrorism. No cause can justify or condone it. It is a criminal activity, totally indiscriminate in its effects, which by design strikes at the very elements of the population that every society tries to protect-the innocent, the weak, the defenseless, children and women.
141.	The record of the United Nations in combating terrorism is dismal. In 1972, after the massacre of the Israeli athletes at the Olympic Games by a gang of Arab terrorists, the Secretary-General proposed an item for the agenda of the General Assembly on measures to prevent terrorism and other forms of violence which endanger or take innocent human lives or jeopardize fundamental freedoms.7 We all know what happened to that praise-worthy venture: it was deliberately sabotaged by a group of States whose interest was not to prevent terrorism but to encourage, aid and abet it on the evident assumption that, because it seemed to serve their own interests, they would be immune from harm.
142.	They were grievously mistaken. Nobody is immune; and some of the States whose representatives were the most eloquent in thwarting any effective United Nations action have themselves been victims of terrorism in the past few weeks-Yugoslavia, India; Egypt and even Syria. Ilie item, now distorted so as to appear like an apology for and justification of terrorism instead of a call for action to suppress it, is still on the agenda of the General Assembly, but is is conceded by all that nothing will ever come of it.
143.	The issue is a fundamental one for the international community, for the attitude this Organization takes on the question of terrorism is a very clear reflection of its moral strength and international responsibility.
144.	The terrorism of today is especially deadly for three principal reasons: the availability to terrorists of sophisticated modern weapons capable of causing mass loss of life and destruction; the complicity of certain States which supply these weapons, frequently delivered in their diplomatic bags, and which provide the terrorists with shelter and comfort; and the abhorrent practice of taking innocent hostages as a means of blackmail.
145.	The rescue by Israel in July of the hostages hijacked to Entebbe in the Air France airbus has shown that given the will it is possible for even a small State to combat terrorism effectively. However, operations such as that would not be necessary if potential hijackers and terrorists knew that nowhere in the world would they get refuge and support.
146.	Israel thus welcomes the proposal made on 28 September by the Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany that the United Nations should draft a convention banning the taking of hostages internationally and providing for the prosecution or extradition of the perpetrators f 7th meeting, para. 113]: This is an important step in the right direction and the General Assembly would lose all credibility as an effective international instrumentality if it failed to take it.
147.	But in view of the extreme gravity of the problem and the sorry performance of the United Nations in dealing with it, we would be deluding ourselves if we imagined that that would be enough. Only by close multilateral co-operation and concerted organized action between States which really intend to fight terrorism will this atrocious crime be suppressed.
148.	The enemies of Israel in this Organization strive mightily to convince the world of similarities between Zionism and apartheid, and make much of the relations between Israel and South Africa to bolster a fraudulent case. Racism and racial discrimination, in any guise, including apartheid, are abhorrent to my country and my people. The basic tenets of Judaism are irreconcilable with any form of racial discrimination. The Jews are the classic victims of racial discrimination and over the centuries our martyrs have run into the tens of millions.
149.	It is equally specious to single out Israel for links with South Africa when most of the world maintains links with that country. According to the latest available statistics, the foreign trade of South Africa totaled over $12 billion in 1974. Of this huge sum Israel's share was less than two fifths of 1 per cent-infinitely smaller than the share of many Arab and some African countries. The armed forces of the Republic are large and equipped with modern weapons -tanks, artillery, aircraft, destroyers and submarines. It is not Israel that supplied them.
150.	In my address to the General Assembly last year  I stated that as far as Israel was concerned we had two criteria for judgment on the policy of detente which was given formal expression in the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. Those criteria are that detente must apply to the Middle East no less than to Europe and to other areas of the world, and that the humanitarian provisions of the Helsinki agreement must be scrupulously applied. On both counts detente has been a grievous disappointment to us.
151.	I declare that detente has not been felt in the Middle East. Moreover, I regret to record that there has been no improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Exit from the Soviet Union-a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Helsinki agreement-is still severely restricted, while those Jews who do insist on their rights are subject to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment, and in some cases to arrest and imprisonment. I once again call on the Government of the Soviet Union to permit those Jews who wish to leave in order to join their families in Israel to do so.
152.	The situation of the Jews of Syria remains tragic: a small community continues to be held as a hostage. Jews are victims of persecution and oppression, are circumscribed in their movements inside Syria, while travel abroad is permitted only under severe restrictions. Surely these 5,000 men, women and children cannot make all that difference to the Government of Syria. Why is it holding them?
153.	When I spoke in the General Assembly last year the war in Lebanon was but six months old. At that time some 5,000 people had already been killed and nearly 18,000 wounded. Twelve months have passed since then; the carnage goes on. By now over 40,000 men, women and children have lost their lives and over 100,000 have been wounded-and this out of a total population of less than 2.5 million. A rough equivalent would be a toll of killed and wounded totaling some 13 million in the United States, 15 million in the Soviet Union and 3 million in France. The ruin and devastation are almost beyond description; most of the flourishing towns and villages of Lebanon have become a bloody and merciless wasteland.
154.	For a year and a half a Member State of the United Nations has been bleeding to death before the eyes of the whole world. At the beginning it was claimed that this was a civil war, and thus outside the purview of the Security Council. No one produces this specious argument now, when massive armed intervention by regular and irregular foreign Arab troops is known and admitted-Syrians, Iraqis and Libyans, to mention only the larger contingents. But not a word from the Security Council, not a whisper.
155.	The silence of the world Organization in the face of this tragedy is an awful warning to all small States. It is clear that a country which relies on the United Nations for its security, a country which cannot defend itself by its own means, is lost.
156.	There is yet another conclusion to be drawn. For years now the world has been bombarded by a propaganda campaign peddling the notion of the replacement of Israel by a so-called secular democratic State where Muslims, Christians and Jews would live in blissful amity. But where is this beautiful mirage now? Destroyed in the fires of Lebanon, by the same gangs of terrorists who are the prime instigators of the blood-letting there in Lebanon.
157.	Israel is an immediate neighbor of Lebanon, and what goes on there concerns us closely. Our overriding desire is that peace and tranquility should be restored to Lebanon, for that is the essential condition for the reaffirmation of the national independence and the territorial integrity of that unhappy land. Moreover, we expect that the future constitutional structure of Lebanon will* be determined by the citizens of Lebanon in their respective communities, and by them alone; that foreign troops, both regular and irregular, will leave the country; and, above all, that Lebanon will not again become a base for attacks on Israel and its people.
158.	But the Lebanese conflict, although the most grave, is not the only current conflict in which countries of the Arab world are engaged. There are many others. A random listing makes, indeed, extraordinary reading.
159.	There is the bitter quarrel between Iraq and Syria. Then comes Iraq's designs on the territorial integrity of, Kuwait; Democratic Yemen's quarrel with Oman, with Yemen and with Saudi Arabia; Somalia's designs on Ethiopia; Egypt's conflict with Syria; Libya's clashes with
Egypt, with Sudan, with Tunisia, with Syria, with Chad and with practically every other independent State in the Arab world and in North Africa; and, finally, the feud between Algeria, Morocco and Mauritania in the Sahara desert.
160.	There is only one island of stability in this stormy sea, and that is the State of Israel.
161.	There is clearly a moral to be drawn here. The neighbors of Israel know that their border with Israel is the safest border they have. They know that if they preserve the peace on the borders with Israel then their own borders are secure. Moreover, their people know full well that when they are in distress they can turn to Israel for humanitarian assistance, as the villagers of South Lebanon are doing this day at the fence of goodwill.
162.	In my speech last year I drew attention to a problem of particular gravity for the prospects of peace as well as for the economic and social well-being of the countries of the Middle East. I refer to the seemingly limitless flow of weapons of war into the region, resulting in a frantic arms race. In the past three years the value of arms supplies delivered by both East and West to the Arab countries in the vicinity of Israel is estimated at $7.5 billion; a further approximately $22 billion worth is contracted for delivery from the end of 1976 onwards, making a total of nearly $30 billion invested in weaponry. This is an utterly staggering sum which is difficult for the human mind to take in. If, instead of being spent on means of destruction, most of this sum was invested in the economic and social development of the area, the Middle East would be transformed and restored to its ancient glory.
163.	However, as long as the Arab States continue to arm themselves with highly sophisticated modern weaponry on this vast scale, Israel is compelled to keep up, and will keep up. But we repeat emphatically that we are prepared now, even before peace is made, to negotiate with our neighbors for a balanced limitation of the inflow of arms into the area in such a manner that the burden will be lightened for all without adversely affecting the security and the defense capacity of any.
164.	It causes us no joy that the Middle East is ablaze with conflict, because the peace that we seek is its principal victim. Therefore, in order to keep up the momentum following on the successful conclusion of the 1974 separation of forces agreements with Egypt and Syria and the 1975 agreement with Egypt, we have tried to take additional steps in the direction of a just and lasting peace in the area.
165.	We have proposed that the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East be reconvened with its original membership. The proposal was torpedoed by the USSR, Syria and Egypt. When it was intimated to us that there was no chance at this time for an overall peace treaty and the normalization of relations, we responded favorably to a United States suggestion to negotiate agreements on the termination of the state of war. This proposal has remained without response or acknowledgment from the Arab side to this day. As far as we are concerned, this possibility still exists.
166.	Israel wants peace, seeks peace and is ready for peace at any time-a peace which will emerge from the region itself, which will break down the wall of hostility dividing the States of the region and which will be shaped by free negotiations between them. We believe that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) form the only agreed basis both for the nature of the peace and for the method of achieving it. For that reason we are ready to take part in a reconvened Geneva Peace Conference, with its original composition, at any time acceptable to all. At such a conference, or by any other means which the parties find satisfactory, we would hope to negotiate with each of our neighbors a final peace settlement based on a fair compromise which, on the one hand, will provide Israel with defensible borders, and, on the other, will satisfy genuine Arab interests, including, within the context of the settlement with our neighbor to the east, a just and constructive solution to the problem of Palestinian Arab identity. Only a peace which serves the interests of Israel and its neighbors will endure.
167.	Peace is the foremost objective of Israel, and its Government will not be deflected from the constant effort required to attain it.
Mr. President, it is my great pleasure to congratulate you on your election as President of this Assembly session. This has been a great year for you. You have already demonstrated your presidential capacity in five sessions of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, and at two of them this year. At the same time your country has been the host for a summit meeting of the non-aligned countries in Colombo.1 Your election as President not only ensures that this session will run with unusual punctuality and efficiency, but also reflects honor on Sri Lanka and on the Asian countries which showed their wisdom in selecting you for this high post.
31.	I offer my warm felicitations to our Secretary-General and his staff on their untiring efforts in the interests of all mankind.
32.	New Zealand, as a fellow member of the Common-wealth, gives a special welcome to Seychelles as the newest Member of the United Nations. In accordance with the principle of universality, New Zealand will support the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam when it comes before this Assembly.
33.	The General Assembly is the great key forum for the discussion of world issues, and the attendance of so many distinguished political figures at this session proves this.
34.	Some might think that New Zealand is not well placed to be much more than an onlooker in such a discussion. We are tucked away at the south end of the world. We are small; we are isolated; we are rather out of the way. But I assure you that any such assumption would be wrong. In spite of our geographical position, we are very much a part of the world. We depend for our livelihood, as much as any other country in the world, on our overseas trade.
35.	When things go wrong with other parts of the world, particularly in the economic sphere, we feel the effects and we feel them heavily and badly. As a result of the recent international recession our economic fortunes have suffered a significant downturn. We are still struggling to put things right, and I am not being pessimistic when I say that we still have a long way to go. Times are difficult for New Zealand. Unemployment has increased, and belts have had to be tightened. All this has inevitably placed strains on our society.
36.	But although we are going through a lean time I have no apprehension about our future. This is because our society is fundamentally strong, and it is strong because it is fundamentally just.
37.	We are multiracial society. We are British, we are Maori, we are Polynesian, we are Chinese, we are Danish, Yugoslav, Indian, Dutch and of many other nationalities. Some might see this cultural diversity as a liability or as a source of friction. We do not. It is a strength. We believe that our society is more mature, more accommodating and richer because we have learned and are still learning to get along together. I will not pretend that stresses do not occasionally arise. The movement in recent years of large numbers of our Maori people to the cities and the immigration of other Polynesians from the Pacific Islands have created problems of adjustment that did not formerly exist. The change from a traditional community life in comparatively isolated rural or island areas to a somewhat frustrating and perplexing one in what may seem to many to be an uncaring city is never easy.
38.	I would claim, however, that the change is perhaps easier to make in New Zealand than in many other places throughout the world, and I believe that is because we have a stronger egalitarian tradition and because we believe that human rights are not the preserve of any one group. Divisions of class, status or cultural background are of less significance than they are perhaps anywhere else in the world. I know that is a bold statement to make, but I believe it to be true. To put it into our colloquial terms, we believe in giving the other chap & "fair go", and it does not matter whether the other chap is a Maori, a Samoan, an Indian, a European, or whatever. We all share the same rights and the same responsibilities.
39.	And this approach is well reflected throughout our history. Representatives might be interested to know that our indigenous people, the Maori, were granted the democratic right of universal suffrage -the "one man, one vote" that we hear so much of today-in 1867: over a hundred years ago. At that time the rest of the New Zealand community still had to have property qualifications in order to vote. The most reliable test of racial harmony is often claimed to lie in the rate of intermarriage between different groups. In New Zealand the rate of intermarriage is so high that it has been estimated that within a generation or two every New Zealander of British or European stock will have at least one close relative of Maori or Polynesian extraction.
40.	As New Zealanders, we have thus come to see clearly that our separate destiny as a nation lies in building upon the heritage of our two main cultures-that of the Polynesian and that of what we call the Pakeha, or European. What we are striving to do is to leave to our children and their children the inheritance of the best of what is to be found in the traditional values of our different cultures.
41.	This has necessarily meant coming to terms with New Zealand's geographical position. As I mentioned earlier, we are located in the far South Pacific, and so New Zealanders of all races have developed a sense of belonging to the Pacific. It is not for us an area that we look on from a long distance and with detachment, as it will be looked on by most people of the world. It is our region.
42.	Our acceptance of this identify has been accelerated by the emergence of new island nations in our neighborhood, and when I talk of "neighborhood" it is pretty vast: I am talking of an area of 2,000 to 4,000 miles wide. It has been fostered, too, by the experience we have had in administering our former Territories, the Cook Islands and Niue. The United Nations was closely associated with the process by which those Territories came to self-government, and New Zealand assisted and welcomed that association.
43.	We were pleased, earlier this year, that a Visiting Mission from the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was able to go to our remaining island Territory, which used to be called the Tokelau Islands, but is from now on to be known simply as Tokelau, to discuss its future. The Mission has since submitted its report [A/31/ 23/Rev.l, chap. XVII, annex]. We in New Zealand are giving most serious consideration to what the report has to say and, of course, particularly to its recommendations. Tokelau comprises an isolated, tiny and thinly settled group of islands. My Government will cp-operate fully with the United Nations in finding ways to meet the expressed wishes of the Tokelau people regarding their future.
44.	The process of political change is at work, not only in New Zealand's corner of the Pacific, but in other parts as well. The South Pacific has sometimes been called a quiet backwater. I doubt that that has ever really been true, and certainly in my long experience the South Pacific has always been a busy place; there is always something going on and some changes taking place.
45.	Yet I also believe it is true that the South Pacific is indeed entering upon a new era: new forms of political co-operation are evolving, notably the South Pacific Forum, in which the heads of government of the independent nations of the South Pacific meet at least once each year, with committees in between times. I had the very great privilege of presiding over the first Forum, which was held in New Zealand in 1971. There is a growing sense of collective interest evident in the work of that Forum. Perhaps the best example of this is the concerted approach its members have adopted towards those aspects of the negotiations on the law of the sea which have very great implications for all those who live in our region.
46.	New leaders have emerged and are emerging. They have new ideas and they are determined to give expression to the expectations of their people. This is a good thing, something to be encouraged. Because of the kinship link New Zealand has with the Pacific people, we are that much more aware of their aspirations for advancement and their aspirations for higher living standards. We are also aware- keenly aware-of the expectations that New Zealand and Australia inspire because we are of the relatively more affluent members of the Pacific family.
47.	My Government is committed to assisting the island countries of the Pacific, and this year a greater share than ever before of New Zealand's aid program is going into the South Pacific countries. A special effort is being made to promote employment opportunities in those countries. We will, however, continue to leave it to those countries themselves to decide their own priorities and the direction in which they wish to go in building towards self- sufficiency.
48.	We are doing all that we can to help. We look also to the United Nations and the specialized agencies to continue their good work in our region. The United Nations Development Program [UNDP], we know, faces a grave resources problem. It has, however, made a valuable contribution to the South Pacific in recent years, and this is an opportunity for me to reinforce the previous representations that the New Zealand Government has made, that the UNDP should maintain its support for the important key projects it has been involved in in the region.
49.	There has recently been a quickening of outside interest in this region. To the extent that it reflects a genuine concern to promote the well-being of the developing countries of the South Pacific, it will be welcome.
50.	Having a special interest in the South Pacific does not mean that we take a parochial view of world economic problems. The same egalitarian tradition which I mentioned earlier, the same concern for the basic human rights, leads us to attach great urgency to early progress in restructuring the world's economic and trading system along more equitable lines. We share Secretary-General Waldheim's own blunt assessment when he said: "A world economically divided could not and would not be politically stable."
51.	As a country heavily dependent on the export of a narrow range of agricultural commodities, New Zealand knows at first hand the difficulties and uncertainties faced by developing countries whose economic progress is dependent upon a stable and remunerative trade in commodities, mainly primary commodities. I have mentioned our own problems arising from the international recession. But we realize fully that many developing countries were hit even harder than we were, and that for them export earnings have shrunk to a level at which their development efforts have been crippled. We believe that improved commodity training arrangements are an essential ingredient of any new international economic order worthy of that name.
52.	Again, as a net importer of investment capital and technology, New Zealand has a special appreciation of the requirement for better and more equitable international arrangements in those two areas. My Government also believes that the daunting debt-servicing problems currently faced by the poorer developing countries demand immediate attention, and in the future the question of the terms of development assistance generally must receive continuing international consideration in a multilateral context.
53.	There has been some progress since the encouraging conclusion of last year's seventh special session of the General Assembly. The Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris and other important meetings, both within and outside the United Nations system, have provided an important element of continuity in the global consultations. The number and the intensity of these meetings reflects a growing recognition of the interrelated nature of our problems and the urgency with which we must tackle them.
54.	The fourth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development [UNCTAD] succeeded in establishing a framework and a time seals for consideration of the key question of the international commodity trade. It cleared the way, at least, for a more detailed analysis of the specific issues involved. These are welcome developments, although less progress was made in other key areas. But in the new climate, consideration of these issues will not be allowed to lapse; the debate is, fortunately, now a continuing one.
55.	International efforts are focused on many different problems-food production, human settlements, the commodities trade, the transfer of science and technology, the flow of development assistance and investment capital, and the restructuring of the United Nations system itself to make it more responsive to the current needs of the world community. In all these efforts New Zealand is committed to full and constructive participation.
56.	One of this Organization's real achievements in its 30-year history has been in the elaboration of standards for basic human rights. We know, however, that despite those standards and despite all the efforts made by men of good will, people in many parts of the world are still being denied their basic human rights. We know, too, that nowhere is the denial as blatant as it is in the countries of southern Africa. The refusal of those who rule South Africa, Namibia and Rhodesia to accept the principle of human equality has caused acute tensions and has brought the situation in the area to a critical stage. Watching the developments of the last few months, we in New Zealand, like people I know in other countries, have had the feeling that we may be seeing the beginning of a maelstrom of violence.
57.	For Rhodesia, time is rapidly running out. Until recently the Smith regime seemed determined to make no concessions to the demand for early majority rule. It has seemed more and more likely that that objective would be achieved only by armed force, with much bloodshed. My Government is, therefore, very encouraged by the decision of Mr. Ian Smith and his colleagues, belated though it may be, to accept majority rule within two years. So the way is now open for negotiations on the detailed arrangements for the transfer of power, and we in New Zealand earnestly hope that, through British good offices, these can soon begin and that they will be successful.
58.	When the Security Council imposed mandatory sanctions on Rhodesia in 1968,  the Government of which I was then head immediately put them into effect in New Zealand. Since then, successive Governments have applied the sanctions consistently and rigorously. After Mozambique had announce d its decision to apply sanctions, and in view of the consequent loss to it, my Government agreed to contribute to the programs of assistance to that country launched by the Commonwealth Secretary-General and the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Although New Zealand is not directly involved, we are prepared to play our part in any international effort to end the bloodshed and to help die people of Rhodesia to achieve a just multiracial society.
59.	Namibia, too, seems dangerously close to the brink of conflict. We in New Zealand believe that South Africa was wrong to go on occupying Namibia after its Mandate was withdrawn, and we have said so consistently. South Africa was even more wrong to try to impose its own policy of apartheid on the people of Namibia. We welcome South Africa's recent acceptance of the goal of independence for Namibia. But independence is meaningless unless it is genuinely based on self-determination. And the refusal of the South African Government to deal with the South West Africa People's Organization [SWAPO] has created a justifiable and reasonable doubt in the minds of African and other countries whether the act of self-determination envisaged by that Government will be fully genuine.
60.	As Namibia was once a League of Nations Mandate, this Organization has a special responsibility towards it: its responsibility is to see that all the people of Namibia are given the opportunity to decide freely for themselves what the future of their country should be. It is essential, therefore, that the United Nations should be given the opportunity and the means to supervise free elections in Namibia and to approve any new constitution for that country.
61.	Much is at stake in Rhodesia and in Namibia, but in the longer term the greatest potential for disaster is in South Africa itself. I think this is obvious to all men. South Africa is not in any means the only country in the world where human rights are consistently violated, and we all know this. But it is the only country where racial discrimination is the basis of the whole social, economic and political system. Our own experience in New Zealand has taught us that racial harmony is essential to the well-being of a multiracial society. The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr: MuldOon, said in a speech about a month ago:
"The New Zealand Government's attitude to apartheid is very clear: we believe it is wrong and we want to see it ended. It should now be plain even to South Africans that apartheid will not work. Based as it is on racial discrimination, it is an unjust and inhuman system. It can be maintained only by the ruthless use of force, and it cannot be maintained that way indefinitely."
62.	The rioting that has been going on around South African cities for over three months now began as a spontaneous explosion of black anger. By ruthless repression, the South African authorities have managed to confine it largely to the black townships. They have not been able to stop it. The outside .world can see that they are in a blind alley. Only a fundamental change of direction can prevent an inevitable escalation of the hatred, violence and bloodshed.
63.	Setting up what are called "homelands", or "bantustans", for. the African people of South Africa will not solve the problem. The black and colored people of South Africa cannot accept being deprived of citizenship in their own country-the country of their birth and the country they have helped to develop. They must be accepted as citizens of South Africa, entitled to a fair share in South Africa's resources. We note that many countries including in particular Britain and the other members of the European Community, have made it clear that they are unable to extend recognition to the Transkei and other homelands as sovereign, independent States:
64.	New Zealand's position is the same. Indeed, I recall that in 1971 New Zealand voted for the resolution adopted by the Assembly condemning the establishment of the bantustans [resolution 2775 E (XXVI)]. Then, as now, a National Party Government was in office in New Zealand. In 1975 New Zealand also supported the Assembly resolution calling upon Governments not to recognize any of the bantustans [resolution 3411D (XXX)]. That action was taken by a Labor Government, but it was in accordance with the policy that the previous Government had initiated. There is a consistent line of policy in New Zealand on this question.
65.	We note with regret that, 31 years after the United Nations Charter was signed, threats to the peace continue to exist in many parts of the world: notably in the Korean peninsula and in the Middle East. Good sense has prevailed here, and we are not going to have another sterile confrontation over Korea at this session, but the fact remains that the border between North and South Korea remains in a state of continuous tension and that talks between the two Governments have reached an apparent stalemate. As a result, Korea remains divided and outside the United Nations.
66.	We feel deeply for the people of Lebanon in the tragic situation in which they find themselves, a situation not of their own choice or of their own making. We are equally concerned at the lack of progress towards a solution of the Cyprus problem, despite the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and others. Again, it is the people of Cyprus who are the innocent victims. We can only join with others in saying that what is needed is simply the implementation of previous Assembly resolutions: the withdrawal of foreign troops, the repatriation of refugees and the resumption of negotiations between the two sides. New Zealand strongly supports this line of action.
67.	This has been an active year in the field of international law-making, although it has not been as productive as most of us would have wished.
68.	New Zealand attaches the greatest importance to the achievement of a new convention on the law of the sea. When you think of that vast area of ocean around us and around the Polynesian islands with which we are so closely associated, you will realize how keenly we are interested in this question. We have, therefore, shared the widespread sense of frustration at the lack of progress during the last session of the Conference on the Law of the Sea on the main issues which are delaying general agreement. We remain committed to the goal of a universally supported treaty on this vital subject. We believe that rapid progress towards this goal is now absolutely essential if the
Conference is not to lose the great chance it has to secure an equitable and stable regime for the world's oceans. In the absence of such progress, New Zealand, like many other States, will inevitably shorten its focus and concentrate on consultations and arrangements within its own region.
69.	I shall turn now to one aspect only of a subject which perhaps overrides all others in its global implications: the question of disarmament.
70.	The aspect that has especially worried New Zealanders is the question of nuclear weapons testing and proliferation. We know that to put an end to the testing of nuclear weapons is not, in itself, a disarmament measure, but we believe that it is an important confidence-building step, an essential preliminary to nuclear disarmament.
71.	It is a great relief to us in New Zealand that the testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere in our part of the world has stopped during the past 12 months. We regret that it continues elsewhere. As recently as yesterday, we have had news of substantial radioactive fall-out right here on our doorstep from a nuclear explosion many thousands of miles away. What the safety level for such fall-out is no one can be sure, but it is obviously desirable that any increase in existing levels should be avoided.
72.	However, that in itself is not enough. Only a comprehensive test-ban treaty, ending weapons testing in all environments and not only in the atmosphere, can be counted as a genuine first step on the road towards nuclear disarmament. One of the main stumbling-blocks to the conclusion of such a treaty has been the question of on-site inspection. We think it is very encouraging that, in a document recently circulated [see A/311232], the Soviet Union has now indicated willingness to consider a com-promise on this issue. The language of the Soviet note is, however, not altogether clear. It is important, we feel, that on-site inspection should not depend entirely on the consent of the State in question.
73.	Another stumbling-block in the way of a comprehensive test-ban agreement has been the unwillingness of certain nuclear Powers to take part in the negotiations. It is our hope that they will take heed cf the increasing concern of world public opinion about the ever increasing growth and proliferation of nuclear weapons and that they will adopt a more co-operative approach.
74.	In this connexion, I stress the need for the utmost control over the exportation of sensitive nuclear facilities and I am thinking particularly of processing plants. Things are bad and dangerous enough now, but they could get very much worse, and even over the short period. The suppliers of nuclear fuel and material have a responsibility not only to themselves but also to the rest of the world to ensure that their commercial activities do not facilitate nuclear weapons proliferation. Profits will be of little value in a nuclear holocaust.
75.	I have touched on several aspects of what I might call a general human rights theme: I have discussed human rights in New Zealand, economic rights in the South Pacific and the developing world generally; I have discussed human rights in southern Africa, and, in relation to disarmament, what I might call the human right to survive. I should like to conclude by referring to one further aspect of the human rights theme, and that concerns the question of international terrorism. I agree absolutely with the comment of the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual report to the Assembly on the work of the Organization that the time has come for a new and determined approach by the international community to this growing and worrying problem [see A/31/l/Add. l, sect. V]. No one can deny that the increasing frequency and scope of acts of terrorism pose a serious threat to the integrity of the whole human society as we know it. My Government therefore welcomes the initiative taken by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on the elaboration of a convention on the taking of hostages and we hope that the Assembly will be prepared to examine it in a positive spirit [A/31/242].
76.	Surely it is not too much to hope that, when this Assembly ends, its work may be marked down as a positive contribution towards strengthening economic, social and political rights, especially of all poor and oppressed peoples everywhere, and to the freeing of all mankind from the fear of nuclear destruction.
On behalf of the Soviet delegation I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the important post of President of the thirty- first session of the United Nations General Assembly. I wish you all success in the performance of this honorable and responsible task.
146.	The United Nations operates uninterruptedly all year round and, like international politics, it knows no interludes. But the annual sessions of such a forum as the General Assembly are of special significance. They provide an opportunity-now to almost 150 States -to scan the political panorama of the world in all its diversity, to identify the main problems that await solution and, most important, to provide by joint efforts, new momentum to international co-operation.
147.	The very emergence of the United Nations as an international organization on the crest of the great victory over the forces of fascism and aggression was an expression of the will of the peoples of the world to prevent another war. In the name of those who perished and those who survived, its founding States declared their determination "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".
148.	Now, as then, the peoples of the world have every right to demand of their political leaders, Governments and parliaments that efforts to strengthen peace be intensified and not slackened.
149.	We are very far from underestimating the United Nations. After all, the Soviet Union is one of its founders. The United Nations has given useful and significant support to the peoples of the world in their struggle for liberation from colonial oppression. It has also made a weighty contribution to getting negotiations under way and preparing agreements which have curbed the arms race in certain areas. In certain cases it has been helpful in extinguishing conflicts. All these things are true.
150.	Nevertheless, if the role of the United Nations is viewed in terms of the problems which still remain on the political agenda of the world there are at least two questions which arise.
151.	First, is the United Nations potential always fully exploited whenever tension grows or blood is shed in any given part of the world? No. The United Nations does not always measure up to the situation. This was true in the case of IndoChina. It is still true in the Middle East. It is true in Cyprus, and it is true in southern Africa.
152.	As a result, people's faith in the effectiveness of the United Nations and its ability to give the necessary support to the victims of aggression is undermined.
153.	When anyone succumbs to the temptation to use force to seize the lands of others or tramples upon the right of peoples to free development, then there arises the question of what has become of his signature on the Charter of the United Nations. No matter how you put it, one thing is clear: such a policy is alien to the interests of peace and to the noble goals in the name of which the new international Organization was brought into being. And this is precisely why all too often the Security Council finds itself paralyzed, while many United Nations resolutions remain mere ink and paper.
154.	The second question is this. Has the United Nations really addressed itself to the task of solving the most burning issue facing mankind today-the elimination of the threat of another world war? Unfortunately this question cannot be answered affirmatively either.
155.	Whenever the General Assembly meets, it discusses at its sessions some hundred items and adopts even more resolutions. At times the resolutions are so eloquent, and their verbal fabric so splendid, that they could be hung around this hall as slogans.
156.	But resolutions are resolutions, and at the same time there is the gigantic machinery of arms production, or, in other words, of material preparation for war, continuing to gather momentum. Figuratively speaking, the globe, or at any rate a sizable part of it, is criss-crossed with assembly lines continuously churning out ever deadlier weapons -land-based, airborne, underwater weapons and whatever others you care to name.
157.	And many political figures who have linked their careers with the arms race and who are building their policies on that basis are clamoring for the development of ever newer weapons of destruction and annihilation. Not satisfied with wingless missiles, they want winged missiles. The B-type bomber no longer suits them. They must have the B-l, or, better still, a C-type.
158.	It is indeed a fact that today the world spends 60 times more money to teach a soldier the ABCs of annihilation than to teach a child the science of creation. And, if one goes through the records of some parliaments, it would appear there is no greater evil than a reduction of military spending. As a result, record-breaking military budgets are being adopted. Those who work at the factory bench and in the fields or who are engaged in scientific and cultural activities are increasingly deprived of funds that could be used for improving nutrition, public health, education, housing and social security.
159.	Science and technology have made tremendous strides forward. Opportunities for raising the material and cultural standards of the people have increased immeasurably. But a huge proportion of the material and intellectual resources of the world are being devoured by the arms race. According to United Nations data, the world today spends on armaments about $300 billion a year, or more than a million dollars every two minutes. In the three hours of this very plenary meeting we are attending, another $90 million worth of means of destruction will have been added to the total.
160.	And what are we to say about the arguments -which have been elevated almost to the rank of theories -of those who preach, with criminal neglect of human life and the achievements of civilization, that it is better to build man's future on radio-active ashes?
161.	We shall not now go into an analysis of the causes of the arms race or their social nature, although of course we could certainly find a few things to say about this too. Now, here in this hall, where States with different social systems are represented, we should focus our attention on what concerns us all equally: the prevention of war and the consolidation of peace.
162.	The Soviet Union rejects the grim conclusion that putting an end to the arms race is beyond human ability. No one can prove that people must either constantly be at war or be preparing for mutual annihilation.
163.	For almost six decades now our country has been guided in its policies by ideas of a different kind, those of peace and friendship among nations. Lenin, the founder of the Soviet State, said, "An end to wars, peace among nations, an end to plundering and violence-that is our ideal...".
164.	The Soviet Union acts in the international arena in close unity and co-operation with its allies and friends, the fraternal socialist States. We are proud that the impact of the socialist countries on the course of world affairs is becoming ever more profound, and we are proud because that impact is used not only in the interests of those States but also for purposes of strengthening universal peace.
165.	Any objective observer can realize that the members of the Warsaw Pact, the countries of the socialist community, bring to international politics a feeling of respect for the independence and sovereignty of all nations and put forward concrete peace-loving initiatives and proposals and serve as a reliable bulwark for peoples fighting for national liberation and social progress.
166.	The Leninist ideas of peace found new, vivid expression in the decisions of the highest forum of our Party, the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, held last spring. Its program of further struggle for peace and international co-operation and for the freedom and independence of the peoples, set out in the report delivered by Leonid Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, is imbued with a sense of profound optimism and an unshakable belief in the possibility of making peace on earth enduring.
167.	As one of the major objectives of the Soviet Union's foreign policy, the Twenty-fifth Congress set the task of seeking to contain the arms race, and then to reverse the trend and begin disarmament. We have put forward numerous specific proposals. Some of them are long-term proposals; others, with goodwill on the part of our partners too, could be implemented in the near future.
168.	Now, what specifically do we have in mind?
169.	The first step would be the curbing of a further build-up of weapons of mass destruction, to be followed by their complete prohibition and elimination. The conscience of mankind demands that ultimately nuclear weapons be eliminated altogether.
170.	The Soviet Union has been, and remains, in favor of the removal of nuclear weapons from the arsenals of States, and of using nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposes. We believe that the nuclear Powers-and all other States could join them-should come to the negotiating table to examine comprehensively the problem of nuclear disarmament and to chart together ways leading to its solution. The Soviet Union is prepared to take part in such negotiations at any time.
171.	Independently of these negotiations, nuclear- weapons testing should be stopped everywhere and by all. This would put an end to the qualitative improvement of those weapons. That is the purpose of the proposal to conclude a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons testing approved by the General Assembly at its last session [resolution 3466 (XXX)]. The start of negotiations on this question is being unjustifiably delayed. The problem here is not the absence of objective conditions -they have long existed-but the unwillingness of some nuclear Powers to begin negotiations.
172.	The question of underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes cannot be allowed to become a stumbling-block: the USSR and the United States have, after all, succeeded in agreeing on this matter, and have recently signed a relevant Treaty.1 2 We hope that this Treaty will soon be ratified by the United States. On our part, there will be no delay.
173.	The problem of verification has been artificially inflated for quite some time now. Advanced techniques for identifying seismic phenomena have eliminated this point of disagreement as well. If, nevertheless, there are some who still harbor doubts on this score, we are confident that a mutually acceptable approach can be found that would remove such doubts.
174.	In short, no room has been left for any plausible excuses which would prevent the completion of the task of prohibiting all nuclear weapons tests.
175.	It is a matter of growing concern that channels for the proliferation of nuclear weapons have not yet been fully blocked. One can only imagine how much greater the risk of nuclear war would become if new States, particularly those in conflict with each other, became involved in the process of developing and stockpiling nuclear weapons.
176.	It is well known that at present international commercial exchanges of nuclear materials are increasing. In some cases, however, it is not sufficiently certain that the possession of fissionable materials could not be used for dangerous purposes or that the means of developing nuclear weapons would not fall into the hands of irresponsible persons, adventurists, or simply madmen. This is not a question of trade, but of politics and security.
12 Treaty on Underground Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes, signed at Washington and Moscow on 28 May 1976 (see document A/31/125).
177.	Surely it follows that the world must be safely protected from all such risks. The way to achieve this is to strengthen the regime on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. We should redouble our efforts to make the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] truly universal and to secure the accession to it of all States, without exception.
178.	The Soviet Union proposes that all chemical means of warfare be completely prohibited and destroyed, as has been done in respect of bacteriological weapons. If all States are not prepared to take such a step, then, to begin with, agreement should be reached on banning and eliminating the most dangerous and lethal types of chemical weapons.
179.	It is not only the means of mass destruction already accumulated that pose a threat: potentially, weapons based on qualitatively new operating principles, in terms of methods of use, targets or effects, could become just as formidable. Today such weapons may exist only as blueprints, mock-ups or ideas, but experience shows that their appearance may not be too far away.
180.	At the last session of the General Assembly, the Soviet Union proposed the conclusion of an international agreement which would preclude the development and production of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction,  Some have asked how you can prohibit something that does not yet exist. However, since the very beginning of the discussion of this matter in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva, it has become evident that there is here a subject for serious discussion. It is vastly more difficult to agree on the elimination of those types of weapons which have already been supplied to armies. The Soviet Union believes that everything possible must be done to prevent the development of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction.
181.	Conventional types of weapons are not normally included among weapons of mass annihilation. But modern tanks, aircraft, cannon and even small arms have been perfected to such a degree that they have actually become instruments capable of wiping out great masses of people.
182.	Since the Second World War, the Soviet Union has repeatedly proposed that conventional types of arms and the strength of armed forces also be reduced. We believe it imperative to discuss these questions as well.
183.	As it always has, the Soviet Union favors the dismantling of all foreign military bases on alien territories. The existence of such bases is one of the main causes of the complications and tensions in the world. This problem is no less urgent today than it was yesterday.
184.	To open up ever new avenues towards the solution of the disarmament problem, efforts are required along many lines. In some cases, the desired result is brought closer by singling out as a subject for negotiation certain types of weapon-say, strategic nuclear missiles. In other cases, the consideration of some particular aspect of the curbing of the arms race in the context of a certain region of the globe is more promising. The Soviet Union is in favor of using either of these approaches, or of combining them when circumstances permit. That also determines the attitude of our country towards regional measures of military detente, including the possibility of creating zones of peace or nuclear-free zones.
185.	We consider it reasonable that a number of Asian and African States desire to turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. In this connexion, the essential point is that there should be no foreign military bases in the area which constitute the main element of a permanent military presence. As for the Soviet Union, it has never had and does not have any intention of building military bases in the Indian Ocean.
186.	In solving the problem of foreign military bases along these lines, the Soviet Union is prepared, together with other Powers, to seek ways of reducing on a reciprocal basis the military activities of non-coastal States in the Indian Ocean and the regions directly adjacent thereto. Our country has shown its readiness to contribute to the realization of the idea of turning the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace, but of course, this should not create any obstacles to freedom of navigation or scientific research in that Ocean. If due account is taken of our approach by the States concerned, the Soviet Union will be able to participate in consultations on matters relating to preparations for convening an international conference on the Indian Ocean.
187.	Among the various methods of securing the curtailment of the arms race there is another one which, as it were, combines the various possibilities, and that is the reduction of military budgets.
188.	Three years ago, the General Assembly approved our proposal that the military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council be reduced by 10 per cent while a part of the money thus saved could be used to provide assistance to developing countries [resolution 3254 (XXIX)]. Because of the position taken by some States, the practical solution of this problem has been blocked. Wishing to break the deadlock in this matter, we are prepared to look for mutually acceptable specific figures with which the reduction could be started. As a first step, a figure either greater or smaller than 10 per cent could be agreed upon as soon as for 1977, next year. But it is necessary to begin negotiations on this question.
189.	The opponents of reductions of military budgets are resorting to every possible means to frustrate any agreement about this. They are endeavoring to prove that inflated military budgets are necessary in the interests of peace, higher employment in industry and the reinforcement of negotiating positions, primarily in negotiations with the Soviet Union. All these arguments are illusory. Those who use them are well aware that they are turning the truth and standing it on its head. But, of course, they do not want to tell the truth. Those who base their policy not on deceiving people but on revealing to them the true causes of such an international phenomenon as an uncontrolled arms race cannot reconcile themselves to that, and they even feel it necessary to say so from this lofty rostrum of the United Nations.
190.	So far, the pace of the arms race has far outstripped the efforts of States to arrest it, and this gap is growing. It is time, and everything possible must be done not only to narrow this gap and even to eliminate it totally, but also to ensure that disarmament negotiations outstrip the arms race in terms of effectiveness, thereby facilitating its termination. The Soviet Union continues to believe that if the elimination of one type of weapon cannot be immediately agreed upon then, to begin with, its production should be substantially limited. But in any case, the important thing is to make a start.
191.	No one today will deny that the arms race has assumed unprecedented dimensions. This makes it imperative for all States, nuclear and non-nuclear, great and small, developed and developing, to combine their efforts to arrest it.
192.	That is why the Soviet Union has proposed, and continues to propose, that the problem of disarmament be considered in its entirety at the broadest and most authoritative forum-a world disarmament conference. An overwhelming majority of the States of the world have declared themselves in favor of convening such a conference. But the implementation of this proposal continues to meet with the objections of some big Powers.
193.	In this regard it has been suggested that it would be appropriate to hold a special session of the General Assembly to discuss disarmament questions. Well, this, too, is a suitable forum if it is viewed as an intermediate stage in the preparations for a world conference. But it must really be a special kind of session, not a routine one. We see its task as that of paving the way for a world conference and finally ensuring a real break-through in solving disarmament problems. Its work must reflect the grave responsibility of all States of the world, especially the great Powers.
194.	Such, fundamentally, is our approach to the problem of stopping the arms race and of disarmament. Such is the essence of the Soviet Union's memorandum on these questions which we are submitting for consideration at this session and circulating as an official document of the United Nations [A/31/232],
195.	Some of the provisions of the memorandum have already been proposed earlier by us, and others have been put forward for the first time. I should like to express the confidence that this important document will be viewed by States Members of the United Nations as reflecting the sincere efforts of the Soviet Union, of our people, to help banish the threat of a world war of annihilation.
196.	Neither in the years preceding the Second World War nor in the first few post-war decades did there exist the objective conditions for making progress towards ending the arms race and towards disarmament such as those that exist today. It will be recalled that it has recently proved possible to achieve international understandings which impose certain limits on the arms race in some areas. As far as one can judge, an important agreement on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques seems to be within reach. A number of questions relating to disarmament are now being discussed among States.
197.	Pride of place belongs, for obvious reasons, to the continuing talks between the Soviet Union and the United States of America on strategic arms limitation. The importance of these talks far transcends the interests of just our two countries. We are ready actively to continue our efforts to translate the well-known Vladivostok understanding into the text of an agreement.
198.	There can hardly be anyone who would doubt that the fullest guarantees of peace will be provided by general and complete disarmament. Ever since Lenin's days, Soviet foreign policy has been aimed at achieving that ultimate goal.
199.	But along with efforts to solve that historic task, it is possible and necessary to seek by other means, too, a reduction of the risk of the outbreak of war. Now, what is of decisive importance today? Above all, a firm agreement between States not to use force in international relations.
200.	It could be argued that the principle of the renunciation of the use or threat of force is already embodied in the United Nations Charter. This is true. But it is also true that many States are seeking ways of putting this principle into practice. It is no accident that it was considered necessary to lay special emphasis on it in recent bilateral and multilateral international treaties and agreements.
201.	The principle of the non-use of force has been developed in detail in the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The need to abide strictly by this principle has on more than one occasion been stressed by non-aligned States, and particularly at their highest forums.
202.	There is another important consideration. When the Charter of the United Nations was being signed, nuclear weapons were virtually non-existent. Their emergence-and especially their growth into a huge complex of various kinds and types of weapon-is a qualitatively new factor. It radically changes our concepts of the consequences of armed conflict. Therefore, it was not without reason that the General Assembly of the United Nations in its special resolution adopted in 1972 linked renunciation of the use of force with the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. Thus, the question of how States should deal with each other without seriously endangering the security of the peoples of the world has not become a whit less urgent.
203.	There are certainly enough unresolved problems in today's world. They were bequeathed to us by the Second World War and the period of the "cold war", and they continue to arise now and again in the course of the current development of international relations.
204.	These knots of differences among States should be untied and outstanding problems should be resolved at the conference table, by peaceful means. The principle of renunciation of the use of force must become an iron law of international affairs. That is the purpose of the proposal made from the rostrum of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union concerning the concluding of a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations.
205.	We note with satisfaction that that proposal has met with a broad response and has aroused the interest of many States. At the same time, we are asked what the Soviet Union has in mind in terms of the specific contents of such a treaty.
206.	The answer to this question is to be found in the draft world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations which the Soviet Union is submitting to the General Assembly [A/311243].
207.	The essence of the proposed treaty lies in the idea that in their relations with each other, as well as in their international relations in general, all parties to it will strictly abide by the undertaking to refrain from the use or threat of force either against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
208.	They will accordingly refrain from the use of armed forces involving the employment of any types of weapon, including nuclear weapons, on land, at sea, in the air and in outer space and will not threaten to use such forces.
209.	They will have to reaffirm the undertaking to settle disputes among themselves solely by peaceful means in such a way as not to endanger international peace and security.
210.	There is, of course, a fundamental difference between the launching of hostilities for the purposes of aggression and the legitimate right to repel aggression or eliminate its consequences. Can the Arabs, for instance, resign themselves to the loss of their lands? And do the colonial peoples have no right to fight for their independence till final victory? They do indeed have an inalienable right to that.
211.	The substance of the matter is the prevention of aggression. In this case there will be no further need to use force to repel it. The source of the evil is aggression and not the desire to restore justice; that is the cause and not its effect. Underlying our draft treaty -and I want to lay special emphasis on this -is the definition of aggression worked out by the United Nations, and everyone voted in favor of that document [resolution 3314 (XXIX)].
212.	The treaty takes fully into account the system of bilateral and multilateral relations of States that has developed in the world. One of its articles provides that nothing in the treaty affects the rights and obligations of States under the United Nations Charter and treaties and agreements concluded by them earlier.
213.	It is envisaged that the treaty would be open for signature by any State of the world at any time. This means that, first, it would be of a general, universal nature. Secondly, for the signatory States the treaty would enter into force upon ratification. Consequently, there would be no need to wait for the accession to the treaty of a specific number of countries.
214.	According to our draft, the Secretary-General of the United Nations would be the depository of the treaty. The United Nations as a whole would be called upon to lend all its moral and political prestige in support of the treaty.
215.	The conclusion of the treaty we are proposing would be a major step bringing the world closer to the time when it will prove possible to eliminate entirely the threat of war and aggression. Supplementing and reinforcing the provisions concerning the non-use of force contained in various international instruments, the treaty would offer new and more reliable guarantees of security to all countries, big and small, and strengthen their confidence that their peaceful life would not be disrupted.
216.	The treaty would undoubtedly also expedite the implementation of effective disarmament measures. The draft clearly provides that the parties will make all the necessary efforts to that end.
217.	Whose rights and interests would be infringed by such a treaty? Who would fail to benefit from it? Every State that really wants peace and international co-operation would stand to gain from it. The conclusion of such a treaty would be of benefit to peace throughout the world.
218.	The Soviet Union hopes that the General Assembly will thoroughly consider the proposal to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations and declare itself in favor of it.
219.	These are the new and concrete initiatives designed to stop the arms race and exclude the use of force in relations among States which have been proposed by the Soviet Union in this important forum. We are convinced that the fundamental strengthening of the bulwark of universal peace depends to a decisive degree on progress precisely in those two directions. The political climate in the world and the processes of relaxation of international tension prevailing in it are conducive to an undertaking of the implementation of these initiatives in a practical and serious manner.
220.	The relaxation of tension and the attitude of States towards it are now in the searchlight of world politics. This alone shows that detente is not a myth or a catchword. Underlying it is a real change-over from confrontation and brinkmanship to peaceful and mutually beneficial co-operation among States and the investing of such co-operation with ever greater material content.
221.	Not a single State, not a single Government-if, of course, it really wishes to remain in touch with reality should hesitate in choosing its policy: either to promote the further reduction of tension and the elimination of the remnants of the cold war or to kindle conflict and friction. Every Government, every statesman should consider it an honor to be in the mainstream of the forces working for the further reduction of tension in the world.
222.	Statesmen who are directly responsible for the foreign policy of their countries should be imbued with the awareness that the course towards solving international problems, including the most urgent and complicated ones, through negotiations -and negotiations alone- equally serves the interests of all peoples and all States. And if that is so, then is it permissible to favor detente today and oppose it tomorrow? Is is permissible, while talking about one's desire to improve relations among States, particularly among the major Powers, at the same time in actual fact to follow in the wake of those who in major politics see no further than the buttons on their military tunics? To invoke in this regard some kind of considerations of domestic policy means to regard detente as the mere small change of political dealings, and not as a firm and noble guideline for ensuring peace,
223.	Some attempts have also been made to interpret detente as if it almost amounted to sanctioning interference in the domestic affairs of other States. How else can one describe the false solicitude of certain people for the rights of citizens in other countries? In actual fact these people are extolling those renegades who believe that the laws of their own country were not written for them to obey. Those who display such touching solicitude for them should open their eyes and take a good look at themselves and around them and see how matters stand in their own house in so far as real, not imaginary, human rights violations are concerned.
224.	We believe that the foreign policy of States in matters relating to peace should be determined and pursued consistently and in good faith. We welcome statements precisely in favor of such a policy from the rostrum of this world Organization. As for the Soviet Union, its position has been determined with utmost clarity by the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Expressing the will of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, of the entire Soviet people, Leonid Brezhnev has stated that our country would
"...do everything possible to deepen international detente and to embody it in concrete forms of mutually beneficial co-operation between States,"
That is our firm foreign policy line, one which the Soviet Union will steadfastly follow.
225.	Experience has shown that if States, no matter how different, take account of reality and exert their will for the same goal-the strengthening of peace- the results are impressive. Europe is a compelling example of that. The year that has passed since the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe shows that the development of the situation there is, on the whole, marked by a realization of the understanding approved at Helsinki.
226.	There are, however, some who are not averse to grumbling. There are various things in the Final Act of the all-European Conference which are not to their liking. We also could point out quite a number of provisions which do not go as far as we would like. But what has been accepted by all the participants and solemnly sealed by the signatures of the leaders of States should be implemented-and implemented fully. That naturally applies also to the clauses relating to the inadmissibility of outside interference in the domestic affairs of States. That is how the Soviet Union acts and intends to act.
227.	Of course, this is not only a question of the Helsinki decisions. All the treaties and agreements concluded in recent years in the interests of a peaceful future for Europe should be scrupulously observed by all parties. I should like to emphasize particularly that attempts to undercut the Quadripartite Agreement on West Berlin, which has been serving the cause of improving the situation in the center of the European continent for five years now, run counter to these interests.
228.	In the light of the results of the all-European Conference new possibilities have opened up for expanding relations between States in Europe in the political, economic, scientific and technological fields, as well as in the sphere of culture, contacts, information and education. The Soviet Union has put forward concrete proposals for organizing multilateral co-operation in such important fields as energy production, transport and protection of the environment.
229.	The task of supplementing political detente with military detente is now coming to the fore in European affairs. What does that mean primarily? It means a successful conclusion of the Vienna talks on mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe, where the concentration of armed forces and armaments is higher than in any other part of the world.
230.	The Soviet Union and other socialist countries taking part in the negotiations are seeking to make the discussions constructive. We have given figures with regard to the total strength of the armed forces of the Warsaw Treaty countries stationed in the zone of reductions, including land forces. It is now our partners' turn to respond. If no attempts are made to obtain unilateral military advantages, the negotiations in Vienna will also succeed.
231.	It is well known how important for the international situation is the state of Soviet-American relations. As a result of the agreements and understandings reached between the USSR and the United States of America in previous years, the necessary conditions have been created for continuing to build those relations on a constructive foundation.
232.	So far as concerns the Soviet Union, it is not guided in its policy by temporary considerations of the moment. The true interests of both countries and the interests of peace are served by only one course of action-that of acting in conformity, with a course jointly formulated in recent years, with the spirit and letter of the agreements that have been concluded. The Soviet Union expects that the United States will proceed precisely in that way. That will primarily determine further developments.
233.	Relations between the Soviet Union and France are developing in a favorable direction. This is something which has been reflected in the signing of many agreements, including the Declaration on the further development of friendship and co-operation, singed last October. The recent Soviet-French agreement to prevent the accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons  is along the same lines. In so far as concerns the Soviet Union, we will consistently follow the line we have taken in our relations with France.
234.	A great deal of what has been achieved in relations between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany and, above all, the conclusion of the Moscow Treaty between the two States on 12 August 1970, has marked the end of a whole phase in the post-war history of Europe. A fundamentally important page was turned in the right direction. The Soviet Union believes that further development and deepening of co-operation with the Federal Republic of Germany-in the expectation, naturally, that the policy of that country will be determined by the interests of peace, including the interests of peaceful development and good neighborliness in Europe is desirable.
235.	The relations between the Soviet Union and practically all States which are known as "Western"-Great Britain or Denmark, Italy or Belgium, Canada or Sweden- are increasingly assuming the character of normal, mutually advantageous co-operation.
236.	The successes of the policy of detente by no means signify that it no longer has any opponents. Ill-assorted forces often presenting a common front against it are easily found in Europe and elsewhere-in fact, they reveal themselves every day.

231. The fruits of the policy of detente must be accessible to all peoples. It is well known, however, that the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus are still threatened. Tensions in the Middle East have not abated.
238.	There can be no doubt that, so long as the occupation by Israel of Arab lands continues, so long as the legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine are trampled upon, the Middle East will continue time and again to be in a state of fever.
239.	It is now common knowledge that thousands of people have been killed or crippled in Lebanon in recent months. The tragic events which have occurred in that country are the direct result of imperialist aggression against the Arabs. The events in Lebanon are a direct consequence of the lack of an overall settlement in the Middle East. The blow is being aimed primarily against the patriots of Lebanon and the valiant Arab people of Palestine, whose just struggle cannot but evoke our admiration.
240.	The Soviet Union believes that the crisis in Lebanon must be settled in a peaceful, democratic way by the Lebanese themselves, without any outside interference, on the basis of the preservation of the territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of Lebanon.
241.	The protracted nature of the tension in the Middle East gives us no grounds for concluding that the situation there is hopeless. A good basis for establishing peace in that area has been worked out through the efforts of many
States, including the Soviet Union. What it boils down to is: the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied in 1967; the satisfaction of the legitimate national demands of the Arab people of Palestine, including their inalienable right to create their own State; and the furnishing of international security guarantees for all States in the Middle East, including Israel.
242.	Is there anything here that could fail to be to anyone's liking, provided that there is a real intention to live in peace with one's neighbors?
243.	Unfortunately, the international machinery for producing the necessary agreements on the Middle East-the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East-is still inactive. The Soviet Union is in favor of a resumption of its work, and the sooner the better, for a consideration by it of all the major issues involved in a Middle East settlement—I repeat, all the major issues involved in such a settlement.
244.	It is becoming ever more urgent to spread detente to Asia. Conditions are ripening there for tire consolidation of peace through the joint efforts of the Asian States. This is demonstrated by a fact of vast historical significance- the end of the war in IndoChina and the formation of a new major peace-loving State, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Soviet Union is confident that the voice of an independent, united Vietnam will soon be heard from this rostrum too. We insist that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam be admitted to the United Nations without delay.
245.	Friendly co-operation between the Soviet Union and India is an important stabilizing factor in the Asian continent. Mutual understanding and confidence between the two States were vividly manifested once again during the recent visit to the Soviet Union of Mrs. Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister of the Republic of India.
246.	Along with the trend towards an improvement of the situation in Asia, there are other facts. In that part of the world, too, circles are active which are by no means loath to create tension by stepping up military preparations, particularly in the area bordering on the southern frontiers of the Soviet Union. History knows how such efforts have ended and this should not be forgotten.
247.	The question of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea should be finally resolved. We support the proposals of the Korean Democratic People's Republic for the peaceful reunification of Korea without outside interference. As we know, last year's session of the General Assembly adopted a resolution in this regard [resolution 3390 (XXX)] on the creation of favorable conditions for converting the armistice in Korea into a lasting peace and for expediting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. That resolution should be put into effect.
248.	The Soviet Union continues, as it has done in the past, to attach great importance to its relations with the People's Republic of China. The normalization of those relations would undoubtedly have a positive effect on the situation in Asia, and, indeed, have even wider international repercussions. Our position in this respect as regards the People's Republic of China has been made quite clear by the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and that position is fully valid today.
249.	The situation in the south of Africa is a subject requiring the most serious attention. The rulers of the Republic of South Africa and of Southern Rhodesia and all those who support and arm them are now demonstrating and would have us believe that they have resigned themselves to the inevitability of the process of national liberation and that they are trying to adapt themselves to it.
250.	But in actual fact everything possible is still being done to repress the just struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and of the indigenous people of the Republic of South Africa for their legitimate rights and for an end to the hateful policy of racism. Every possible method is being resorted to, from direct suppression and violence to attempts to divert the national liberation movement from genuine independence and freedom through political gimmickry and financial hand-outs.
251.	What is being sought from these people before the eyes of the whole world? A renunciation of their inalienable right to free and independent development, a development along the path of social progress. But we are confident that the inexorable course of events and the facts of life itself with its political realities will put everything in its proper perspective. Peoples have learned and have learned well to distinguish between truth and falsehood.
252.	Today, as always, the Soviet Union stands firmly by the side of the fighting peoples of southern Africa. We are in favor of the unconditional ending of the policy of apartheid and racism in South Africa, of the immediate withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia, of the unreserved transfer of all power to the people of Zimbabwe. No one will ever see the Soviet Union failing to oppose attempts to prolong colonial and racist oppression under whatever guise.
253.	It is worth recalling, particularly in this hall, that on 14 December 1960 thunderous applause greeted the adoption of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)]. Its adoption signified that historically the hour had struck for the complete elimination of colonial domination in the world.
254.	We have all witnessed the failure of the attempt to stifle with the help of arms the young independent State of the People's Republic of Angola. If there are still Governments which would impede the exercise of its legitimate right to participate in the work of the United Nations, they stand to gain nothing by that action; they only stand to lose. Angola will without any doubt take its lawful and proper place in this hall.
255.	We should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Republic of Seychelles on its admission to the United Nations and to wish the people of that country success in the building of a new life.
256.	Thousands of miles separate the Soviet Union from Latin America, but our people have feelings of friendship towards its peoples and wish to have good relations with Latin American countries. So much greater, then, are our bitterness and indignation at tHe unabated violations of human rights and liberties in several parts of that continent, primarily in Chile, where these rights and freedoms are being flagrantly and criminally trampled under foot. Together with all progressive mankind we demand freedom for Luis Corvalan, arrested three years ago, and for other Chilean democrats.
257.	Recently, problems of the restructuring of international economic relations have been assuming increasing importance in world affairs. We support the just demands of the developing countries to do away with discrimination and artificial barriers in international trade, to eliminate all instances of inequality, the imposition of will and exploitation in international economic relations. On behalf of the Soviet Union, the Soviet delegation intends to make a special statement on these matters at this session of the General Assembly.
258.	Among topical issues of international affairs a prominent place now belongs to questions relating to the co-operation of States in the uses of the world's oceans. A search for ways of establishing such co-operation is, as we know, under way at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, the latest round of which came to an end just a few days ago, The Soviet Union believes that the issues facing that Conference should be resolved by its participants on a mutually acceptable basis. No one should try to impose on the Conference any arbitrary or one-sided decisions which have nothing in common with the interests of justice and the fruitful co-operation of States in such an important field as the use of the world's oceans.
259.	The present international situation is far from being monochrome. Along with the positive changes which have occurred in the world, which have been characteristic of recent times, certain phenomena of a different kind have been noted, namely, opposition to detente. This requires the vigilance and active efforts of all those who cherish the cause of peace. And yet the overall political background of the world today gives grounds for looking to the future with optimism,
260.	The States of the socialist community have thrown their prestige, their material and foreign policy resources onto the scales of the policy of defending peace. The newly independent countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America have resolutely favored the strengthening of international security. This has also been demonstrated by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries in Colombo.
261.	A sound tendency is emerging in the policy of a number of capitalist States and gathering momentum, although not without snags. The essence of this trend is the recognition in practice of the principles of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems. Certain public circles, movements and political parties which consistently advocate peace among nations and social progress are being listened to more and more.
262. We are convinced that, in the light of present-day dynamics of the correlation of forces in the world, with detente making ever more confident headway, the United Nations should exploit all its possibilities as a reliable instrument for maintaining and strengthening peace. But it will be able to fully evince this quality only when all its Member States are firmly abiding by its Charter and observing it.
263.	The Soviet Union unswervingly strives to ensure that the questions discussed at sessions of the General Assembly are resolved in such a way as to be of benefit to the peace, co-operation, freedom and independence of the peoples of die world. And at this session too we are determined to co-operate constructively with all those who support these great humane goals which meet the aspirations of all peoples.
Let me first congratulate this body for electing Ambassador Amerasinghe of Sri Lanka to preside over this thirty-first session of the General Assembly. He is a diplomat of great, international stature who, among his many distinctions, has provided indispensable leadership to the crucial negotiations on the law of the sea.
144.	I would also like to pay a tribute to the Secretary- General for his tireless efforts on behalf of the world community. He successfully embodies the Charter's prin¬ciples of fairness, impartiality and dedication to the causes of global peace and human dignity.
145.	The United Nations was born of the conviction that peace is both indivisible and more than mere stability, that for peace to be lasting it must fulfill mankind's aspirations for justice, freedom, economic well-being, the rule of law and the promotion of human rights. But the history of this Organization has been, in considerable measure, the gradual awareness that humanity would not inevitably share a single approach to these goals.
146.	The United Nations has survived-and helped to manage-30 years of vast change in the international system. It has come through the bitterness of the cold war. It has played a vital role in the dismantling of colonial empires. It has helped to moderate conflicts, and is even now manning truce lines in critical parts of the world. It has carried out unprecedented efforts in such areas as public health, development assistance and technical co-operation.
147.	But the most important challenge for this Organization still lies ahead: to vindicate mankind's positive and nobler goals and help nations to achieve a new understanding of community.
148.	With modern communications, human endeavor has become a single experience for peoples in every part of the globe. We share the wonders of science and technology, the trials of industrialization and social change, and a constant awareness of the fate and the dreams of our fellow men.
149.	The world has shrunk, but the nations of the world have not come closer together. Paradoxically, nationalism has been on the rise at the precise time when the most serious issues we all face can only be resolved through a recognition of our interdependence.
150.	Fragmentation has affected even this body. Nations have taken decisions on a bloc or regional basis, or by rigid ideologies, before even listening to the debate in these halls; on many issues positions have been predetermined by prior conferences containing more than half the membership of the United Nations. The tendency is widespread to come here for battle, rather than negotiation. If these trends continue, the hope for world community will dissipate and the moral influence of this Organization will progressively diminish.
151.	This would be a tragedy. Members of this Organization are today engaged in a multiplicity of endeavors to find just solutions for complex and explosive problems. There is a fragile tranquility, but beneath the surface it is challenged by fundamental forces of change -technological, economic and social. More than ever, this is a time for statecraft and restraint, for persistence but also for daring in the pursuit of peace and justice. The doctrines of perpetual strife produce only bloodshed and bitterness; they unleash the forces of destruction and repression and plant the seeds of future conflict. Appeals to hatred-  whether on the basis of race or class or color or nationality or ideology-will in the end rebound against those who launch them and will not advance the cause of freedom and justice in the world. 
152.	Let us never forget that the United Nations benefits the smaller and Weaker nations most of all; for without the rule of law, disputes will be settled as they hive been all too frequently and painfully in history: by tests of strength. It is not the weak that will prevail in s world of chaos.
153.	The United States believes that this thirty-First session of the General Assembly must free itself of the ideological and confrontational tactics that marked some of its predecessors and dedicate itself to a program of common action.
154.	The United States comes to the General Assembly prepared to work co-operatively on programs of common action. We will offer concrete proposals. We will listen carefully to the ideas of others. We will resist pressure and we shall seek co-operation.
155.	Let me, in this spirit, discuss the three principal challenges we face: the problem of peace, the challenge of economic well-being, and the agenda of global interdependence.
156.	The age of the United Nations has also been an age of frequent conflict. We have been spared a third world war, but we cannot assume that this condition will prevail forever or without exertion. Our generation must build out of the multitude of nations a structure of relations that frees the energies of nations and peoples for the positive endeavors of mankind, without die fear or the threat of war.
157.	Central to American foreign policy are our sister democracies, the industrial nations of North America, Western Europe, the southern Pacific and Japan, and our traditional friends in the Western Hemisphere. We are bound to these nations by ties of history, civilization, culture, shared principles and generations of common endeavors.
158.	Our alliances, founded on the bed-rock of mutual security, now reach beyond the common defense to a new range of issues: the social challenges shared by the advanced technological societies; common approaches to easing tensions with our adversaries; and shaping positive relations with the developing world. The common efforts of the industrial democracies are not directed at exclusive ends, but as a bridge to a broader, more secure and co-operative international system and to increasing freedom and prosperity for all nations.
159.	The United States is proud of its historical friendships in the Western Hemisphere. In the modern era these friendships must be, and they are, based on equality and mutual benefit. We have a unique advantage in this Hemisphere: the great dialog between the developed and the developing nations can find its most creative solution in the Hemisphere where modern democracy was born, and where co-operation between developed and developing, large and small, is a long-standing tradition.
160.	Throughout history, ideology and power have tempted nations to seek unilateral advantage. But the inescapable lesson of the nuclear age is that the politics of tests of strength has become incompatible with the survival of humanity. Traditional power politics becomes irrational when war can destroy civilized life and when neither side can gain a decisive strategic advantage.
161.	Accordingly, the great nuclear Powers have particular responsibilities for restraint and vision. They are in a position to know the full extent of the catastrophe which could overwhelm mankind. They must take care not to fuel disputes if they conduct their rivalries by traditional methods; if they turn local conflicts into aspects of a global competition, sooner or later their conflicts will grow out of control.
162.	The United States believes that the future of mankind requires coexistence with the Soviet Union. Tired slogans cannot obscure the necessity for a more constructive relationship. We will insist that restraint be reciprocal, not just in bilateral relations, but around the globe. There can be no selective detente. We will maintain our defenses and our vigilance. But we know also that tough rhetoric is not strength and that we owe future generations more hopeful prospects than a delicate equilibrium of awesome forces.
163.	Peace requires a balance of strategic power. This the United States will maintain. But the United States is convinced that the goal of strategic balance is achievable more safely by agreement than through an arms race. The negotiations on the limitation of armaments are therefore at the heart of United States-Soviet relations.
164.	Unprecedented agreements limiting and controlling nuclear weapons have been reached. An historic effort has been made to place a ceiling on the strategic arsenals of both sides in accordance with the Vladivostok communique of 24 November 1974. And once this is achieved we are ready to seek immediately to lower the levels of strategic arms.
165.	The United States welcomes the recent progress that has been made in further curtailing nuclear-weapons testing and in establishing a regime for peaceful nuclear explosions for the first time. The two treaties now signed and awaiting ratification should be the basis for further progress in this field.
166.	Together with several of our European allies, we are continuing efforts to achieve a balanced reduction in the military forces facing each other in central Europe. In some respects this is the most complex negotiation on arms limitation yet undertaken. It is our hope that, through patient effort, reciprocal reductions will soon be achieved that enhance the security of all countries concerned.
167.	But coexistence and negotiations on the control of arms do not take place in a vacuum. We have been disturbed by the continuing accumulation of Soviet armaments and by recent instances of military intervention to tip the scales in local conflicts in distant continents. We have noted crude attempts to distort the purposes of peaceful diplomacy and to impede hopeful progress towards peaceful solutions to complex issues. These efforts only foster tensions; they cannot be reconciled with the policy of improving relations, and they will inevitably be
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
uneasy armistice, both sides must recognize that ideology and power politics today confront the realities of the nuclear age and that a striving for unilateral advantages will not be accepted.
168.	In recent years, the new relationship between the United States and the People's Republic of China has held great significance for global security.
169.	We came together out of necessity and a mutual belief that the world should remain free of military blackmail and the will to hegemony. We have set out a new path -in wide-ranging consultations, bilateral exchanges, the opening of offices in our respective capitals and an accelerating movement towards normalization. And we have derived reciprocal benefits- a clearer understanding of the aspirations of our peoples, better prospects for international equilibrium, reduced tensions in Asia and increased opportunities for parallel actions on global issues.
170.	These elements form the basis for a growing and lasting relationship founded on objective common interest. The United States is committed to strengthen the bonds between us and to proceed towards the normalization of our relations in strict conformity with the principles of the Shanghai communique of 27 February 1972. As this process moves forward, each side must display restraint and respect for the interests and convictions of the other. We will keep Chinese interests in mind on all international issues and will do our utmost to take account of them. But if the relationship is to prosper, there must be similar sensitivity to our views and concerns.
171.	On this basis, the progressive development of our relations with the world's most populous nation will be a key element of the foreign policy of the United States.
172.	The world today is witness to continuing regional crises. Any one of them could blossom into larger conflict. Each one commands our most diligent efforts of conciliation and co-operation. The United States has played, and is prepared to continue to play, an active role in the search for peace in many areas -southern Africa, the Middle East, Korea and Cyprus. Let me deal with each of these.
173.	Racial injustice and the grudging retreat of colonial power have conspired to make southern Africa an acid test of the world's hope for peace and justice under the Charter. A host of voices have been heard in this chamber warning that, if we failed quickly to find solutions to the crises of Namibia and Rhodesia, that part cf the globe could become a battleground with consequences for every part of the world.
174.	I have just been to Africa, at President Ford's request, to see what the United States could do to help the peoples of that continent achieve their aspirations to freedom and justice.
175.	An opportunity to pull back from the brink now exists. I believe that Africa has before it the prize for which it has struggled so long-the opportunity for Africans to shape a future of peace, justice, racial harmony and progress.
176.	The United Nations since its beginning has been concerned with the issue of Namibia. For 30 years that Territory has been a test of this institution's ability to make its decisions effective.
177.	In recent months, the United States has vigorously sought to help the parties concerned speed up the process towards Namibian independence. The United States favors the following elements: the independence of Namibia within a fixed, short time-limit; the calling of a constitutional conference at a neutral location under the aegis of the United Nations; and the participation in that conference of all authentic national forces, including specifically the South West Africa People's Organization Progress has been made in achieving all those goals. We will exert our efforts to remove the remaining obstacles and bring into being a conference which can then fashion, with goodwill and wisdom, a design for the new State of Namibia and its relationship with its neighbors. We pledge our continued solicitude for the independence of Namibia so that it may, in the end, be a proud achievement of this Organization and a symbol of international co-operation.
178.	Less than a week ago the Rhodesian authorities announced that they were prepared to meet with the nationalist leaders of Zimbabwe to form an interim Government to bring about majority rule within two years. That is in itself an historic break from the past. The African Presidents, in calling for immediate negotiations, have shown that, they are prepared to seize this opportunity. And the Government of the United Kingdom, in expressing its willingness to assemble a conference, has shown its high sense of responsibility and concern for the rapid and just independence of Rhodesia.
179.	Inevitably, after a decade of strife, suspicions run deep; many obstacles remain. Magnanimity is never easy, and less so after a generation of bitterness and racial conflict. But let us not lose sight of what has been achieved: a commitment to majority rule within two years; a commitment to form immediately a transitional Government with an African majority in the cabinet and an African prime minister; and a readiness to follow that with a constitutional conference to define the legal framework of an independent Zimbabwe.
180.	The United States, together with other countries, has made major efforts; and we will continue to do what we can to support the hopeful process that is now possible. But it is those in Africa who must shape the future. The people of Rhodesia and the neighboring States now face a supreme challenge. Their ability to work together and their capacity to unify will be tested in the months ahead as never before.
181.	There may be some countries which see a chance for advantage in fueling the flames of war and racial hatred; but they are not motivated by concern for the peoples of Africa, or for peace. And if they succeed they could doom opportunities that might never return.
182.	In South Africa itself, the pace of change accelerates. The system of apartheid-by whatever name-is a denial of our common humanity and a challenge to the conscience of
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
have shown wisdom in facilitating a peaceful solution in Rhodesia. The world community takes note of it and urges similar wisdom-while there is still time-to bring racial justice to South Africa.
183.	As for the United States, we have become convinced that our values and our interests are best served by an Africa seeking its own destiny, free of outside intervention. Therefore we will back no faction, whether in Rhodesia or elsewhere; we will not seek to impose solutions anywhere. The leadership and the future of an independent Zimbabwe, as for the rest of Africa, are for Africans to decide. The United States will abide by their decision. We call on all other non-African States to do likewise.
184.	The United States wants no special position or sphere of influence in Africa. We respect African unity. The rivalry and interference of non-African Powers would make a mockery of Africa's hard-won struggle for independence from foreign domination. It will inevitably be resisted.
185.	Every nation which has signed the Charter is pledged to allow the nations of Africa, whose peoples have suffered so much, to fulfill at long last their dreams of independence, peace, unity and human dignity in their own way and by their own decisions.
186.	The United Nations, since its birth, has been involved in the chronic conflict in the Middle East. Each successive war has brought greater perils, an increased danger of great-Power confrontation and more severe economic dislocations.
187.	At the request of the parties, the United States has been actively engaged in the search for peace in the Middle East. Since the 1973 war, statesmanship on all sides has produced unprecedented steps towards a resolution of that conflict. There have been three agreements that lessen the danger of war; and mutual commitments have been made to pursue the negotiating process with urgency until a final peace is achieved. As a result, we are closer to the goal of peace than at any time in a generation.
188.	The role of the United Nations has been crucial. The Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East met in 1973 under its aegis, and the implementation of subsequent agreements has been negotiated in its working groups. Security Council resolutions form the only agreed framework for negotiations. I want to compliment the Secretary- General and his colleagues in New York, Geneva and on the ground in the Middle East for their vigorous support of the peace process at critical moments.
189.	The United States remains committed to help the parties reach a settlement. The step-by-step negotiations of the past three years have now brought us to a point where comprehensive solutions seem possible. The decision before us now is how the next phase of negotiations should be launched.
190.	The United States is prepared to participate in an early resumption of the work of the Geneva Conference. We think a a preparatory conference must be useful for a discussion of the structure and agenda of future negotiations; but we are open to other suggestions.
191.	The groundwork that has been laid represents an historic opportunity. The United States will do all it can to assure that by the time this Assembly meets next year it will be possible to report significant progress towards a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
192.	Since the General Assembly last met, overwhelming tragedy has befallen the people of Lebanon. The United States strongly supports the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that troubled country. We oppose partition. We hope that Lebanese affairs will soon be returned to the hands of the people of Lebanon. All Members of the United Nations, and all the conflicting parties in Lebanon, have an obligation to support the efforts of the new President of Lebanon to restore peace and to turn energies to rebuilding the nation. And the agencies of the United Nations system can play an important role in the reconstruction effort.
193.	The confrontation between North and South Korea remains a threat to international peace and stability. The vital interests of world Powers intersect in Korea: conflict there inevitably threatens wider war.
194.	We and many other United Nations Members welcome the fact that a contentious and sterile debate on Korea will be avoided this fall. Let this opportunity be used, then, to address the central problem of how the Korean people can determine their future and achieve their ultimate goal of peaceful reunification without a renewal of armed conflict.
195.	Our own views on the problem of Korea are well known. We have called for a resumption of a serious dialog between North and South Korea. We are prepared to have the United Nations Command dissoJved so long as the Armistice Agreement is either preserved or replaced by more durable arrangements. We are willing to improve relations with North Korea, provided that its allies are ready to take similar steps towards the Republic of Korea. We are ready to talk with North Korea about the peninsula's future, but we will not do so without the participation of the Republic of Korea.
196.	Last fall the United States proposed a conference including all the parties most directly concerned- North and South Korea, the United States, and the People's Republic of China to discuss ways of adapting the Armistice Agreement to new conditions and replacing it with more permanent arrangements.  On 22 July, I stated our readiness to meet immediately with those parties. I reaffirm that readiness here today.
197.	If such a conference proves impracticable right now, the United States would support a phased approach. Preliminary talks between North and South Korea, including discussions on the venue and scope of the conference, could start immediately. In that phase the United States and the People's Republic of China could participate as observers or in an advisory role, if the parties so desired. If such discussions yielded concrete results, the United States and China could join the talks formally. This, in turn, could set the stage for a wider conference in which other countries could associate themselves with arrangements that guarantee a durable peace on the peninsula.
198.	We hope that North Korea and other concerned parties will respond affirmatively to this proposed procedure or else offer an alternative suggestion.
199.	The world community is deeply concerned over the continuing stalemate on the Cyprus problem.
200.	Domestic pressures, nationalistic objectives, and international rivalries have combined to block the parties from taking even the most elementary steps towards a solution. On those few occasions when representatives of the two Cypriot communities have come together, they have fallen into inconclusive procedural disputes. The passage of time has served only to complicate domestic difficulties and to diminish the possibilities of constructive conciliation.
201.	All concerned need to focus on committing themselves to achieving the overriding objectives: assuring the well-being of the suffering Cypriot people and ensuring peace in the eastern Mediterranean.
202.	A settlement must come from the Cypriot communities themselves. It is they who must decide how their island's economy, society and government shall be reconstructed. It is they who must decide the ultimate relationship of the two communities.
203.	The United States is ready to assist in restoring momentum to the negotiating process. We believe that agreeing to a set of principles might help the parties to resume negotiations. We would suggest some concepts along the following lines. A settlement should preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The present dividing lines on Cyprus must be adjusted to reduce the area currently controlled by the Turkish side. The territorial arrangement should take into account the economic requirements and humanitarian concerns of the two Cypriot communities, including the plight of those who remain refugees. A constitutional arrangement should provide conditions under which the two Cypriot communities can live in freedom and have a large voice in their own affairs. Security arrangements should be agreed upon that would permit the withdrawal of foreign military forces other than those present under international agreement.
204.	I have discussed this approach with the Secretary- General and with several Western European colleagues. In the days ahead, the United States will consult along these lines with all interested parties. In the meantime, we urge the Secretary-General to continue his dedicated efforts.
205.	I shall now turn to the problems of economic development. The economic division of our planet between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, between the industrial and developing nations is a dominant issue of our time. Our mutual dependence for our prosperity is a reality, not a slogan. It should summon our best efforts to make common progress, to bring mankind's dreams of a better life to closer reality in our lifetime.
206.	There are many reasons why co-operation has not made greater strides. The industrial democracies have sometimes been more willing to pay lip service to the challenge of development than to match rhetoric with real resources. The countries with non-market economies are quite prepared to undertake verbal assaults, but their performance is in inverse ratio to their rhetoric. Their real contribution to development assistance has been minimal. Last year, for example, the non-market economies provided only about 4 per cent of the public aid flowing to the developing nations. The developing nations are understandably frustrated and impatient with poverty, illiteracy and disease. But often they have made demands for change that are as confrontational as they are unrealistic. They sometimes speak of new economic orders as if growth were a quick fix requiring only that the world's wealth be properly redistributed through tests of strength instead of a process of self-help extending over decades. Ultimately, such tactics lose more than they gain, for they undermine the popular support in the industrial democracies which is imperative to provide the resources and market access -available nowhere else- to sustain development.
207.	I believe that the objectives of the developing nations and the objectives of the industrial nations are complementary. Indeed they must be, for neither side can achieve its aims at the expense of the other. They can be realized only through co-operation.
208.	We took a major step forward together a year ago at the seventh special session of this Assembly, and we have since followed through on many fronts. We have taken steps to protect the economic security of developing nations against cyclical financial disaster. The newly expanded compensatory finance facility of the International Monetary Fund has disbursed over $2 billion to developing nations in this year alone. Replenishments of the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank will provide additional resources for development. World-wide food aid has been expanded. With a United States contribution of $200 million, we have brought the International Fund for Agricultural Development close to operation.
209.	The United States has continued this process by putting forward a number of new proposals at the fourth session of UNCTAD in May 1976. We committed ourselves to improvements in the quality of aid. We agreed to a serious effort to improve markets of 18 basic commodities. These measures, undertaken since we met here just a year ago, assist, not with rhetoric and promises, but in practical and concrete ways, the peoples of the world that are struggling to throw off the chains of poverty.
210.	Much remains to be done. First, the application of science and technology is at the very heart of the development process. The United States, conscious of its pioneering role in technology, has put forward three basic principles, which we shall support with funds aid talent: to train individuals who can identify, select and manage the future technology of the developing world; to build both national and international institutions to create indigenous technology; and to spur the private sector to make its maximum contribution to the development and transfer of technological progress. 
211.	To achieve these goals, we are today extending an invitation to the world conference on science and technology for development, now scheduled for 1979, to meet in this country. In preparation for that meeting, we have asked members of the industrial, academic and professional scientific communities throughout the United States to meet in Washington in November. They will review the important initiatives this country can take to expand the technological base for development and they will strive to develop new approaches.
212.	Secondly, the ministerial meeting of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris should be given new impetus. We are making several new proposals. We will seek to help nations facing severe debt burdens. We will advance new ideas for expanded co-operation in energy.
213.	Thirdly, the industrial democracies have been far too willing to wait for the demands of the developing countries rather than to advance their own proposals. Now, however, the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development have, at the suggestion of the United States, agreed to examine long-range development planning and to develop a more coherent and comprehensive approach to global growth and economic justice.
214.	Fourthly, natural disasters each year take thousands of lives and cost billions of dollars. It strikes most those who can afford it least-the poorest peoples of the world. The United Nations has a unique capacity to address these global concerns and thus improve man's odds against nature. We urge this body to take the lead in strengthening international co-operation to prevent and alleviate natural calamity.
215.	Our dream is that all the children of the world can live with hope and widening opportunity. No nation can accomplish this alone; no group of nations can achieve it through confrontation. But together there is a chance for major progress-and in our generation.
216.	It is an irony of our time that an age of ideological and nationalistic rivalry has spawned as well a host of challenges that no nation can possibly solve by itself: the proliferation of nuclear weapons technology; the problems posed by the law of the sea; and the horrible new tool of tenor that cJiims innocent victims on every continent.
217.	The growing danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons raises stark questions about man's ability to ensure his very existence. We have lived through three perilous decades hi which the catastrophe of nuclear war has been avoided, despite ? strategic rivalry between a relatively few nations.
218.	But now a wholly new situation impends. Many nations have the potential to build nuclear weapons. If this potential were to materialize, threats to use nuclear weapons, fed by mutually reinforcing misconceptions, could become a recurrent feature of local conflicts in every' quarter of the globe. And there will be growing dangers of accidents, blackmail and nuclear terrorism.
219.	Unless current trends are altered rapidly, the likelihood of nuclear devastation could grow steadily in the years ahead. We must look to the roots of the problem. Since the 1973 energy crisis and drastic rise in oil prices, both developed and developing nations have seen in nuclear energy a means both of lowering the cost of electricity and of reducing reliance upon imported petroleum. In an age of growing nationalism some see the acquisition and expansion of nuclear power as symbols of enhanced national prestige, and, let us be frank, as a means to provide themselves a future option to acquire nuclear weapons.
220.	A nation that acquires the potential for a nuclear weapons capability must accept the consequences of its action. It is bound to trigger offsetting actions by its neighbors and stimulate broader proliferation, thereby accelerating a process that ultimately will undermine its own security. And it is disingenuous to label as "peaceful" nuclear devices which obviously are capable of massive military destruction.
221.	Time is of the essence. In no area of international concern does the future of this planet depend more directly upon what this generation can do or fails to do. We must move on the following three broad fronts.
222.	First, international safeguards must be strengthened and strictly enforced. The supply and use of nuclear materials associated with civilian nuclear energy programs must be carefully safeguarded so that they will not be diverted. The physical security of nuclear materials must be increased. The International Atomic Energy Agency must receive the full support of all nations in making its safeguards effective. Any violator of these safeguards must face immediate and drastic penalties.
223.	Secondly, adherence to safeguards, while of prime importance, is no guarantee against future proliferation. We must continue our efforts to forge international restraints against the acquisition or transfer of reprocessing facilities and of enrichment facilities which produce highly enriched uranium.
224.	Thirdly, we must recognize that one of the principal incentives for seeking sensitive reprocessing and enrichment technology is the fear that essential non-sensitive materials will not be made available on a reliable basis. Nations that show their sense of international responsibility by accepting effective restraints have a right to expect a reliable. economical supply of peaceful nuclear reactors and associated non-sensitive fuel. The United States, as a principal supplier of these items, is prepared to be responsive in this regard.
225.	In the near future President Ford will announce a comprehensive American program for international action on non-proliferation that reconciles global aspirations for assured nuclear supply with global requirements for nuclear control. In that way we hope that the 9.tom can be seen once again as a boon, and not as a menace, to mankind.
226.	Another issue of vast global consequence is the law of the sea. The negotiations which have just recessed in New York represent one of the most important, complex
and ambitious diplomatic undertakings in history.

227.	We have traveled an extraordinary distance in these negotiations in recent years, thanks in no small part to the skill and dedication of the distinguished President of this Assembly. Agreement exists on key concepts: a 12-mile territorial sea; free passage over and through straits; a 200-mile economic zone; and important pollution controls. In many fields we have replaced ideological debates with serious efforts to find concrete solutions. And there is growing consensus that the outstanding problems must be solved at the next session.
228.	But there is hardly room for complacency. Important issues remain which, if not settled, could cause us to forfeit all our hard-won progress. The Conference has yet to agree on the balance between coastal-State and international rights in the economic zone; on the freedom of marine scientific research; on arrangements for dispute settlement; and, most crucially, on the regime for exploitation of the deep sea-beds.
229.	The United States has made major proposals to resolve the deep sea-bed issue. We have agreed that the sea-beds are the common heritage of all mankind We have proposed a dual system for the exploitation of sea-bed minerals by which half of the mining sites would be reserved for the International Authority and half could be developed by individual nations and their nationals on the basis of technical capacity. We have offered to find financing and to transfer the technology needed to make international mining a practical reality. And in light of the many uncertainties that lie ahead, we have proposed that there be a review-for example after 25 years-to determine whether the provisions on sea-bed mining are working equitably.
230.	In response, some nations have escalated their demands and the stridency with which they advocate them.
231.	I must say candidly that there are limits beyond which no American administration can, or will, go. If attempts are made to compel concessions which exceed those limits, unilateralism will become inevitable. Countries which have no technological capacity for mining the sea-beds in the foreseeable future should not seek to impose a doctrine of total internationalization on nations which alone have this capacity and which have voluntarily offered to share it. The United States has an interest in the progressive development of international law, stable order and global co-operation. We are prepared to make significant sacrifices for this- but these sacrifices cannot go beyond equitable bounds.
23*2. Let us therefore put aside delaying tactics and pressures and take the path of co-operation. If we have the vision to conclude a treaty considered fair and just by mankind, our labors will have profound meaning not only for the regimen of the oceans but for all efforts to build a peaceful, co-operative and prosperous international community. The United States will spend the interval between sessions of the Conference reviewing its positions and will approach other nations well in advance of the next session at the political level to establish the best possible conditions for success.
233.	A generation that dreams of world peace and economic progress is plagued by a new, brutal and indiscriminate form of violence: international terrorism. In the year since I last addressed this body there have been 11 hijackings, 19 kidnappings, 42 armed attacks and 112 bombings perpetrated by international terrorists. Over 70 people have lost their lives and over 200 have been injured.
234.	It is time this Organization said to the world that the vicious murder and abuse of innocents cannot be excused by the invocation of lofty motives. Criminal acts against humanity, whatever the professed objective, cannot be excused by any civilized nation.
235.	Hie threat of terrorism should be dealt with through the co-operative efforts of all countries. More stringent steps must be taken now to deny skyjackers and terrorists a safe haven. Additional measures are required to protect passengers in both transit and terminal areas, as well as in flight.
236.	The United States will support new initiatives which will ensure the safety of the innocent. The proposal of the Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany against the taking of hostages [7th meeting, para.,113] deserves the most serious and sympathetic consideration of this Assembly.
237.	The United States will do everything within its power to work co-operatively in the United Nations and in other international bodies to put an end to terrorism. But we have an obligation to protect the lives of our citizens as they travel at home or abroad, and we intend to meet that obligation. If multilateral efforts are blocked, then the United States will be forced to act through its own legislative processes and in conjunction with others willing to join us.
238.	Terrorism is an international problem. It is inconceivable that an organization of the world's nations would fail to take effective action against it.
239.	The final measure of all we do together, of course, is man himself. Our common efforts to define, preserve and enhance respect for the rights of man thus represent an ultimate test of international co-operation.
240.	We Americans, in the year of our bicentennial, are conscious -and proud of our own traditions. Our founders wrote 200 years ago of the equality and inalienable rights of all men. Since then the ideals of liberty and democracy have become the universal and indestructible goals of mankind. But the plain truth -of tragic proportions-is that human rights are in jeopardy over most of the globe. Arbitrary arrest, denial of fundamental procedural rights, slave labor, the stifling of freedom of religion, racial injustice, political repression, the use of torture, and restraints on communications and expression these abuses are far too prevalent.
241.	The performance of the United Nations system in protecting human rights has fallen far short of what was envisaged when the Organization was founded. The principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are clear debates of this body and in other forums have been marred by hypocrisy, double standards and discrimination. Flagrant and consistent deprivation of human rights is no less grave in one country or one social system than in another. Nor is it more acceptable when practiced upon members of the same race than when inflicted by one race upon another.
242.	The international community has a unique role to play. The application of the standards of the Universal Declaration should be entrusted to fair and capable international bodies. But at the same time let us ensure that those bodies do not become platforms from which nations which are the worst transgressors pass judgment on the alleged shortcomings of others.
243.	Let us together pursue practical approaches: to build on the foundations already laid at previous sessions of the General Assembly and in the Commission on Human Rights to lessen the abominable practice of officially sanctioned torture; to promote acceptance of procedures for protecting the rights of people subject to detention, such as access to courts, counsel and families,-and their prompt release or fair and public trial; to improve the working procedures of international bodies concerned with human rights, so that they may function fairly and effectively; to strengthen the capability of the United Nations to meet the tragic problems of the ever growing number of refugees whose human rights have been stripped away by conflict in almost every continent. The United States pledges its firm support to these efforts.

244.	The challenge to statesmanship in this generation is to advance from the management of crises to the building of a stable and just international order, an order resting not on power but on restraint of power, not on the strength of arms but on the strength of the human spirit.
245.	Global forces of change now shape our future. Order will come in one of two ways: through its imposition by the strong and the ruthless or by the wise and far-sighted use of international institutions through which we enlarge the sphere of Common interests and enhance the sense of community.
246.	It is easy and tempting to press relentlessly for national advantage. It is infinitely more difficult to act in recognition of the rights of others.
247.	Throughout history the greatness of men and nations has been measured by their actions in times of acute peril. Today there is no single crisis to conquer. There is, Instead, a persisting challenge of staggering complexity: the need to create a universal community based on co-operation, peace and justice.
248.	If we falter, future generations will pay for our failure. If we succeed we shall have been worthy of the hopes of mankind.
249.	I am confident that we can succeed.
250.	And it is here, in the Assembly of nations, that we should begin.
We, the delegation of the People's Republic of China,
have come to attend the present session of the United Nations General Assembly today at a time of immense grief for the people of all nationalities in China. Chairman Mao Tsetung, the most esteemed and beloved great leader and teacher of the Chinese people, passed away on 9 September The passing of Chairman Mao Tsetung is a loss beyond measure to the 800 million Chinese people. But for Chairman Mao, there would have been no victory of the Chinese revolution. But for Chairman Mao, there would have been no new China of today. Without the victory of the Chinese revolution under the leadership of Chairman Mao the world would not have changed so vastly as it has. Hie extremely sorrow-stricken Chinese people are determined to turn grief into strength, to carry out Chairman Mao's behests and to carry through to the end the cause of the proletarian revolution in China which Chairman Mao pioneered. The Chinese people's revolutionary cause has worthy successors. Chairman Mao Tsetung has left us forever, but the magnificent contributions he made in revolutionary theory and practice are immortal. The radiance of Mao Tsetung thought will always illuminate our road of advance.
21	Here I Wish to express once again, on behalf of the Chinese Government and people, our deep gratitude to the representatives of many countries who have at various meetings of the United Nations tendered condolences on the passing away of Chairman Mao Tsetung.
22	Chairman Mao Tsetung drew a whole series of profound conclusions from the contemporary international situation The complete correctness of these conclusions is being more and more corroborated by the developing situation.
23. Back in the early 1960s, Chairman Mao Tsetung vividly portrayed the contemporary world situation in these verses:
"The Four Seas are rising, clouds and waters raging, The Five Continents are rocking, wind and thunder roaring."
The world situation has been in a stats of great turmoil. All the political forces in the world have undergone drastic division and realignment as a result of prolonged contests of strength and struggles. On the one hand, there is the rise of the third world; on the other hand, there is the rivalry tor hegemony between the two super-Powers-the Soviet Union and the United States. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution -this has become an irresistible trend of history. Looking around the globe, one cannot find a single place of tranquility. "The wind sweeping through-the tower heralds a rising storm in the mountains." The factors for both revolution and war are increasing. As Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out, the current international situation is characterized by great disorder under heaven, and it is excellent: this great disorder is a good thing, and not a bad thing, for the people. It throws the enemies into disarray and divides them, while awakening and tempering the people, thus pushing the international situation to develop further in a direction favorable to the people and unfavorable to imperialism and social-imperialism.
24. Making a penetrating analysis of all the basic contra-dictions of our time and the division and realignment of all the political forces in the world, Chairman Mao Tsetung advanced his great strategic concept of the three worlds. He pointed out that the United States and the Soviet Union make up the first world; the developing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America and elsewhere constitute the third world; and in between the two is the second world composed of Europe, Japan, Canada and other countries. Lenin once said: "Imperialism is the progressing oppression of the nations of the world by a handful of great Powers; it is an epoch of wars among these Powers for the extension and consolidation of national oppression." At present, the Soviet Union and the United States, the two super-Powers constituting the first world, are the biggest international oppressors and exploiters of our time and they are the sources of a new world war. While the developed countries of the second world oppress and exploit third-world countries, they themselves are at the same time subjected to super-Power oppression, exploitation, control or threats. The numinous third-world countries are most heavily oppressed and exploited by colonialism and imperialism; they are the main force in the fight against imperialism, and particularly against super-Power hegemonism.
25. Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out: "Who are our enemies? Who are our friends? This is a question of the first importance for the revolution."' Chairman Mao s concept of the three worlds provides orientation for the workers and oppressed nations and oppressed peoples of the world in their fight in the realm of international class
struggle.
26 In the past year, the struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism waged by the people of the third-world countries has made great progress, though it suffered temporary setbacks in individual places These people have further awakened and have strengthened their unity in struggle. The heroic people of Egypt, unable to bear social-imperialist bullying and oppression any longer, resolutely abrogated the Egyptian-Soviet treaty. The Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries withstood outside pressure and maintained the position of opposing imperialism, and particularly super-Power hegemonism. The people of Asia, Africa and Latin America have come to see more and more clearly the true colors of social-imperialism. The great African people are now launching an offensive on barbarous racism, and the handful of colonialists have been cornered m southern Africa. The situation there is complicated owing to the meddling of the two super-Powers. But the long- tempered African people are clear-headed. They do not believe the nice words of imperialism and social- imperialism, nor are they intimidated by their bluster. They will surely win their liberation by relying on their own armed struggle, strengthening their unity and persisting in this course. Chairman Mao Tsetung said:
"The evil system of colonialism and imperialism arose and throve with the enslavement of Negroes and the trade in Negroes, and it will surely come to its end with the complete emancipation of the black people."
The future of Africa is infinitely bright.

27. Strategically, Europe is the focus of contention between the Soviet Union and the United States for world hegemony. The so-called "European Security Conference" was in fact a "European Insecurity Conference". There are always some people in the West who want to urge social-imperialism eastward and divert this peril towards China, thinking it best if all is quiet in the West. The "European Security Conference" reflected such a Munich line of thinking. After the Conference concluded last year, these people thought that henceforth there would be peace and tranquility in Europe. But since that Conference, the military threat posed by the Soviet Union against Western Europe and its political subversion there have been on the increase, and Europe is not more secure, but in greater danger. The desire of the European people for peace is understandable. But the Soviet Union has played up the "European Security Conference" with ulterior motives. It attempts thereby to put Western Europe off guard, divide and crush it piecemeal and ultimately seize the whole of Western Europe. The fact that strategically Europe is the focus of contention between the two hegemonic Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, is determined by their fundamental interests. Some people take the lead hi appeasing and making concessions to the expansionists, attempting to shift this strategic focus by recognizing their sphere of influence and giving them small favors. But such an attempt cannot be realized. The continued pursuit of such a policy will result in lifting a rock only to drop it on one's own feet. Forces opposing appeasement are now rising in the West. The unity of the West European countries has made new progress. We support the unity of Western Europe and wish to see Western Europe grow strong.
28. The rivalry between the two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and She United States, extends to all parts of the globe. The United States has vested interests to protect around the world, and the Soviet Union seeks expansion. This state of affairs is unalterable. In this world-wide rivalry, the expansionist activities of the Soviet Union are all-pervasive. A Soviet leader has openly declared that there is no corner of the earth that is not taken into account by them. Now more and more people have come to realize that the so-called "irreversible process of detente" constantly peddled by Soviet social-imperialism is but a fraudulent and hollow phase; every day it talks "peace" but practices expansion; every day it talks "disarmament" but practices arms expansion. Soviet social-imperialism is the biggest peace swindler and the most dangerous source of war today. The continued fierce rivalry between the two super-Powers is bound to lead to war some day. This is independent of mail's will. The so-called "balance of power" is only a temporary, superficial and even deceptive thing. It cannot be relied upon to maintain peace. As Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out, in an era when classes exist, war is a phenomenon between two periods of peace. The danger of a new world war is visibly growing, and the people of all countries must get prepared.
29. There is now a strange phenomenon in the world. Some people are terrified at the mention of the Soviet Union, thinking that it cannot be touched. This is superstition. Soviet social-imperialism is nothing to be afraid of. It is outwardly strong but inwardly weak. Alienated from the people, it is essentially feeble, it faces economic difficulties and ever-sharpening class contradictions and contradictions among its nationalities. Carrying out expansion everywhere and committing all sorts of evils, it has affronted the people of the East European countries and of the world. Its offensive posture bears the seed of defeat. Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out long ago: "All reactionaries are paper tigers.""The revisionist Soviet Union is a paper tiger too." All the countries that are subjected to super-Power aggression, subversion, interference, control or threat should unite and wage a tit-for-tat struggle against it. "The people, and the people alone, are the motive force in the making of world history." The destiny of mankind is definitely not to be decided by any super-Power.
"People of the world, be courageous, dare to fight, defy difficulties and advance wave upon wave. Then the whole world will belong to the people. Monsters of all kinds shall be destroyed."
30.	Following Chairman Mao Tsetung's teachings, the Chinese Government and people firmly and unswervingly support the just struggles of all oppressed nations and oppressed peoples. Now, I would like to state our consistent position on some of the issues to be considered by the current session of the General Assembly.
31.	We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania in their just struggle against white racism and for national liberation. We warmly support the relevant resolutions adopted by the recent Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity and the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries [see A/311197], We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe in their armed straggle against the Smith white minority regime. We firmly support the people of Namibia in their aimed struggle against forcible occupation by the reactionary authorities of South Africa ai d for national independence. We warmly hail the powerful mass movements of the people of Azania against racial discrimination and apartheid. We strongly condemn the Soviet Union for disrupting the unity of the Angolan national liberation movements and carrying out armed intervention in Angola. We are firmly opposed to the rivalry between the two super-Powers in southern Africa, and especially to social-imperialist attempts to seize the opportunity to sow discord and carry out armed intervention while pretending to support the national liberation movements.
32.	We firmly support the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle for the restoration of their national rights and the recovery of their lost territories and against the rivalry between the super-Powers for hegemony in the Middle East. We sincerely hope that the various political forces in Lebanon, together with the Arab States concerned and the Palestinian people, will set store by the national interests of Lebanon and the militant unity of the Arab countries and find a reasonable solution to their temporary differences through peaceful consultations free from super-Power interference.
33.	We firmly maintain that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus should be respected. We earnestly hope that the Greek and Turkish communities of Cyprus and the countries directly concerned will guard against super-Power meddling and gradually eliminate their differences through patient consultations on the basis of equality and in the spirit of mutual understanding and mutual accommodation.
34.	We firmly support the Korean people in their just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland. United States aggression and its interference in Korea are the main cause for recurrent tensions in Korea and for the failure to achieve an independent and peaceful reunification. The United Nations Command must be dissolved, and the United States armed forces must be withdrawn from South Korea. The division of Korea must end, and the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea must be realized. This is not to be hindered by any force on earth.
35.	We firmly support the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations. The United States threat to use the veto is utterly unjustifiable. We firmly support the just struggle carried on by the people of East Timor under the leadership of the Frente Revolucionaria Timor Leste Independente [FRETILIN] in defence of the independence and territorial integrity of their country chainst foreign aggression. We hold that the position of the Association of South-East Asian Nations for the establishment of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality free from interference by foreign Powers should be respected.
36.	We firmly support the proposal of the Government of Sri Lanka to declare the Indian Ocean a zone of peace.4 We firmly support the proposal of the Government of Pakistan to establish a nuclear-free zone in South Asia.s We firmly support the solemn statement of the King of Nepal declaring Nepal a zone of peace. We firmly support the reasonable position taken by Bangladesh on the question of sharing the water of the Ganges river.
37.	We firmly support the just struggle of the third-world countries for the establishment of the new international economic order. To attain this aim, the third-world countries have, since the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, made many efforts at various international conferences. But owing to obstruction by the super-Powers, these efforts have so far not achieved the progress they ought to have. Facts prove that the superPowers will never lightly give up their prerogative of exploiting and plundering the developing countries. We approve of dialogue, but first of all one must be strong. The developing countries can wrest back, step by step, positions on the economic front occupied by the super-Powers only if* they maintain independence and self-reliance, fully exercise their state sovereignty, take firm hold of their national resources, develop and expand their national economies, consolidate and expand the associations of raw material-producing countries and strengthen their mutual help and co-operation.

38.	As for the question of disarmament, our consistent position and views are known to all. The Soviet representative puts forward in this forum every year a sham disarmament proposal of one description or another to achieve a demagogic effect. It is not worth while here to comment on such old stuff in new concoctions.
39.	The Chinese Government and people are determined to carry on the cause left behind by Chairman Mao, to adhere to the basic line of our Party and to keep to Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs. This has been solemnly declared in the message to the whole party, the whole army and the people of all nationalities throughout the country issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China, the Council of State of the People's Republic of China and the Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and in the memorial speech by Comrade Hua Kuo-feng, First Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and Premier of the Council of State, at the mass memorial meeting to mourn our great leader and teacher, Chairman Mao Tsetung. The revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs laid down for us by Chairman Mao personally are a beacon that has illuminated and will forever illuminate the successful advance of our external work. The Chinese Government will continue unswervingly to implement Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs, keep the people in mind, place hopes in them, uphold proletarian internationalism, and never seek hegemony or to be a super-Power. We will strengthen our unity with the international proletariat and the oppressed nations and oppressed peoples the world over, our unity with the people of the third-world countries and our unity with all the countries subjected to aggression, subversion, interference, control or bullying by imperialism or social-imperialism so as to form the broadest possible united front against imperialism, and particularly against the hegemonism of the two superPowers, the Soviet Union and the United States. We consistently maintain that all countries, big and small, should be equal. The affairs of any country should be managed by its own people; world affairs should be managed by all countries in the world. As in the past, we will establish or develop relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
40.	Chairman Mao Tsetung taught us that "In our inter-national relations, we Chinese people should get rid of great-Power chauvinism resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely."  We will follow this instruction of Chairman Mao in handling all our foreign relations. China is still a developing socialist country. However great our future achievements in national construction, we will keep firmly in mind Chairman Mao's teaching always to be modest and never become arrogant, not even after a hundred years, and never become cocky, not even after the twenty-first century.

41.	China is a vast and richly endowed country with a population of 800 million. Chairman Mao Tsetung taught us: "China ought to make a greater contribution to humanity." At present, under the leadership of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the Chinese people are taking class struggle as the key-link, keeping to the Party's basic line and policies for the entire historical period of socialism, persevering in the continued revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat, consolidating the great unity of the people of all nationalities under the leadership of the working class and based on the worker-peasant alliance, deepening the struggle to criticize Teng Hsiao-ping and repulse the rightist deviationist attempt to reverse correct verdicts, consolidating and developing the victories of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, combating and preventing revisionism, consolidating the dictatorship of the proletariat, working hard independently and self-reliantly, to build China into a powerful socialist country, and striving to make a greater contribution to humanity. Following the consistent teachings of Chairman Mao, we are determined to strengthen our preparedness against war, heighten our vigilance and be ready at all times to wipe out any enemy that dares to invade China. We are determined to liberate Taiwan. Under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, we Chinese people are fully confident that we will triumph over domestic and foreign enemies, overcome all difficulties and achieve our objectives.
42.	Surveying the whole world, we see that there is great disorder under heaven and that the situation is excellent. The way ahead is tortuous, but the future of mankind is bright. The people of China are ready to join hands with the people of all other countries in our common endeavor.
The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany is pleased that this thirty-first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations meets under the chairmanship of a man who belongs to one of the leading nations of the group of non-aligned countries. He has acquired the highest personal respect among our nations both in his capacity as spokesman of his country at the United Nations and as President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, one of the most important conferences of our time.
60.	I combine my congratulations for the new President with my thanks to the outgoing President, the Prime Minister of Luxembourg, Mr. Thorn, who gave exemplary and balanced guidance to the work of our Assembly and whose country and personality symbolize the best traditions of a Europe that stands for peace and justice.
61.	I am furthermore pleased to welcome the Republic of Seychelles to our midst. With the admission of this one hundred and forty-fifth Member, the United Nations has taken a further step towards universality.
62.	This General Assembly of the United Nations, like the previous one, must continue to promote the idea of co-operation between all States of the world. Co-operation means combining all our efforts in the search for peaceful solutions to the problems that make it so difficult for the peoples of this globe to live peacefully together. Let us not forget that at the end of this century the world will have twice as many people to feed and twice as many jobs to find.
63.	In the year that has passed since the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, it has been possible to lead the world economy out of the deepest recession since 1930, but the world is still far away from lasting, stable growth and continuing acceleration. In the past year international peace has been maintained, but the conflicts in the Middle East, in Cyprus and elsewhere continue to smolder, and in southern Africa the task is to avoid a racial war. At the same time, new forms of illegal force, such as the seizing of hostages, have been developing into a world-wide plague. Whereas old conflicts basically remain unresolved and new ones are already pushing their way to the surface, the potential of destructive weapons in all parts of the world is growing and so is the capability of manufacturing nuclear weapons.
64.	The year 1975 brought no progress towards accomplishing so urgent a task as reducing military expenditure. On the contrary, we are faced with the threat of another build-up in the arms race.
65.	This year the International Covenants on Human Rights entered into force, but in many parts of the world the individual is still denied the most elementary human rights: his right to life and to personal safety, his right to equality without regard to race, his right to move freely, his right to free expression, and his basic economic and social rights.
66.	In a world threatened in this way it is our duty to create durable foundations for peace and co-operation. The one needs the other: we cannot achieve peace without the will to co-operate beyond frontiers, and co-operation will remain ineffectual without peace. Thus the future of this planet really does depend on whether we achieve a break-through to that co-operation.
67.	Awareness of this began to dawn following the crises of recent years, and this gives us good reason to be hopeful. It is significant that the Conference of non-aligned States in Colombo and, similarly, the Conference of the Group of 77 in Mexico  have so unequivocally supplemented the principle of national sovereignty and independence by the principle of international co-operation "as the basis of a secure world order". My Government has made this view the guideline for its action in international relations.
68.	The Federal Republic of Germany will therefore continue at this session, as at previous ones, to pursue a policy aimed at safeguarding peace and securing international co-operation. The foundations and objectives of our policy remain unchanged: European union; our firmly rooted position within the Atlantic Alliance, which ensures the balance of power and is thus the prerequisite for peace in Europe; the policy of detente towards the States of Eastern Europe, and partnership and an equitable reconciliation of interests with the third world.
69.	The members of the European Community have made encouraging progress towards creating stable structures for co-operation in a spirit of solidarity. For centuries the history of Western Europe was a series of wars. Even in this century it has been the source of two world wars. Today, however, the people in the European Community see their future as a common future-so thoroughly has the situation changed within the span of a single generation. Outside Europe this may not seem an earth-shaking event, but all, I am sure, should be able to judge from it what can be achieved through goodwill in relations between peoples.
70.	The members of the Community have set themselves the task of together putting into practice the great historic concept of freedom and human dignity. We adhere to the aim of European union. Yet the Community is not inward-looking. It is not a closed community whose responsibility stops at its own front door. It actively supports efforts towards peace and justice and towards a world economy that is open for trade and investment. It is the biggest trading partner in the world. And it is, in particular, a partner of the third world: as the most important source of investment capital and technology, as the most important trading partner, and as a pioneer in the creation of equal, balanced relations between industrialized and developing countries.
71.	The previous speaker, the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, who spoke on behalf of the nine member States of the European Community, has been able to show how far our common aims extend in foreign policy as well.
72.	The Federal Republic of Germany is a member of the North Atlantic Alliance. It understands that alliance and its role in it as a contribution to the safeguarding of peace in our region. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] is a pact for peace, and it is in line with that understanding of its role that it renders an active contribution of its own to detente. This alliance testifies to the close and manifold ties existing between Western Europe, the United States and Canada.
73.	On the basis of the European Community and the Atlantic Alliance, a policy of realistic detente towards the East became possible for Western Europe, That policy starts from the following consideration: if we cannot remove the ideological division and the basic differences between political and social systems in Europe, then it is all the more urgent to resolve conflicts by negotiation or at least to mitigate them and to discover areas where co-operation between East and West is possible, to the mutual advantage of both and for the benefit of the peoples of both sides.
74.	The policy pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany in concluding treaties with the Soviet Union, the Polish People's Republic, Czechoslovakia and the other members of the Warsaw Pact serves this very aim. We attach special importance to the further development of the relationship between the two German States on the basis of treaty arrangements. The policy of detente pursued by the Federal Government is a long-term policy and it consistently continues the policy initiated by Willy Brandt and Walter Scheel.
75.	The nations of Europe, the United States and Canada held the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. They laid down principles for peaceful relations and agreed on a whole series of specific arrangements. Among other tilings, these arrangements are intended to foster economic and scientific co-operation, regulate humanitarian questions and facilitate contacts between people in East and West and the exchange of ideas and information; in the military field, they are intended to build up confidence.
76.	All those arrangements must now be put into practice. The more co-operation across the ideological barrier becomes possible and the less energy is wasted in sterile confrontation, the more will the nations of Europe be able to contribute to an equitable reconciliation of interests between the industrialized countries and countries of the third world.
77.	This year, too, we have resolutely pursued our treaty policy. The agreements concluded with the Polish People's Republic have removed burdens of the past and opened up hopeful prospects for relations between the two countries. The relaxation of tension in Europe brought about since 1970 would not have been possible without an improvement of relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the USSR. Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union will also in future be of particular importance for the process of detente. For this reason, great significance attaches to the visit of Mr. Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to the Federal Republic of Germany which is planned to take place in the course of this year.
78.	No nation can be more interested in co-operation across the frontiers of different systems than the German people which is compelled to live in two States. Through Germany runs the frontier which divides Europe. Our negotiations with the German Democratic Republic have also been, and will continue to be, concerned with easing conditions for the people and with further developing co-operation. To pursue a policy of detente in a divided country and for a divided country is a great and, at the same time, a difficult task; but we Germans know that there is no acceptable alternative.
79.	A great deal has been made possible by negotiations between the two German States; much has been achieved in the way of practical improvements; it has been possible to alleviate human suffering; human contacts between Germans have become increasingly possible. But all objectives have not been attained-far from it. As before, the aim of our policy is to overcome the painful consequences of the division of Germany by patient negotiation.
80.	The Federal Government is not resigned to the reality of a frontier where only recently shots were still fired from the other side. This must at last be stopped. The Federal Government will not tire in its efforts to achieve this too by means of its policy of detente.
81.	In the heart of Germany also lies the city which for better or worse, has been a touchstone of detente- Berlin The Federal Government will not relax its efforts to promote the viability of West Berlin. For Berlin, the strict observance and full application of the Quadripartite Agreement of 3 September 1971 is of essential importance. The Federal Government will, as before, ensure that West Berlin continues to be included in international co-operation. The more we succeed in this the less will be the danger of the city's again becoming a source of international crises.
82.	The Federal Republic of Germany, whose foreign policy has been a policy of and for peace from the very first day of its existence, will unflinchingly continue its policy of detente and thus contribute to the safeguarding of peace. It remains its political objective to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. For us, history has not yet passed its final verdict on the division of the German nation.
83.	It will be of decisive importance for the progress of detente whether the current negotiations on the second SALT agreement and on the balanced reduction of ground forces in central Europe prove successful. For nothing could constitute a greater threat to detente than another arms race.
84.	The Federal Government will make special efforts in talks with the United States, the Soviet Union and other countries concerned, to get the stagnant expert discussions on mutual and balanced force reduction in Vienna going again. This was announced by Chancellor Schmidt last week.
85.	Peace itself and efforts to safeguard it by means of more stable structures are jeopardized by unrelenting efforts in nearly all parts of the world to build up arms strengths. Exports of conventional weapons in particular have increased rapidly.
86.	The monstrous waste of scarce resources in the industrialized countries as in the developing countries works to the detriment of the people.
87.	We must not give up hope because of the disappointing results in the field of arms control and disarmament so far. In the process of detente efforts must be redoubled to halt the arms race and, both world-wide and regionally, to translate into reality effective measures of arms control and arms limitation.
88.	Balanced and controlled disarmament remains one of the most urgent tasks. But it is high time words were followed by deeds. The world needs plough and workbench more urgently than rifle and missile.
89.	In Europe, within the framework of the negotiations in Vienna, the Federal Government will continue to seek the establishment of an equal and hence stable relationship of power in central Europe.
90.	The Federal Government welcomes the request made by the non-aligned States in Colombo calling for a special session of the General Assembly to deal with questions of world-wide disarmament [see A/31/197, annex IV, resolution 12] and is ready to play a constructive part in it.
91.	But we still live in a heavily armed world. All the more urgent, therefore, is the one principal task of international politics: to ward off dangers for peace in time, and that means resolving conflicts without war.
92.	Consequently, we look with anxiety towards a region whose unresolved problems are a constant threat to world peace: the Middle East. The guidelines for a solution to the Middle East conflict were mapped out long ago. They are based on resolutions of the Security Council, complemented by a large consensus of international opinion that the national rights of the Palestinian people must also be taken into consideration. Thus, at the 1974 session of the General Assembly,  the Federal Republic of Germany stated that a peace settlement, apart from providing for the termination of the territorial occupation, should make allowance for the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people, including the right to establish a State authority, and for Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries.
93.	It is not a question of keeping on repeating the principles governing a solution; it is a question of putting them into practice. The Federal Republic of Germany, together with its partners in the European Community, has a vital interest in a peaceful solution to the conflict in its neighboring region to the south, and today it is more than ever convinced that a solution is possible.
94.	Our special interest in this region also finds expression in the Euro-Arab dialog. No one can today speak of the Middle East problem without including the tragic developments in the Lebanon. Efforts have been of no avail to stop hostilities that have taken a heavy toll of human life and are destroying a country in which the seed of violence has sprung up. We appeal to all concerned to stop the terrible bloodshed.
95.	A second source of danger for international relations has developed in southern Africa. It is impossible to imagine the consequences which a racial war embracing the whole region would have. All countries in that region are aware of this. The Federal Republic of Germany has, therefore, not abandoned hope of a peaceful solution being achieved.
96.	But it knows that only where no one attempts to hold up a historically necessary change can we expect peaceful developments, can we feel that peace is secure.
97.	Everyone must realize, also in southern Africa, that racism and colonialism no longer have a place in this world. The sands have run out.
98.	Southern Africa, too, must determine its own destiny. There is only one way to attain this: blacks and whites must develop some form of co-operation based on equality, which will prove a sound foundation also in the future;
there must be majority rule, but at the same time safeguards must be provided for the rights of the minority.
99.	In Rhodesia, as we hope, the first and decisive step in this direction has now been taken. This could well be the beginning of an era of people of all races in southern Africa living peacefully together.
100.	Recent developments confirm in an impressive manner the correctness of the position we have always taken: that only the renunciation of force prevents the catastrophe of a racial war which would otherwise be unavoidable. The urgently required changes in southern Africa can be brought about only by peaceful means and by negotiation. A turn of events is foreshadowed for which all concerned deserve thanks and appreciation the Secretary of State of the United States, the British Government, and those African statesmen who are working with perseverance for a peaceful solution of this pressing problem.
101.	As regards the Namibia problem, we reaffirm the demands: that the rule of South Africa should end and the earliest possible date for independence be fixed in a binding manner; that the competence of the United Nations to lead the former Mandated Territory to independence should be recognized; and that in exercising the right of self-determination under the supervision of the United Nations all political groups in the country should participate in the preparations for independence.
102.	Only the speedy fulfillment of all these demands will prevent any further aggravation of the situation. The Federal Government will assist a free Namibia as far as possible in building up its economy.
103.	We appeal to the Government of the Republic of South Africa to give up the policy of apartheid and not to oppose necessary reforms any longer. Only those who are prepared to carry out the necessary changes can preserve the heritage of the past.
104.	We support the appeal of President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia to the white population in southern Africa to join with the other parts of Africa in creating a new society which is not based on color. Only then will it be possible for a new society of black and white Africans with equal rights to master together the great task of developing the continent.
105.	The efforts made by the community of nations to control the use of force must now also include the new illegal forms of force which in recent years have come to be a problem assuming more and more menacing proportions.
106.	The most widespread of these new forms of violence, and one of the most murderous, is the taking of hostages. The growing number of acts involving the taking of hostages has spotlighted the extent of the threat, None of the 500 million passengers traveling on airliners every year can be sure not to be among the next victims.
107.	Acts involving the taking of hostages are not the problem of just one State or another or of any group of States; they are a problem concerning us all. The United Nations bears a special responsibility. The Secretary-
General in his annual report on the work of the Organization rightly pointed that out [see A/31 (1 (Add. 1, sect. VI}.
108.	What is at stake is the protection of human beings, the sovereignty of States, the safety of international traffic and an international order free from violence. The taking of hostages is a particularly cruel act of violence which indiscriminately claims or threatens the lives of helpless people, of women and children. For this reason, the Geneva Convention of 1949 prohibits this act as a means of warfare.
109.	It is an act offending the dignity, safety and fundamental rights of the individual person, that is, basic values the protection of which is proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex].
110.	Those taking hostages attempt to blackmail sovereign States and to confront them with the unbearable choice of either yielding to their demands or risking the lives of the hostages taken. Acts involving the taking of hostages are a threat to international relations. The efforts made by all States to settle international conflicts peacefully and also the endeavors of this world Organization to make peace more secure are placed in jeopardy by criminal acts of violence committed by a few.
111.	International conferences and diplomatic exchanges are thus threatened. In exploiting the particular vulnerability of aeroplanes, the taking of hostages above all imperils international air traffic,
112.	Our peoples expect the United Nations to exhaust all possibilities of checking this method of using brute force. We must face up to this danger which affects us all and initiate an objective discussion on possible steps. After the bitter experiences of recent months, the Governments of all countries should unite in condemning the act of taking hostages as a particularly abhorrent crime and in introducing world-wide measures against it.
113.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany deems it necessary that the United Nations should draft a convention banning the taking of hostages internationally and making sure that the perpetrators are either extradited or brought before a court in the country in which they have been seized. We are convinced that it should be possible soon to arrive at such a convention within the framework of the United Nations. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will therefore request that an item on international action against the taking of hostages be included in the agenda of this General Assembly as an important and urgent matter.
114.	General acceptance of and respect for human rights is an inalienable element of any order of peace and worldwide co-operation.
115.	This is one of the noblest aims of the United Nations. The concept of human rights has played a decisive role in the emergence of the United Nations. The year 1976 is a historic year for human rights and for the United Nations. It is the year in which the international covenants on human rights-the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights- have entered into force. Both Covenants guide our action. The Federal Republic of Germany orients its policy towards the developing countries in keeping with demands embodied in the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
116.	We advocate in the strongest possible terms respect for basic human rights not only in Germany but all over the world. Our policy serves the individual human being; only the realization of his rights and his dignity lends ultimate meaning and purpose to all our efforts to ensure political and economic co-operation. And this includes the right of all men to live under conditions which are really consistent with human dignity.
117.	The year 1976, with its important events in the field of human rights, now confronts us with the task of translating into reality the principles of law which we have worked out. In this new phase too the United Nations must remain the champion of human rights. An institution should therefore be established which should ensure comprehensive and world-wide protection of human rights. What we need is an independent, international authority making objective judgments in order to ensure that human rights are safeguarded in all parts of the world. Such an authority would not be directed against anybody; it would be there for somebody, namely, the individual human being and his rights.
118.	The phase of codifying human rights was long and difficult; it lasted 30 years. The implementing phase will perhaps be even more difficult, but this should not lead us to believe that we can take that much time again.
119.	Much patient negotiating will be necessary. Our aim must be to guarantee the application of human rights throughout the world by means of an institution which would prevent the question of human rights from being abused for political purposes.
120.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is aware that this is a difficult task. But it is convinced that the aim of establishing an international court for human rights can be attained. Its belief is strengthened by its experience with the protective system of the European Convention on Human Rights,  which has proved its value for more than two decades and which will not lose anything of its importance should the United Nations establish an institution along its lines.
121.	I have already pointed out that it is also the application of human rights that makes it incumbent on us to reduce the economic gap between the rich and poor countries. The difference in prosperity between North and South is a threat to peace and stability throughout the world. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany notes with great satisfaction that the will for co-operation which is the prerequisite to any effective action in this field has grown in all parts of the world and is today actually unchallenged.
122.	The seventh special session of the General Assembly last year, the Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris, the fourth session of UNCTAD in Nairobi and also the Conference of the non-aligned States in Colombo have confirmed this principle.
123.	It is a positive sign that such complicated problems as those of raw materials and energy and the reorganization of the law of the sea are negotiated at international conferences. But now it is essential to achieve rapid and concrete results. Solemn declarations of intent are not enough to feed the people in the poorest countries. A hard year lies behind us. In 1975, the year of the nadir of recession, the national products of the free-market industrialized countries fell and, although the developing countries' national products continued to rise, their growth rate declined and, in many developing countries, dropped below the growth rate of the population.
124.	The gap between industrialized and developing countries decreased for the first time, but it decreased because the world as a whole became poorer. The world all of a sudden became aware of the magnitude of the threat. We had to realize that development as such can be accelerated only within an international economy which, as a whole, is expanding. It was this experience that increased the awareness of the need for co-operation and made 1975 the year of a common departure.
125.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany realizes without any illusions that up to now we have come only a short way together, but even along this short distance we certainly have scored results.
126.	First, in 1975 there was a sharp rise in the flow of capital into the developing countries. The countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development increased their official and private capital transfers to the unprecedented amount of $39 billion, which is an increase of 40 per cent. This means that for the first time ever the target of the capital transfer amounting to 1 per cent of gross national product was reached. The Federal Republic of Germany exceeded that target by having attained 1.18 per cent. At the same time, there was an increase in the capital influx from the States, of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries [OPEC].
127.	Secondly, progress was made in the efforts to stabilize the developing countries' export earnings. The International Monetary Fund considerably widened the possibilities of taking up compensatory credits in the event of a decline in export earnings. The European Community in the Lomé Convention set up the world's first stabilizing system for commodity exports from developing countries.
128.	Third, progress was also made in the opening of markets to third-world exports. The multilateral trade negotiations in Geneva have made this objective a focal subject for talks. This year, too, the European Community plans to increase essentially the possibilities for tariff-free imports of industrial goods from developing countries. In 1975 the Federal Republic of Germany increased its imports of manufactures from developing countries by one quarter and that in a year of heavy recession.
129.	Fourth, and finally, to promote the development of agriculture in the third world it was decided to set up a fund which will make available considerable funds to increase agricultural production.
130.	To speed up the development of the third world is the common task of all countries. It requires that the developing countries themselves concentrate their strength and efforts on the development goal. It also requires that they assist one another. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany therefore appreciates it that the Colombo Conference strongly emphasized the idea of collective self-help.
131.	Already now the oil-producing countries substantially contribute to the transfer of resources to developing countries in want of capital. At the latest conference of OPEC they also showed their readiness to share in the responsibility for the world economy as a whole.
132.	But the largest external contribution to development undoubtedly has to come from the industrialized countries. In the past, the free-market industrialized countries have already been a motor of third-world development. The power of that motor must grow even stronger. The integration of the countries with a centrally-controlled economy into the world economic system -an integration which has begun in recent years -now opens up the possibility that those countries, too, will finally become a motor of development. That possibility should, however, be pursued. Trade between free-market industrialized countries and centrally-planned industrialized countries has almost quadrupled during the past four years. It is necessary now to increase trade between centrally-planned industrialized countries and developing countries with similar speed.
133.	The potential is enormous. Whereas free-market industrialized countries absorb three quarters of the developing countries' exports, the share of the centrally-planned industrialized countries in these exports is no more than 4 per cent.
134.	When we look ahead, the question is, What can we and what must we do together now in order to promote the equitable reconciliation of interests between industrialized and developing countries?
135.	First, in the four commissions of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation-on energy, commodities, finance and development - we must quickly find concrete solutions to the problems defined in the initial phase of the Conference.
136.	Second, at the meetings and conferences on commodity problems decided on by the fourth session of UNCTAD we must achieve rapid and appropriate results.
137.	Third, we would like to see all industrialized countries, whatever their economic system, make greater efforts with regard to the transfer of capital and technology to developing countries. The developing countries, for their part, should create the prerequisites for these efforts to be successful.
138.	Fourth, we regard the intensified industrialization of the developing countries as an urgent requirement. We therefore participate in all efforts contributing to that goal and are prepared to open our markets still further. We are aware of the adjustment problems entailed for our own economy and shall be prepared for this.
139.	Fifth, the solution of the problem of indebtedness becomes an ever-more pressing requirement. Like other countries, the Federal Republic of Germany gives the solution of that problem priority attention. In the spirit which has imbued the Federal Republic of Germany in rendering its financial assistance and in continuing to render such assistance, it will, together with other donor countries, use its full energies to help solve the problem of indebtedness. We do this because we have full confidence in the future of the developing countries and their peoples.
140.	The success of our endeavors to build a co-operative world will be decisively influenced by the outcome of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, We have declared the sea the common heritage of mankind. It is now essential to translate this principle into reality, and that means establishing a legal system governing the seas which will take into account the interests of all States in a well-balanced manner. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will actively participate in the work on these problems because it is convinced that the problems of die developing countries are the problems of the industrialized countries as well. That is a new piece of knowledge which all of our citizens do not yet find it easy to accept. In our countries many people still have to learn that their own destiny is connected with that of all others.
141.	In all industrialized countries a great deal of information and education is still necessary to make it understood that the North-South dialog is concerned not with the giving and taking of alms, but with our common future.
142.	The Secretary-General in the introduction to his report to the General Assembly on the work of the Organization correctly defined the role of the United Nations when he characterized our time as a period of transition in which we must overcome the antagonism between the principle of national sovereignty and the regulatory principles governing an interdependent world. Only co-operation can help us steer this development in such a way that it will benefit mankind as a whole,
143.	In this co-operation a central role falls to the United Nations as the only world-embracing organization, a role which no one else and nothing else can play. According to the mandate of the Charter, our Organization is to be the center in which the nations of the world will harmonize their actions to attain the common objectives of peace and progress. Let us at this thirty-first session of the General Assembly fulfill this mandate which the Charter gives us. Let us continue to work on the great task of building a world to conform to the vision of our Charter: a world of peace, a world of economic and social progress, and a world in which the freedom and dignity of man are a reality.
144.	My country is today more convinced than ever that in creating the United Nations mankind endowed itself with a great opportunity. We understand only too well the impatience of many who are waiting for their most elementary rights to come true. Nor do we underrate the difficulties which the United Nations is having in trying to close the big gap between demands and reality. We do not close our eyes to the obstacles besetting the road to an equitable and peaceful world-wide order. Only the spirit of co-operation on a basis of partnership can help us to go forward. Let us therefore use the opportunity we have.
Mr. President, first of all I should like to express to you my warmest congratulations upon your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. The great talent of the Permanent Representative of SriLanka, of the President of the Conference on the Law of the Sea and of the representative in New York of the presidency of the non-aligned countries is known to all. I have no doubt that at this session it will increasingly manifest itself. The co-operation of the French delegation will be yours in helping you to bring to a successful conclusion your difficult task in the next few weeks.
90.	I should also like to pay a tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Gaston Thorn, who at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly displayed qualities of intelligence and character which made him the candidate of the group to which France belongs. An illustrious European and hence familiar with international problems, he found here a scene that' was equal to the exceptional talents and gifts which brought him to the head of the Government of a country united to France both by the ties of history and geography and by those of the heart, will and reason.
91.	Lastly, I am particularly pleased to find here again my friend Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who was so frequently for me a welcoming and understanding interlocutor and to tell him to what extent France appreciates the talent, the authority and the tact with which he accomplishes his lofty and difficult mission. Our confidence in him has never been wanting, and he still has our full support.
92.	It is not without some emotion that, after having been twice accredited to the United Nations and, just recently, the Permanent Representative of France for more than four years, I address the Assembly today in this familiar setting in my capacity as Minister of Foreign Affairs. I recognize the honor but also the weight of the duty which falls to me in this circumstance when once again, this time vested with broader responsibilities, I must make France's voice heard. My task is lightened by the pleasure I feel at seeing so many familiar faces and at drawing on such recent memories.
93.	It will not surprise members of the Assembly that as a former Permanent Representative I am tempted to review the world situation in the light of our Charter. This document, written 30 years ago, is still the basic instrument of international co-operation. Do not its preamble and the purposes and principles it lays down for oar Organization in memorable words contain a statement of the aspirations that should determine the action of peoples and States? A comparison between what should be and what actually is should serve to stimulate reflection and spur efforts so that, in this necessarily interdependent world where we live, war, poverty, intolerance and discrimination will no longer have to be put up with as inevitable ills.
94.	To save succeeding generations from the scourge of war: that is the first goal set by the Charter. Although there is now no military conflict between States in the conventional sense of the word, how can we fail to see that overt or potential hotbeds of crisis persist or have developed quite recently?
95.	The crisis in Lebanon, a country to which France is deeply attached, is a tragic illustration of this fact. That country, once a model of coexistence among different communities, has been subject to uncontrolled outbreaks of violence for more than a year now. An implacable mechanism has consistently kindled new flames from the smoking ashes of each previous outbreak. What is at stake is Lebanon's very existence and the survival of its people in all their richness and diversity. It rests with the Lebanese people themselves to find through dialog a political solution which, alone, can put an end to these fratricidal struggles.
96.	On behalf of the French Government, I should like to express again to Mr. Elias Sarkis, the new President of the Lebanese Republic, our heartfelt wishes for the success of the difficult task he is undertaking and our hope that once peace is restored the Lebanese people will be able to devote their efforts to the necessary work of reconstruction.
97.	I should like to state here that the crisis in Lebanon will be resolved only by a settlement based on the unity, integrity and sovereignty of the country. The French Government, for its part, remains available and, in particular, willing to facilitate any meeting or any search for reconciliation, which obviously presupposes a definitive cessation of the fighting. With a view to this, France is maintaining close contact with all the parties to the conflict.
98.	Deeply moved by the suffering of the entire Lebanese people, we have endeavored to provide humanitarian aid. Assistance has been granted to Lebanese nationals temporarily living in France and large shipments of medical supplies have been sent to Lebanon itself. Moreover, we are ready to lend our help, in conjunction with our partners in the European Community, to the reconstruction of Lebanon.
99.	But the solution of the Lebanese tragedy cannot be separated from the solution of the Palestinian problem and the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. These three questions are in fact inextricably linked. It is for that reason that in the latter two cases we reaffirm both the necessity to implement Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) and the basic nature of the three principles upon which any lasting settlement must necessarily rely: withdrawal from the territories occupied by Israel in June 1967, recognition of the Palestinians' right to a homeland, and the right of all States in the area, including Israel, to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries.
100.	The basis of any just and lasting settlement can be found in the application of those principles, especially as regards the Palestinians. That people, raised in hardship and made strong by suffering, has now taken its place as a necessary partner in any negotiation. It has become quite obvious that no solution to the conflict is possible unless the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to express its national identity becomes a reality. But how can that right be exercised without a territorial base which, at the proper time, could be given the structures of statehood?
101.	Close to the Middle East is another area of tension, Cyprus. The United Nations feels especially responsible because it decided on the framework and guidelines for a settlement there. We are obliged, unfortunately, to recognize that the resolution adopted by our Assembly two years ago [resolution 3212 (XXIX)] has so far remained a dead letter.
102.	Indeed, a settlement can result only from an agreement between the communities of the Republic of Cyprus. The United Nations has never ignored this. France and her European Community partners have, for their part, tried to persuade the parties involved to set aside passion and resentments, even when justified, in order to begin genuine negotiations and reach a settlement in keeping with law and justice. Such a settlement must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and must be acceptable to all Cypriots.
103.	The Secretary-General, who was entrusted by the Security Council with a mission whose importance deserves special emphasis, has tried in every way he has felt possible to carry out this mission successfully. He is striving and will continue to strive with ail his well-known dedication to bring about a real resumption of and progress in inter- communal negotiations and to help them to move forward. We consider his contribution indispensable in attaining the goal we all seek: the restoration of peace in Cyprus and a return to its former prosperity.
104.	I have cited only the examples of Lebanon, the Middle East and Cyprus here, but this by no means implies that the solemn pact that commits us "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another" is being respected everywhere else.
105.	I note, however, that in South-East Asia, where the guns have at last fallen silent, the possibility does exist for the principles of our Charter now to find fruitful application. And what more fervent hope could we have for South-East Asia, so long divided and battered, than that peace should take hold, independence assert itself and co-operation increase in a spirit of tolerance? The recent improvement of bilateral relations among the various States of the region gives ground for hope that the time will come for a free and harmonious concertation; it gives hope that a regional grouping can be formed in mutual respect, a grouping that will make it possible to ensure the neutrality of South-East Asia as a whole and to pool efforts to meet the challenge of development. Who can fail to see how valuable an example the success of such an undertaking would be?
106.	Nobody, of course, should put himself in the place of the nine countries of South-East Asia to assess the timeliness of one move or another or suggest the most appropriate ways in which they might co-operate. But it is our task to increase the chances of success and eventually to uphold the results of any initiative which would spare over 300 million people the dangers of new conflicts and the effects of confrontations which are not their own.
107.	France, which has so many ties with that part of the world and whose sole ambition is to best serve the interests of the countries there, is for its part determined, along with all those who share its concern, to make every effort to further this end.
108.	Peace, the goal which is central to our action, is the product of an equilibrium which is built on the independence of States and nations, to be sure, but it also needs broader foundations. Back in 1945 did we not, after all, proclaim our "faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small"?
109.	Much has been said and done, right here and elsewhere, towards the realization of this noble goal. But we are forced to note that there are distressing situations in the world today which may at times actually jeopardize peace. Those situations arise from the failure to recognize the fundamental rights of the human person.
110.	I am thinking most particularly of southern Africa, where tension and confrontation are becoming more acute. This development justifies the part we are taking and the support we are giving to the efforts to prevent a fatal escalation. It is all too evident that racial discrimination is the underlying cause of the crisis, though situations may differ here and there. France -and I want to say this with the greatest possible emphasis-rejects and condemns the policy of apartheid. The recent tragic incidents should have made South Africa's leaders realize at long last that such persistent contempt for the dignity of the human person in itself constitutes a source of perpetual conflict among men, and this could lock their country in a deadly cycle of unrest and repression.
111.	The fact that France, like other countries, but to a lesser extent than some, maintains commercial relations with South Africa obviously should not be interpreted as contradicting its position on apartheid. The peaceful nature of a recent contract in the electro-nuclear sector has been amply demonstrated, as is witnessed, moreover, by the international guarantees that have been granted by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
112.	The French Government's condemnation of racial discrimination and other aspects of the policy followed by Pretoria led it to adopt an increasingly restrictive policy with regard to the delivery of arms and ultimately to prohibit any new contracts or further sales. I informed the Security Council of this on 19 June in my capacity as Permanent Representative.  I am saying it again here as a member of the French Government.
113.	Elsewhere in southern Africa, the situation is of still more immediate concern. It is a matter of urgency that Namibia should in accordance with United Nations resolutions accede to sovereignty and independence under the supervision of our Organization after a constitutional process in which the political groups, the principal one being SWAPO, should participate. In several instances, we, together with our European partners, have approached Pretoria to that effect.
114.	It is no less urgent a matter for the majority to accede to power in Rhodesia. Accordingly we welcomed 
the announcement in which the illegal regime in Salisbury has at long last accepted that principle following the recent mission to southern Africa by the Secretary of State of the United States, In this matter, as in the question of Namibia, he has had our encouragement. Without concealing from ourselves the difficulties that still have to be overcome, we want to note the decisive step that has been taken and the change in thinking that it shows. In so far as the two communities and the African leaders directly concerned are prepared with the assistance of the administering Power to draw conclusions from this, it seems to us that prospects for a peaceful settlement may be foreseen, in accordance with the wish that France has always expressed.
115.	The right of peoples to self-determination is written into our Charter. It has been the guiding principle through-out our policy on decolonization, and it is still our foremost criterion in defining the future of peoples and the framework for their existence.
116.	With regard to the Comoros, France has scrupulously applied this principle, and we intend to remain faithful to it. Although we have raised no obstacle to the admission of the State of the Comoros to the United Nations, our attitude has frequently not been understood. I do not wish to harp on misunderstandings that I should like to see overcome. What is past is past; we are looking only to the future. I can tell you that the proposal on the status of Mayotte, to be submitted to the French Parliament, will indeed leave open all possibilities for the future, with due respect for the wishes of the peoples.
117.	In the French Territory of the Afars and Issas, France is engaged in a process that will lead in a democratic manner to independence, if such is the wish of the population. Our intentions are, I believe, now understood, especially by those who are concerned most particularly with the peaceful settlement of this question, and under-stood by all those who have wanted to listen to us. We hope that all the States which call for this evolution will contribute to it as the process develops.
118.	At this point I should like to emphasize that the issue of development is one of major importance for the African continent. Absolute priority has to be given to enabling African States rapidly to improve the lot of their peoples. This is one of the governing principles of France's African- policy. Therefore, the President of the Republic recently proposed the creation of a fund for African advancement, an instrument of solidarity for the financing of development projects that are of special interest, particularly for the least favored countries.
119.	The need to give priority to development problems quite naturally leads us to hope that Africa will remain free from ideological conflicts and will not become a pawn of Powers outside the continent. As Mr.Giscard d'Estaing recently said:
"Africa must be left to the Africans, and the only competition that serves its interest is competition, the sole objective of which is the economic, social and cultural development of Africa."
120.	Latin America too aspires to define its identity still more clearly. Its vast reservoir of human and intellectual potential, its rich cultural past and its very considerable resources assure for this continent a promising future. The affinity we have with its peoples makes us particularly sensitive to the respect for human dignity and the tolerance enjoined on us by our Charter, of which, as we know, Latin American nations have so frequently set an example.
121.	Respect for the rights of the human person is not an obligation incumbent on States alone. Our laws and customs impose it on individuals as well. Here I should like to add France's voice to the universal cry of condemnation and anguish that is aroused by acts of terrorism. The point is not to determine whether certain forms of violence generate others, but to condemn such acts in their principle and to repress them because they involve innocent people, without distinction as to age or sex, making them instruments of intolerable blackmail.
122.	The measures that should be taken to end this outrage are part of the yet unfinished labor of defining, and especially of ensuring, proper respect for human rights.
123.	We fully approve of the initiative taken by the Federal Republic of Germany to combat the taking of hostages, and we will support it to the full.
124. But it is not enough to remove the most imminent threats of conflict and the most brutal manifestations of violence or better to guarantee the exercise of justice. The authors of the Charter knew full well that the freedom of mankind is but an empty phrase if the material prerequisites for existence are not satisfied. Hence the ultimate grand design which they assigned to our Organization: namely, to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
125.	Of course, the results achieved cannot yet be considered satisfactory: the intolerable gap between the multitude of poor countries and the small minority of developed countries remains an object of scandal. It explains one of the predominant factors of tension in our world. But the United Nations effort to attain the objective of economic progress and justice deserves recognition. Over the years, right in this very place, I have witnessed the growing importance accorded development and co-operation. The seeds of these concepts were in the text of the Charter. Thirty years later, they have become an imperative.
126.	France, for its part, believed in this effort-an effort made within our Organization, by our Organization. At the early sessions of UNCTAD, France presented specific ideas on the percentage of public aid for development, generalized preferences and the organization of raw-materials markets, which have made considerable headway. France closely associated itself with the elaboration of the Inter-national Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] and confirmed its interest in this collective effort. When it became evident that new relations had to be established between the producers and consumers of energy, the French Government turned first to the United Nations to deal with this problem. Lastly, France has participated unconditionally and without ambiguity in the immense undertaking of joint reflection required to set up a new international economic order. For, indeed, this is precisely what has to be done: to replace the disorder in world economic relations, and the relations of force permeating them, by the quest for rationality and justice; and to ensure lastingly, at the world level, as was stated last year by the President of the Republic, a better balance of trade, economic activity, currencies and revenues.
127.	We are still wide of the mark, but progress has been made. Indispensable transfers of resources from the developed countries to the developing world are on the rise. That will be the case this year for the volume and percentage of French public aid. But what can and should evolve are the very structures of international trade. In this respect, I think that we must not underestimate the positive results of the fourth session of UNCTAD. After years of procrastination, the international community has finally committed itself to work for the organization of markets. France, whose delegation to that Conference took the initiative of making certain proposals concerning the centralized financing of buffer stocks of raw materials and which participated very closely in the drafting of the fundamental resolutions, is firmly resolved to participate actively and in good faith in the implementation of the principles approved in Nairobi.
128.	The negotiations to begin shortly in Geneva on this vital question and the discussions to be continued on other important problems will require the understanding and patience of us all. Reason and realism preclude recourse to slogans and rejection of the facts. This law of life is even more binding in debates on the full range of economic problems, from energy to development, as is the case in the only forum with such a complete agenda- the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, which is being held in Paris at present.
129.	It is only natural that the tensions of international life should be reflected in the work of that Conference since the justifiable impatience of the third world is so keen and since it is so difficult to define truly valid solutions in these diverse areas, even when agreement can be reached on the principles to be respected and the goals to be attained.
130.	But the instrument is there if we want to, and if we can, go further. It is a unique instrument, with advantages recognized by all the participants, an instrument that can easily be used to complement the large meetings of the United Nations.
131.	The world conferences held in recent years have broadened our field of action. I will mention, in particular, the United Nations Conference on the. Human Environment, held in Stockholm last year, the Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in Lima last year, and, more recently, the International Labor Organization's Tripartite Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labor. As the goals defined by Governments in their successive assemblies acquire world-wide importance, the variety of means and solutions must also grow. No prejudices should be allowed to limit the choice of methods needed to attain the desired goals.
132.	The specific role of the United Nations is not to tackle each and every problem. It is still less to serve as an arena for conflicts in which the stakes would be the ephemeral, and useless, victory of one ideology over another. As the Charter says so well, the Organization must be "a center for harmonizing the actions of nations" for purposes they hold in common. What we expect from it, through reflection, discussion and practical action, is that it arrive at and constantly perfect an overall strategy to build this more effective, more equitable economic order.
133.	There is no doubt that laying the foundations of this new order will be a lengthy task, because it involves nothing less than getting the world started in a new phase of organization and setting up a global system that reconciles the liberal principles of the old order with new measures governing structure and organization.
134.	The basics are already present, namely, each nation's acceptance of this common endeavor of justice. As for concrete measures, we must still avoid getting bogged down in facile ultimatums and ready-made solutions. We have yet to listen to our partner, and confirm our faith in negotiation and co-operation, as the Economic and Social Council asked us to do at its session this summer in Abidjan. In order for us to be faithful to the spirit of the Charter, we must still combine perseverance, courage and realism.
135.	To "live together in peace with one another as good neighbors" is the last great aspiration that the Charter proposes to our peoples.
136.	The organization of regional relations, particularly in Latin America and Africa, corresponds to this desire. I shall refrain from making an assessment which our friends from these regions might find out of place. I shall merely recall the progress made in Europe.
137.	The fratricidal wars of the past now belong to history. The distrust and antagonism of former days have been replaced by entente, co-operation and organization.
138.	The organization is, first of all, that of the Europe of the nine members of the European Economic Community; Year after year, whatever the difficulties, whatever the hazards, which sometimes come from abroad, that Europe is making progress. The United Nations knows this. When I was Permanent Representative and one or another question was being examined, so many people used to ask me, "What are the nine going to do? ". This vitality of the Community stems from its very nature as the framework for reconciliation and co-operation among nations	were once enemies but which have today deeded to work together. For this purpose, there have been set up structures and institutions which, instead of being fixed once and for all, are slowly but surely evolving. "Progress", wrote an author in ancient times, "is when something grows while remaining itself'. This could be the motto of the European Communities. Thanks to the traditions of the States that comprise it, this group of nations has also chosen to be a center of exchange and dialog. Sometimes denounced for being a closed bloc, it has proved its ability to be open towards the rest of Western Europe as well as towards countries to the east of our old continent and, since the Lomé Convention,  towards 46 countries lying across the seas.
139.	The existence and soundness of the Community cannot be demonstrated better than by the passage in the address delivered yesterday by its current President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, on behalf of the member countries. The French delegation fully agrees with everything he said in that capacity about economic and political problems.
140.	Nothing illustrates this better, also, than the role played by the Community here at the United Nations and in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe-the culmination of several years of patient effort to end the divisions caused by the Second World War and a point of departure for a pattern of development which, with time and experience, would reveal a clearer picture of a Europe at last consistent with its geographical designation.
141.	What happens on the European continent does not, however, exempt us from observing that the world is still far from the state of neighborly relations prescribed by the Charter. There has not been a global conflict in 30 years; probably not so much because peace feigns in the full sense of the word as because destructive capabilities neutralize each other.
142.	That is why France believes that, foremost among our concerns, should be the quest for an agreed disarmament between States. That undertaking, which got its start shortly after the Second World War, is marking time. Fifteen years ago the study of general plans for disarmament was in fact abandoned in favor of the study of partial measures. But the agreements reached in that direction-some of which have some merit-should not conceal the unremitting arms race, which leaves an awesome threat weighing on the world.
143.	Nevertheless, some initiatives are taking shape to revise the very structures of the disarmament effort. My Government is following them with interest. It is prepared to support any proposal aimed at genuine disarmament, that is, at the effective destruction of weapons of all types, nuclear and conventional, in accordance with a reasonable time-table and under effective international control.
144.	Since the very birth of the United Nations, it has ' been fashionable to criticize and even lampoon our Organization for its shortcomings and relative ineffectiveness.
145.	I would like to say here that France does not share that skepticism. It considers the United Nations an in-dispensable and irreplaceable instrument for dialog and co-operation among the peoples of the earth. It realizes that, in the maintenance of peace and in many aspects of economic development, the Organization has rendered services which are so easily forgotten because they were so effective. Lastly, it is aware of the fact that the shortcomings of the United Nations are a product of the political divisions in the world. As a minor, it shows nations their own reflection; as a forum, it allows aspirations to be expressed in a political and diplomatic framework; and as an instrument, it is the natural tool of those who want to use it and who know how.
146.	The Organization today extends, with but a few exceptions, to the dimensions of the globe. Five years ago it took an important step in this direction-although it was merely a reasonable step-by restoring China to its rightful place here. In this way, the representatives of that immense nation were able to bring to us here the echo of the great voice that fell silent early this month.
147.	The Organization must truly become a world body, that is, it must welcome the States which apply for membership once they have met the recognized criteria of international law and once they have declared their willingness to respect the Charter.
148.	Accordingly, while France is pleased to welcome the admission of the Republic of Seychelles, with which it has historical affinities, it hopes that the doors of the Organization will be opened to VietNam -with which it particularly intends to develop its relations-to Angola and, generally speaking, to all those that request membership. By the same token, it speaks out against any attempt to prevent or suspend a State's membership. Whatever complaints are brought against the States thus threatened, such extreme measures would in no way facilitate the search for settlements-quite the contrary.
149.	To find what unites us and overcome what divides us, harness our mutual determination to build and repress the instinct that urges us to destroy, work together for the liberty, happiness and dignity of mankind-that, to my mind, is a program that is just as relevant and imperative in 1976 as it was in 1945. That is also the reason for my country's acceptance of the ideals of the Charter and the action of the United Nations.
150.	This acceptance is no mere formality. It is based on the conviction that, beneath frequently militant positions, there is a large community of needs which is expressed here. Over and above the verbal battles and attempts to gain the advantage, there is a growing recognition of the real ills that set mankind: economic crises, deterioration of the environment, mass poverty, over-population and war. Rooting out those scourges is a long-range task; but the future of coming generations and the survival of humanity are at stake. Such a task demands that concertation win over confrontation, that everyone agree to lend himself to dialog; it demands the patient and resolute efforts of countries which are capable of looking beyond groups and blocs. France intends to be among them.
The thirty-first session of the General Assembly is an auspicious occasion for the Commonwealth. It is particularly gratifying to the United Kingdom that the President of this session should be not only a distinguished and longstanding servant of the United Nations but also an outstanding representative of a Commonwealth country. I extend to you, Mr. President, the warm congratulations of my Government on your election. At the same time, I should like to pay my country's tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, for his unremitting efforts over the last five years to promote peace and international understanding.
44.	I also take pleasure in welcoming here for the first time the Republic of Seychelles, a country whose membership in the United Nations was sponsored by the United Kingdom and by fellow members of the Commonwealth [A/31/L.1 and Add.l and 2]. I take this opportunity to convey my Government's thanks for the kind words of the President of Seychelles in his address to the Assembly last week [1st meeting].
45.	It is self-evident that the British Government's foreign policy should reflect the values of the British people themselves. We in Britain are trying to create a society based on the ideals of morality, equality and justice, the United Kingdom is no less committed to these ideals in its foreign policy.
46.	This is a fundamental fact which shapes my Government's attitude to the great challenges facing the international community today: the search for peace; the establishment of a proper economic balance between developed and developing countries; the promotion of human rights; and the maintenance of the rule of law. It is appropriate that on my first visit to the General Assembly as British Foreign Secretary I should at the outset reaffirm unequivocally my country's commitment to support and sustain the efforts which are being made to meet these challenges.
47.	This is also a pledge of support for the United Nations itself. More than ever before, the problems that confront our societies can be effectively tackled only on a regional, or even a global, basis. "Interdependence" is a fashionable word; it is on everybody's lips these days-but rightly so. There is not a nation represented here today that can confidently assure its security and prosperity in isolation. With universal membership as its ultimate goal, with international co-operation and the peaceful settlement of disputes as its ideals; and with its ability to offer the world's nations a forum in which they can discuss their problems freely and openly, the United Nations is uniquely placed to meet the challenges of an interdependent world. That is why today, as over the last 31 years, support for the United Nations is an axiom of British foreign policy.
48.	It would be invidious to arrange these challenges according to some neat order of priorities. We need to meet them all if we are to create the better world we seek. The deprivation of human rights is just as offensive to human dignity as economic deprivation. The establishment of the rule of law is inseparable from the establishment of conditions of peace and security.
49.	But, this said, the relationship between the developed and developing countries is a matter of particular concern to the international community at the present time. Tue gap between the rich and the poor countries is not just a matter of economics; it is a moral question which requires a firm and principled stand. The United Kingdom's position was demonstrated when, in July, at a time of severe economic pressures, we exempted one programme, and one programme alone, from the widespread cuts in public expenditure-the overseas aid programme. Within this programme, moreover, it is our policy to put increasing emphasis on the poorer countries; and not just the poorer countries, but the poorest people in those countries. For when we say that we want a fair and rational world economic system in the management of which the developing countries will have their proper share, we mean also that the poor countries of the world should obtain a new deal, which enables them to offer their peoples the prospect of lives no longer dominated by hunger and chronic insufficiency.
50. Now we should not belittle what has already been achieved in the comparatively short time since the seventh special session of the General Assembly last year. The Conference on International Economic Co-operation has now resumed its detailed work in the four critical areas of energy, raw materials, development, and finance; and I hope that this work will culminate in a successful ministerial conference at the end of the year and in a major and positive step forward in the north-south dialogue. The fourth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in May, for all the initial difficulties which beset it, also marked a significant stage in this dialogue. Eleven out of 13 resolutions  were adopted by consensus and an important programme of work was set in train to which the United Kingdom is determined to contribute positively. There- have also been major international monetary reforms to the benefit of the poorer countries. So something, though not enough, has been achieved in the past 12 months.
51. It is especially pleasing to the United Kingdom that the European Community has taken effective action in this field I welcome the words of the Netherlands Foreign Minister, speaking on behalf of the Community, when he addressed the Assembly last week [7th meeting]. Of particular significance was his reference to an outward- looking Europe. For Britain, an essential justification for the Community's very existence and for our membership of it is that it should play an active and constructive role in the world, so enabling its member States to contribute more effectively to the solution of international problems than if they were acting on their own. The Community has played just such a role in the dialogue between the developed and developing worlds, deploying its collective economic strength to excellent effect. In his speech, Mr. van der Stoel rightly stressed the importance of the Lome Convention,  which grants, as representatives know, preferential access to Community markets to some 50 developing countries and offers a scheme for the stabilization of export earnings for certain raw materials. In recent years, the Community has also steadily improved its generalized scheme of preferences, a scheme which is revised every year and is now of particular benefit to the poorer countries. And, of course, at the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, the Community speaks for all its nine members.
52. The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has an important contribution to make to the dialogue between the industrialized and developing nations. The concept of an international authority to administer the mineral resources of the deep sea-bed for the benefit of all mankind is bold and imaginative. Her Majesty's Government has played a full part in attempting to promote general agreement on the structure of the authority, on the regime itself, and on the many other issues which are currently before the Conference. But while-and you know better than anyone, Mr. President-the Conference has made progress on other issues, we are disappointed by the lack of movement on this basic question of the deep sea-bed. At the fifth session, some States seemed to abandon their previous willingness to consider possible compromise solutions. The United Kingdom was not among these. We shall persist in our efforts to find solutions acceptable to all, and we hope that, before the next session of the Conference, other States will also consider carefully how we might achieve consensus.
53. It is a measure of the size of the problem that so much still remains to be done before a proper balance is achieved between the richer and the poorer "amongst the nations": a balance which is an essential pre-condition of a more civilized international order. I fully understand the impatience in some quarters: it is, after all, literally a matter of life and death for many people that effective remedies be found for poverty and starvation-and found quickly. But the lesson of the past three years is that no one gains from confrontation: our economies are too closely interconnected. The dialogue must continue, because on its successful outcome depends the ability of the poorer countries to secure the real transfer of resources that they so desperately need. What we are searching for, and must seek with sympathy and imagination, is a new relationship based upon justice and a balance of mutual advantage.
54.	However, the North-South dialogue is about political as well as economic partnership. This brings me to an area of the world in which we find distilled all the challenges that confront this Organization today. I refer of course, to southern Africa. There the need for international cooperation and peaceful reconciliation is overwhelming if multiracial societies are to be able to live in freedom and prosperity.
55.	In Rhodesia, I believe, the acceptance of majority rule by the illegal regime-a turning point the achievement of which is largely due to the skill and energy of the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger-has given us at long last the basis for a peaceful settlement. That, as Mr. Callaghan, my Prime Minister, made clear earlier this year, was the essential first requirement. We must now seize this opportunity to make real progress towards an independent government that will truly represent the peoples of Zimbabwe.
56.	Britain will continue to play a constructive role in this. As you will know, I have agreed, in response to the requests of all the parties concerned, to convene a conference to discuss the early formation of an interim government. I am sure you will agree that Mr. Ivor Richard has all the right qualifications to be chairman of that conference. I may add that his knowledge and experience of the United Nations was an important factor in my choice.
57.	I emphasize that, while we are ready to help in whatever way is appropriate, we look to the parties concerned-the parties on the spot-to work out for themselves the best means of achieving a rapid transition to independence based firmly on majority rule.
58.	All of us hope that the threat to peace and stability which Rhodesia has posed for too many years will soon be at an end. Once the interim government has been established, the justification for the various pressures which have been maintained against the illegal regime should fade away. At that stage there should no longer be any reason for the international isolation of Rhodesia. But until that time comes, it would be right for the international community to continue with the enforcement of economic sanctions. We cannot afford to let the momentum of the present initiative be lost.
59.	I hope that when I next have the honor of addressing the Assembly we shall have seen great progress. We all look forward to welcoming a truly independent Zimbabwe into the international community and to giving it our full support and encouragement.
60.	In South Africa, the rioting which broke out in Soweto in June and which has since spread widely has revealed-if indeed any such revelation were needed-the strength of black African bitterness against the evils of apartheid. Britain has consistently condemned apartheid; we condemn it now. The violence and bloodshed in South Africa have shown in the most tragic way that apartheid is not only unjust; it will not work. There must, and indeed there will, be change. We have always hoped that such change could take place peacefully. But time is running out. We urge the South African Government to accept the need for a fundamental reappraisal of its racial policies, so that a society can be built in South Africa in which all South Africans, regardless of color, can live and work in peace, equality and mutual respect.
61.	In the past year Namibia has rightly remained the subject of extensive debate, both in the General Assembly and in the Security Council. We were pleased to vote in favor of Security Council resolution 385 (1976) of 30 January. This was a constructive attempt to press on towards the common aim of securing South Africa's withdrawal from its unlawful occupation of the Territory. The United Kingdom has been active in a number of contexts and we have repeatedly make our views clear to South Africa, both in bilateral and in multilateral approaches. We hope that Mr. Kissinger's success in producing movement over Rhodesia will be followed by similar success in producing movement on Namibia. We fully support his efforts and those of the African leaders directly concerned to help to bring Namibia to early self-determination and independence.
62.	If our efforts to achieve international co-operation and peaceful reconciliation in southern Africa fail, we face the prospect of a catastrophic conflict that not only will engulf the peoples of the region but could also have serious results for world peace.
63.	We hear much about the need for detente, in the aftermath of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. But recent history has given a forcible reminder to us all-and particularly to those, like the Soviet Union, who disparage the present attempts to bring peace to southern Africa-that, in the pursuit of detente, the need for a sense of responsibility is world-wide and not confined to Europe.
64.	We cannot limit detente by geography or by subject. More important, if we are to achieve a genuine detente on a world-wide scale, we must all as a first step honor the undertakings which we gave when we pledged ourselves to the United Nations Charter. This requires a high degree of restraint and mutual tolerance between nations. We are a long way yet from bringing these qualities to international life. Nowhere is this need for restraint more necessary and obvious than in the field of arms control. It is crucial that the international community take urgent steps to curtail the proliferation of nuclear and conventional weapons. Lord Goronwy-Roberts, my Minister of State, will set out the British Government's views on disarmament at greater length in the First Committee.
65.	The concept of the peaceful settlement of disputes is, of course, far older than that of detente. The United
Nations has from its inception seen continuous attempts to apply it in the Middle East. Yet the unresolved conflict there remains one of the great threats to the peace and prosperity of the world. I endorse everything the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands has said on this subject on behalf of the nine members of the European Community. We urgently want to see negotiations leading to a peace agreement supported and sustained by the world community. It is a tragedy that lack of mutual trust causes both sides to adopt so cautious an approach to negotiation when they both stand to gain so much. Of course no one can guarantee in advance that negotiations will lead to a lasting peace but, unless the opportunity is grasped now, the chances of success will surely diminish as time passes,
66.	An enduring settlement must of course be based on compromise; but that compromise must fulfill the basic aspirations of all the parties and leave no underlying grievances to fester and yet again to threaten the peace of the area. On the one hand, the Arabs must accept that Israel is a fact and that its right to exist is not in question. No peace can survive unless the Arab States give Israel formal recognition, within secure, recognized and commonly agreed boundaries, as a permanent feature of the geography and politics of the Middle East.
67.	On the other hand, if Israel is to obtain this recognition, it must, in a settlement, put an end to the territorial occupation which it has maintained since the war of 1967. The nine members of the European Community have declared that that is an essential element in a settlement. On behalf of the British Government I underline that need today. A settlement must also provide a place for the Palestinians, whose fate is at the very heart of the Middle East dispute. They regard themselves and are now generally recognized as a people distinct from their Arab neighbors, with their own strong aspirations towards nationhood. One essential element in a settlement will be a land for the Palestinians, not necessarily a sovereign State, but a place where they will be free to look after their own affairs.
68.	There are things which both sides can do now to help prepare for the negotiations which must come, and I hope will come soon. Above all, both sides must show restraint: the Israelis, by not seeking to change the situation in the occupied territories; the Arabs, by validating their claims that they really want peace.
69.	In the thirty-first year of its existence, the United Nations has come close to its goal of universal membership. The welcoming of new Member States, a feature of past General Assemblies, will become an increasingly rare occurrence as the age of decolonization draws to a close. Universality will not of itself bring greater mutual understanding; the more diverse the membership, the greater the challenge to consensus. The prospect of universal membership therefore obliges us more than ever to ensure that the Organization functions promptly and effectively in the interest of world peace and harmony.
70.	There are surely a number of ways in which we can increase the effectiveness of the Organization. I have already mentioned the Conference on the Law of the Sea; a successful conclusion of that Conference would bring a vast new area of human activity under international regulation and add immeasurably to the Organization's standing. Again, the activities of the United Nations should be more closely harnessed to the promotion of the international rule of law. There are also specific measures that the United Nations could take to tackle international violence. For example, the Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany has put forward a proposal for a United Nations convention against the taking of hostages [A/31/242]. I strongly support that proposal and hope that other members will do so too.
71. But I want to sound a warning. Sometimes the work of our specialized conferences and agencies is made more difficult by the introduction of divisive political issues into their proceedings. I believe that the huge majority of professionals and experts attending those meetings are becoming more and more concerned at what they regard as unnecessary obstruction of their work. The British Government shares that concern. We want to make the specialist and technical work of the United Nations as effective as we can. In many areas of our shared concern, we cannot afford the luxury of prolonged political debate when the harsh realities of, for example, water shortages, starvation and waste of resources cry out for immediate joint action. Of course the political issues of the day are crucial to us, and must be debated; free debate is the life-blood of this Organization. But at the United Nations we have plenty of opportunities for the political disputes and issues of the day. We have this Assembly and its Committees and we have the Security Council. But we cannot afford to allow those disputes to reduce the effectiveness of specialist international co-operation. If this trend persists, there will be a growing pressure to achieve results outside the United Nations system. And so I appeal to all Members of this Organization to maintain the effectiveness of our work together in the many fields where joint action is in the interest of us all.
72. I also believe that we should identify those areas where our aspirations and standards of conduct are not negotiable and should enjoy the full support of the membership of the United Nations. I refer in particular to the question of human rights. The normative work of the United Nations in drafting instruments has, I think, in general been well done. We already have the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which has been the inspiration of many constitutions and conventions, including the European Convention to which the United Kingdom has long been a party. The year 1976 has now seen the entry into force of the two International Covenants on Human Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXX)]. These give legal force to the rights set out in the Universal Declaration. The United Kingdom's ratification of the Covenants last May reflects the seriousness of its approach. We hope that other States will join us in ratifying and giving full support to the Human Rights Committee, whose task it will be to supervise the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with vigor and impartiality. But vital though it is, legislation alone cannot of course guarantee human rights. We must all approach this question with frankness, with honesty and, where necessary, with self-criticism. Our task is to arrest and reverse the present erosion of human rights in the world. We shall not accomplish this if we allow human rights to become, as is too frequently the case today, a playground for political propaganda, hypocrisy and cynicism.
73.	Our task is to create a world in which all men can live in peace, prosperity and freedom, guaranteed by the rule of law. This is an ambitious goal and some may despair of ever reaching it. But I believe that if we approach the problems that beset us in a spirit of peaceful reconciliation, co-operation and restraint-and if, above all, we display these qualities in our dealings with one another in this Organization-the task will not appear so daunting and the goal will not prove impossible of achievement.
Let me begin by extending to the President my Government's warm congratulations on his unanimous election to be President of the thirty-first session of the General Assembly. We are happy indeed that this high office has been filled by his country this year, and that the choice has fallen on him in particular. It is a mark of international tribute to Sri Lanka and its noteworthy role in the United Nations. It is also yet another mark of recognition of his own wide experience and skill in conference diplomacy. We feel sure that the success of the thirty-first session is in safe hands.
48.	I wish to place on record also our appreciation of the work of his distinguished predecessor, the Prime Minister of Luxembourg who under difficult circumstances maintained a high standard of leadership and objectivity.
49.	It is customary for us to say a few words about our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. He has tried always to represent the United Nations as accurately as possible. He has reaffirmed his faith in the United Nations when it was most needed. His loyalty to the principles and purposes of the United Nations has been demonstrated on many an occasion, when a lesser man might have faltered. We wish him many more years of dedicated service to the United Nations.
50.	We are glad to welcome Seychelles, our youngest Member. The attainment of its independence through peaceful constitutional means is a tribute to the maturity of its people and its leaders.
51.	It is unfortunate that Viet Nam and Angola have not yet' been admitted to the United Nations, despite their clear entitlement to membership. The peoples of these two countries have had to wage prolonged and bitter struggles for winning their national independence, and having won their birthright, their Governments have applied for admission to the United Nations. This is a remarkable manifestation of their belief that the best guarantee of their independence and future development lies in joining the United Nations. And yet, our doors remain closed to them for reasons that do not carry conviction. We feel sure therefore that there will be a change of heart. We reaffirm our support for the admission of Viet Nam and Angola and we have every expectation that they will soon be seated among us.
52.	An important recent event was the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries held in Colombo in August 1976. It was the largest ever of its kind and demonstrated that, despite their diversity, non-aligned countries are united in their struggle for freedom, equality and peace. The fact that most States on attaining independence from colonial rule have joined the non-aligned family is proof of the continued validity and importance of non-alignment. My Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated at the Colombo Conference that in a fast changing world non-alignment remains the bulwark of the ever widening area of peace, a shelter against external pressures and a catalyst for a new world economic order based on equality and justice. The Action Program for Economic Co-operation adopted by the Colombo Conference [A/311197, annex III] is a significant achievement and provides a basis for further collective action.
53.	The United Nations has now been in existence for 30 years and it has seen dramatic changes in the world. It has survived the years of the cold war and has entered a period of detente between the great Powers. It has managed to contain situations of active hostilities and in the process it has acquired useful experience in peace-keeping operations. Its membership has increased rapidly and the United Nations has become a hallmark of independence of countries that have liberated themselves from colonial rule.
54.	The United Nations stands for the promise of peace, equality, justice and full opportunities for the common man everywhere. When one examines the resolutions adopted by the United Nations on a wide variety of subjects, one sees that a quiet revolution has been taking place during the last 20 years- a revolution in the realm of ideas about the quality of peace and the quality of life for all in the future.
55.	On the one hand, the United Nations has been trying to cope with current problems and controversies. Some-times these are issues that could be resolved outside the United Nations by the countries concerned. It is our belief that if the United Nations is to survive and grow into a cooperative organization equipped to deal with problems of the future, we should not unduly burden it with issues that lend themselves to solutions outside the United Nations in conformity with the principles of its Charter. After all, Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter stipulates that all Members shall settle their disputes themselves by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered.
56.	On the other hand, there are other types of issues that concern a number of countries and they seem to need the healing hand of the United Nations. But the experience of dealing with even such issues indicates that in the final analysis it is necessary for the parties directly involved to sit together and negotiate practical and reasonable solutions to their mutual benefit. This is as true of the Cyprus question as it is of the Korean question or any other such question for that matter. We wish to draw attention to this basic fact of life, because it is often forgotten in the early stage of most problems. As a consequence the credibility of the United Nations is placed under increasing strain.
57.	Issues that directly pose a continued threat to inter-national peace and security merit our attention as a matter of priority. The situation in the Middle East has been a source of grave anxiety. Another war in that region will affect all of us in one way or another. It will almost certainly plunge the peoples of that region into disasters of unprecedented magnitude. The continuing civil war in Lebanon makes us very sad, because of the heavy loss of life and destruction of property. It has also added a new dimension to an already complex situation.
58.	There is no doubt that peace must come eventually to that troubled part of the world. The essential ingredients for a peace settlement have already been set out in Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973). In subsequent resolutions the United Nations has recognized the national rights of the Palestinian people and affirmed the vital importance of the exercise of those rights for the maintenance of peace in that region. The root of the problem of course is the continuing occupation of Arab lands and territories by Israel. Ways and means must be found for implementing the Security Council resolutions and a proper climate for their implementation should be quickly created by an early resumption of the work of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East.
59.	The process of decolonization has maintained its momentum everywhere, except in southern Africa. We had hoped that after the withdrawal of Portuguese colonialism, white minority rule elsewhere in southern Africa would quickly yield to majority rule. But it would seem that our hopes were based on wrong premises. The national liberation movements have been left with no option but to resort to armed struggle. It is particularly sad that the peoples of southern Africa should have to make many more sacrifices before winning their freedom, because it is within the competence of the United Nations to prevent them by taking enforcement action.
60.	In Zimbabwe the time is overdue for the introduction of majority rule. The question of a constitution, safeguards for minorities, etc. surely must follow the establishment of majority rule. Diplomatic efforts are being made by front-line African States and others to resolve the problem democratically and peacefully through negotiations. The regime of Ian Smith clearly has no basis in law or in the will of the people, and it must yield to majority rule without any delay, if further bloodshed is to be avoided. The United Kingdom, whose legal responsibility continues, could play a helpful role at the present juncture.
61.	It is necessary to remind ourselves that the Territory of Namibia has international status and that South Africa's presence there is illegal. South Africa's open challenge to the authority of the United Nations has remained unanswered in effective terms. Almost every Member of this Organization agrees that steps should be taken to retrieve in practice what the United Nations legally holds in trust, which is the Territory of Namibia and the destiny of its people. But nothing has been done so far except to adopt recommendatory resolutions. Nothing could cause greater harm to the credibility of the United Nations than its failure to assume in practice responsibility for what belongs to it in law. The implications of this should be squarely faced by those countries that support the legal position but are not prepared to enforce it. Here again, diplomacy seems to be at work to bring together representatives of the people of Namibia to discuss and agree upon the process towards their independence within a short period of time. The United Nations cannot afford to fail in Namibia, because the Members of this Organization have a collective legal responsibility for its independence.
62.	The infamous policy of apartheid, which is the device employed by the white minority regime in South Africa to perpetuate its rule, has been roundly condemned by nearly all Members of the United Nations. That policy, racist in concept and rooted in slavery, contains within it the seeds of its own violent destruction. It is a flagrant violation of the concept of equality of human beings regardless of color or race. We see already the beginnings of its end and we hope it will be peaceful. We extend our sympathies to the victims of racist oppression in Soweto and Cape Town.
63.	We hope that the white rulers in South Africa, in order to avoid further loss of life and property, will give up the policy of apartheid and replace it with a forward-looking enlightened policy that will enable all persons, regardless of race or color, to live together on a basis of complete equality. The intention of the white South African Government to grant so-called independence to Transkei sad to create similar "bantustans" is no solution. It is nothing more than the logical extension of the policy of apartheid and is intended to create satellite black areas without any real independence. It will intensify racial discrimination rather than eliminate it, and it should be rejected by the United Nations.
64.	Turning now to some other important problems, may I mention that while we have welcomed the state of detente in East-West relations, we have always stressed that efforts to consolidate and intensify detente should respond positively to the anxieties and aspirations of the rest of the world. This can best be done through meaningful disarmament measures, through implementing agreed measures for securing a rational and equitable new economic order, and through non-interference in the internal affairs of developing countries. It is only through such steps that detente can spread to all regions and create its own momentum for establishing mutually co-operative and beneficial relations between all States.
65.	The frightful dilemma facing mankind today is the incredible accretion of enormous military power by a few countries and their seeming inability to deescalate the arms race. They seem to be under a strange compulsion to race faster and faster in order to remain in the same position of parity. The price of this parity is reported to be Of the order of $US 300 billion per annum at present. Despite the astronomical waste involved in the diversion of vast resources for achieving the so-called balance of strategic power or mutual deterrence, war continues to remain a likely consequence. It is significant that the United States Secretary of State should have cautioned that any one of the current regional crises could blossom into a larger conflict [11th meeting].
66.	The rest of the world cannot remain insensitive to this prospect. It seems unlikely that there will be significant progress in social reform and economic development in developing countries as long as world military expenditure continues to grow at the present rate. My delegation has been among the foremost to propose a variety of disarmament measures since 1950 but it is regrettable that little progress has been made. The need for a world disarmament conference has become increasingly urgent. It might be useful by way of preparation to have a special session of the General Assembly to be devoted exclusively to disarmament. If we can have world conferences on space, atomic energy, environment, human settlements, trade and development, and so on, there is even greater reason and greater urgency for organizing a world conference on disarmament.
67.	Several speakers have referred to the problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. India has consistently supported efforts in the direction of achieving nuclear disarmament. We are surprised that attempts are continuously being made to confuse the question of non- proliferation of nuclear weapons with the legitimate right of all Member States to engage themselves in programmers involving peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We reject the thesis that access to the benefits of nuclear energy should be limited only to a few nations, or that only some countries can be trusted to behave in a responsible manner in embarking upon and implementing programs in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
68.	The initiative of the USSR in proposing a treaty on non-use of force in international relations is a positive step and deserves the most careful consideration by the General Assembly. It is in fact an attempt to elaborate the principle already enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter that all members shall refrain from the threat or use of force in their international relations.
69.	Another initiative of the USSR, which is of direct interest to us, is the statement made by the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union the other day that his country did not have "any intention of building any military bases in the Indian Ocean" [7th meeting, para. 185] and that it was "prepared, together with other Powers, to seek ways of reducing on a reciprocal basis the military activities of non-coastal States in the Indian Ocean and the regions directly adjacent thereto" [ibid., para. 186]. This is a welcome statement. We trust that it will be reciprocated by other great Powers so that existing foreign military bases such as Diego Garcia are eliminated and the Declaration of the General Assembly that the Indian Ocean shall be a zone of peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)] can become a reality.
70.	India attaches great importance to the work of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. While it has succeeded in evolving a consensus on many important issues, the search for a consensus is still continuing on the remaining issues like the system of exploitation of the- international sea-bed area and its resources which are the common heritage of mankind. The developing countries, which have suffered from the consequences of colonial domination and the arbitrary operations of an unjust economic order, cannot be deprived of their legitimate share in the vast sea-bed resources by technologically advanced countries unilaterally exploiting these resources.
71.	I should like to say a few words about a problem that has been recently plaguing many countries and affecting the lives of all travelers. It is the pernicious practice of making hostages of innocent persons for political or other reasons. I feel sure that this practice deserves to be condemned by all States in the strongest terms. But what is more important is that we should all do something more to put an end to it. The initiative taken by the Federal Republic of Germany to propose an international convention against the taking of hostages [A/311242] is timely. The terms of such a convention should be so drafted as to secure the widest possible support.
72.	In our part of the world, India has been pursuing a deliberate policy of normalizing and improving relations with all its neighbors. We intend to continue to persist in developing good neighborly relations with all.
73.	The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan referred the other day [8th meeting] to the so-called dispute relating to Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India. He also referred to the resolutions of the Security Council of 1948 and 1949. Those resolutions were not implemented at that time because Pakistan did not fulfill certain essential preconditions that had been laid down in them. As a consequence the resolutions became obsolete and this was repeatedly made clear to the Security Council. In our opinion it is now entirely unrealistic to hark back to those resolutions. The Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972, however, provides a practical and realistic basis for overcoming all impediments to friendly and co-operative relations between India and Pakistan. The implementation of that Agreement has already resulted in a large measure of normalization of relations in several fields. It is our intention to persist in this process because we believe that it can lead to stability and durable peace in the subcontinent.
74.	With Bangladesh we wish to develop, on a basis of equality, close and friendly relations to our mutual benefit. Unfortunately Bangladesh has chosen to bring before this General Assembly certain misconceived allegations concerning the equitable sharing of the waters of the river Ganga during the lean period of the dry season every year. My delegation expressed our views on this issue when the question of the inclusion of the item came up before the General Assembly [4th meeting], I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate our firm belief that the discussion of this question in the United Nations will only serve to complicate the situation and impede bilateral negotiations.
75.	I should like to turn now to the struggle in the United Nations for a square deal for developing countries-a struggle that has already entered its second decade with no promise or even hope of an early solution. The grievances and expectations of developing countries have been clearly set out in previous sessions of the General Assembly and in various other conferences. But we still seem to be convening one conference after another for no ostensible reason other than to repeat and reaffirm earlier resolutions. Developing countries find themselves in a state of political independence in an economic environment over which they have little control and which they have inherited through historical circumstances. They are in the grip of forces manipulated by developed countries largely for their own benefit. Such a situation is likely to lead to the permanent impoverishment of developing countries, while developed countries continue to prosper at the expense of others. This state of affairs is both immoral and intolerable. Decisions already taken and measures agreed on at earlier conferences should be speedily implemented through constructive negotiations.
76.	The indebtedness of developing countries has exceeded $US 15O billion with repayments increasing every year. Developing countries now face the dilemma of either not paying their debts, or suspending altogether the process and tempo of their national development. This problem can be resolved only if the international community as a whole draws up mutually agreed norms for affording realistic and immediate relief to debtor countries. Even a 5 per cent reduction in the military budgets of developed countries could facilitate the transfer of much needed resources and open for two thirds of mankind vast opportunities for development.
77.	The survival of mankind in all its many splendored diversity depends on planned expansion of areas of equitable interdependence. My Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi observed recently at the Colombo Conference of non-aligned countries:
"The community of nations should jointly and peace-fully achieve that elusive equation between global production and consumption that yields the right share for each nation. Patchwork remedies are no substitute for genuine reform. We need a global perspective plan that would relate resources to human needs and provide a system of early warning of imbalances and disasters. Improved terms of trade and credit, easier access to markets and better value for raw materials and industrial goods are all essential to secure greater equity in the distribution of benefits."
78.	To that end we need to evolve a global ethic, a code of conduct and a set of principles for managing interdependence for the purpose of sustaining economic development. We need also the sort of interdependence among nation States that preserves their sovereignty, transcends political ideologies, harmonizes the actions of States for common ends, strengthens the weak and prevents their exploitation by the strong, prohibits policies which beggar one's neighbor and envisages an equal share in decision-making.
79.	Recognition of this mutuality of interests and of the need to rearrange the present economic system on a more equitable basis should influence the attitudes of the affluent countries in such a manner that their people respond readily and positively to the modest national objectives of developing countries. Unfortunately, the response of the developed countries so far indicates a certain wavering of political will to meet the full dimension of the challenges and opportunities inherent in the present situation, as evidenced by the slow progress made by the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation. Perhaps fear of the unknown future, or reluctance to reduce wasteful consumption, is at the root of their inadequate response.
80.	Surely, they must realize that there can be no freezing of the status quo of dependence between the developed and developing countries. The present situation must inevitably evolve into a new order of equitable interdependence and mutual benefit. Self-serving short-term remedies will not meet the long-term requirements of the present situation. So far as the developing countries are concerned, they should be prepared to safeguard their own interests through a higher level of individual and collective self-reliance as well as mutual co-operation.
81.	The strength of the developing countries rests, of course, entirely on their own unity and their sense of purpose. Theirs is not the strength that comes from numbers alone but rather from the shared awareness that they form the backbone of peace-loving nations. They represent not only the majority of the nation States of the world but also the majority of the world's population. Their aspirations therefore acquire a special meaning for mankind's future, for they represent the hard core of suffering humanity. Their collective position should make an appropriate impact on the attitudes of developed countries and their peoples.
82.	As the United Nations enters the fourth decade of its existence, I would like to recall in conclusion the words of our former Prime Minister and leader Jawaharlal Nehru, who said on the first day of our independence: "Peace is said to be indivisible; so is prosperity, and so also is disaster in a world that can no longer be split into isolated fragments."
Permit me to join the representatives who have spoken before me in the general debate to proffer to you, Sir, the congratulations of the delegation of Israel on your unanimous election to the high and responsible office of President of the General Assembly.
122.	I also tender my delegation's good wishes to Mr. Gaston Thorn, who presided over the deliberations of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly with such distinction, and to our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his devotion and assiduity in the performance of his onerous duties.
123.	What is the aspect of the'United Nations as it enters into its fourth decade? Physically, the Organization works well. One must ask, however, if the principles of the United Nations Charter, as they were determined in San Francisco 31 years ago, have proved equally resilient; if intellectually and morally the United Nations has withstood the test of experience -the experience of a generation which, although it has been spared the devastation of a world war, has still seen major armed conflict, massacre, political terrorism, slavery, tyranny, persecution, hunger and poverty in all too many areas on the surface of the globe for every minute the United Nations has been in existence. Regrettably, the answer must be negative.
124.	It is indisputable that world public opinion has become increasingly disenchanted with the United Nations; increasingly frustrated by the opportunism and hypocrisy of so much of its debates and decisions; increasingly disgusted by the power of a mechanical majority to bend the Organization to its own purposes, by, for example, transforming an initiative designed to outlaw terrorism into an apologia for terrorism; or by converting the Commission on Human Rights into a forum in which the guilty are the accusers and the innocent condemned, In the twisted terminology which is used here a defeated aggressor is portrayed as a victim, a successful defender as an aggressor; those who refuse to treat with their neighbors are hailed as lovers of peace, and those who seek peace negotiations branded as warmongers.
125.	The list of discrepancies between the current practices of the United Nations and what the Charter says is long, and there is no need to labor the point.
126.	To a great extent the General Assembly has become an arena for empty rhetoric and arbitrary recommendations which have little to do with right, justice and international reality. Indeed, there appears to be no limit to the absurdity which the General Assembly, as it operates today, can reach it even achieved a record in futility by adopting, at the same session, two conflicting resolutions on the same subject.
127.	Two further examples from the record of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly demonstrate that clearly. One is the ludicrous and evil attempt to stigmatize the national liberation movement of the Jewish people as racism and racial discrimination; the other is the bizarre episode of the Committee of 20 members, from the resolution which the General Assembly was not competent to adopt; through the biased and non-representative com-position of the Committee itself, to the report of the Committee which is not only a flagrant intervention in the domestic jurisdiction of a Member State but also a prescription for its dismemberment by stages.
128.	History will consign these resolutions to oblivion, and those countries which supported their adoption will bear the shame.
129.	But the United Nations system is an essential feature of the international scene of our times and it is hardly possible to conceive of a world without it. It must be cured, however, of the grave maladies which afflict it: there must be a return to the Charter; there must be an end to the rancorous confrontation which is the dominant feature of our deliberations; consultation and agreement must be restored to their primary place; the United Nations, and particularly the specialized agencies, must abandon the dangerous path of politicization along which they are being dragged by Arab obsessions about Israel, so that they may devote themselves to the social, humanitarian, scientific and technical tasks which they were set up to perform and which they perform very well when they are allowed to do so; and, lastly, there must be full participation of all Members in all United Nations activities on an equitable basis, by strict alphabetical rotation, instead of the discriminatory bloc system.
130.	The effort to bring into being a new order in international economic and trade relations has become a major focus of interest and debate throughout the world and in the United Nations system.
131.	Israel belongs to a small group of countries in the developing world which, though meagerly endowed by nature, have by hard work and the application of science and technology reached a promising level of development.
These countries have a special role to play because they show what can be done even in the most difficult of circumstances.
132.	It is thus important, I believe, that developing countries consider not only what the fortunate countries of the industrialized world can do for them but what they can do for themselves and what they can do for one another. As our sage Hillel taught some 2000 years ago: "If I am not for myself, who will be for me; but if I am only for myself, what am I; and if not now, when? "
133.	For our part we have tried, at the seventh special session and at the fourth session of UNCTAD, to present some ideas which some delegations found useful and constructive.
134.	What we can best do is to put our experience in overcoming some of the major problems which beset a large part of the developing world at the disposal of all who wish to avail themselves of it. For many years now it has been the policy of the Government of Israel to conduct programs of technical co-operation with other emerging and developing countries and, indeed, it is a source of pride to us that, with all the limitations which nature has imposed on us, and saddled as we are with tremendous burdens caused by the absence of a peace settlement in the Middle East, we are at this very moment co-operating in one technical field or another with over 50 countries represented in this hall.
135.	One such important field is water development in semi-arid climates. In view of the forthcoming United Nations water and desertification conferences scheduled to take place next year, the practical experience of Israel in water exploration and management as well as in the development of highly efficient methods of irrigation, which has already aroused much interest in a number of countries with similar problems to our own, might well prove to be susceptible of wider application.
136.	The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has just concluded its fifth session here in New York, and it is a matter of some disquiet that it has not achieved any significant progress in the direction of an acceptable international agreement.
137.	The trend towards unilateral decisions by individual States concerning the increase in the width of their territorial sea or the proclamation of economic zones is asserting itself without a parallel international reaffirmation of proper rules to guarantee the essential freedom of navigation and overflight on the seas and through and over straits. This is a regrettable situation which cannot but result in an increase in international tensions.
138.	Another problem which is still without solution is that presented by the lofty idea that the sea-bed beyond the economic zones constitutes the common heritage of mankind. A realistic compromise between this concept and its practical application for the benefit of all nations is still apparently far away.
139.	A goodly number of representatives who have spoken before me have raised their voices in condemnation of
international terrorism, which these last few years has spread over the face of the earth like a malignant cancer.
140.	There is no excuse for terrorism. No cause can justify or condone it. It is a criminal activity, totally indiscriminate in its effects, which by design strikes at the very elements of the population that every society tries to protect-the innocent, the weak, the defenseless, children and women.
141.	The record of the United Nations in combating terrorism is dismal. In 1972, after the massacre of the Israeli athletes at the Olympic Games by a gang of Arab terrorists, the Secretary-General proposed an item for the agenda of the General Assembly on measures to prevent terrorism and other forms of violence which endanger or take innocent human lives or jeopardize fundamental freedoms.7 We all know what happened to that praise-worthy venture: it was deliberately sabotaged by a group of States whose interest was not to prevent terrorism but to encourage, aid and abet it on the evident assumption that, because it seemed to serve their own interests, they would be immune from harm.
142.	They were grievously mistaken. Nobody is immune; and some of the States whose representatives were the most eloquent in thwarting any effective United Nations action have themselves been victims of terrorism in the past few weeks-Yugoslavia, India; Egypt and even Syria. Ilie item, now distorted so as to appear like an apology for and justification of terrorism instead of a call for action to suppress it, is still on the agenda of the General Assembly, but is is conceded by all that nothing will ever come of it.
143.	The issue is a fundamental one for the international community, for the attitude this Organization takes on the question of terrorism is a very clear reflection of its moral strength and international responsibility.
144.	The terrorism of today is especially deadly for three principal reasons: the availability to terrorists of sophisticated modern weapons capable of causing mass loss of life and destruction; the complicity of certain States which supply these weapons, frequently delivered in their diplomatic bags, and which provide the terrorists with shelter and comfort; and the abhorrent practice of taking innocent hostages as a means of blackmail.
145.	The rescue by Israel in July of the hostages hijacked to Entebbe in the Air France airbus has shown that given the will it is possible for even a small State to combat terrorism effectively. However, operations such as that would not be necessary if potential hijackers and terrorists knew that nowhere in the world would they get refuge and support.
146.	Israel thus welcomes the proposal made on 28 September by the Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany that the United Nations should draft a convention banning the taking of hostages internationally and providing for the prosecution or extradition of the perpetrators f 7th meeting, para. 113]: This is an important step in the right direction and the General Assembly would lose all credibility as an effective international instrumentality if it failed to take it.
147.	But in view of the extreme gravity of the problem and the sorry performance of the United Nations in dealing with it, we would be deluding ourselves if we imagined that that would be enough. Only by close multilateral co-operation and concerted organized action between States which really intend to fight terrorism will this atrocious crime be suppressed.
148.	The enemies of Israel in this Organization strive mightily to convince the world of similarities between Zionism and apartheid, and make much of the relations between Israel and South Africa to bolster a fraudulent case. Racism and racial discrimination, in any guise, including apartheid, are abhorrent to my country and my people. The basic tenets of Judaism are irreconcilable with any form of racial discrimination. The Jews are the classic victims of racial discrimination and over the centuries our martyrs have run into the tens of millions.
149.	It is equally specious to single out Israel for links with South Africa when most of the world maintains links with that country. According to the latest available statistics, the foreign trade of South Africa totaled over $12 billion in 1974. Of this huge sum Israel's share was less than two fifths of 1 per cent-infinitely smaller than the share of many Arab and some African countries. The armed forces of the Republic are large and equipped with modern weapons -tanks, artillery, aircraft, destroyers and submarines. It is not Israel that supplied them.
150.	In my address to the General Assembly last year  I stated that as far as Israel was concerned we had two criteria for judgment on the policy of detente which was given formal expression in the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. Those criteria are that detente must apply to the Middle East no less than to Europe and to other areas of the world, and that the humanitarian provisions of the Helsinki agreement must be scrupulously applied. On both counts detente has been a grievous disappointment to us.
151.	I declare that detente has not been felt in the Middle East. Moreover, I regret to record that there has been no improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Exit from the Soviet Union-a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Helsinki agreement-is still severely restricted, while those Jews who do insist on their rights are subject to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment, and in some cases to arrest and imprisonment. I once again call on the Government of the Soviet Union to permit those Jews who wish to leave in order to join their families in Israel to do so.
152.	The situation of the Jews of Syria remains tragic: a small community continues to be held as a hostage. Jews are victims of persecution and oppression, are circumscribed in their movements inside Syria, while travel abroad is permitted only under severe restrictions. Surely these 5,000 men, women and children cannot make all that difference to the Government of Syria. Why is it holding them?
153.	When I spoke in the General Assembly last year the war in Lebanon was but six months old. At that time some 5,000 people had already been killed and nearly 18,000 wounded. Twelve months have passed since then; the carnage goes on. By now over 40,000 men, women and children have lost their lives and over 100,000 have been wounded-and this out of a total population of less than 2.5 million. A rough equivalent would be a toll of killed and wounded totaling some 13 million in the United States, 15 million in the Soviet Union and 3 million in France. The ruin and devastation are almost beyond description; most of the flourishing towns and villages of Lebanon have become a bloody and merciless wasteland.
154.	For a year and a half a Member State of the United Nations has been bleeding to death before the eyes of the whole world. At the beginning it was claimed that this was a civil war, and thus outside the purview of the Security Council. No one produces this specious argument now, when massive armed intervention by regular and irregular foreign Arab troops is known and admitted-Syrians, Iraqis and Libyans, to mention only the larger contingents. But not a word from the Security Council, not a whisper.
155.	The silence of the world Organization in the face of this tragedy is an awful warning to all small States. It is clear that a country which relies on the United Nations for its security, a country which cannot defend itself by its own means, is lost.
156.	There is yet another conclusion to be drawn. For years now the world has been bombarded by a propaganda campaign peddling the notion of the replacement of Israel by a so-called secular democratic State where Muslims, Christians and Jews would live in blissful amity. But where is this beautiful mirage now? Destroyed in the fires of Lebanon, by the same gangs of terrorists who are the prime instigators of the blood-letting there in Lebanon.
157.	Israel is an immediate neighbor of Lebanon, and what goes on there concerns us closely. Our overriding desire is that peace and tranquility should be restored to Lebanon, for that is the essential condition for the reaffirmation of the national independence and the territorial integrity of that unhappy land. Moreover, we expect that the future constitutional structure of Lebanon will* be determined by the citizens of Lebanon in their respective communities, and by them alone; that foreign troops, both regular and irregular, will leave the country; and, above all, that Lebanon will not again become a base for attacks on Israel and its people.
158.	But the Lebanese conflict, although the most grave, is not the only current conflict in which countries of the Arab world are engaged. There are many others. A random listing makes, indeed, extraordinary reading.
159.	There is the bitter quarrel between Iraq and Syria. Then comes Iraq's designs on the territorial integrity of, Kuwait; Democratic Yemen's quarrel with Oman, with Yemen and with Saudi Arabia; Somalia's designs on Ethiopia; Egypt's conflict with Syria; Libya's clashes with
Egypt, with Sudan, with Tunisia, with Syria, with Chad and with practically every other independent State in the Arab world and in North Africa; and, finally, the feud between Algeria, Morocco and Mauritania in the Sahara desert.
160.	There is only one island of stability in this stormy sea, and that is the State of Israel.
161.	There is clearly a moral to be drawn here. The neighbors of Israel know that their border with Israel is the safest border they have. They know that if they preserve the peace on the borders with Israel then their own borders are secure. Moreover, their people know full well that when they are in distress they can turn to Israel for humanitarian assistance, as the villagers of South Lebanon are doing this day at the fence of goodwill.
162.	In my speech last year I drew attention to a problem of particular gravity for the prospects of peace as well as for the economic and social well-being of the countries of the Middle East. I refer to the seemingly limitless flow of weapons of war into the region, resulting in a frantic arms race. In the past three years the value of arms supplies delivered by both East and West to the Arab countries in the vicinity of Israel is estimated at $7.5 billion; a further approximately $22 billion worth is contracted for delivery from the end of 1976 onwards, making a total of nearly $30 billion invested in weaponry. This is an utterly staggering sum which is difficult for the human mind to take in. If, instead of being spent on means of destruction, most of this sum was invested in the economic and social development of the area, the Middle East would be transformed and restored to its ancient glory.
163.	However, as long as the Arab States continue to arm themselves with highly sophisticated modern weaponry on this vast scale, Israel is compelled to keep up, and will keep up. But we repeat emphatically that we are prepared now, even before peace is made, to negotiate with our neighbors for a balanced limitation of the inflow of arms into the area in such a manner that the burden will be lightened for all without adversely affecting the security and the defense capacity of any.
164.	It causes us no joy that the Middle East is ablaze with conflict, because the peace that we seek is its principal victim. Therefore, in order to keep up the momentum following on the successful conclusion of the 1974 separation of forces agreements with Egypt and Syria and the 1975 agreement with Egypt, we have tried to take additional steps in the direction of a just and lasting peace in the area.
165.	We have proposed that the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East be reconvened with its original membership. The proposal was torpedoed by the USSR, Syria and Egypt. When it was intimated to us that there was no chance at this time for an overall peace treaty and the normalization of relations, we responded favorably to a United States suggestion to negotiate agreements on the termination of the state of war. This proposal has remained without response or acknowledgment from the Arab side to this day. As far as we are concerned, this possibility still exists.
166.	Israel wants peace, seeks peace and is ready for peace at any time-a peace which will emerge from the region itself, which will break down the wall of hostility dividing the States of the region and which will be shaped by free negotiations between them. We believe that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) form the only agreed basis both for the nature of the peace and for the method of achieving it. For that reason we are ready to take part in a reconvened Geneva Peace Conference, with its original composition, at any time acceptable to all. At such a conference, or by any other means which the parties find satisfactory, we would hope to negotiate with each of our neighbors a final peace settlement based on a fair compromise which, on the one hand, will provide Israel with defensible borders, and, on the other, will satisfy genuine Arab interests, including, within the context of the settlement with our neighbor to the east, a just and constructive solution to the problem of Palestinian Arab identity. Only a peace which serves the interests of Israel and its neighbors will endure.
167.	Peace is the foremost objective of Israel, and its Government will not be deflected from the constant effort required to attain it.
Mr. President, it is my great pleasure to congratulate you on your election as President of this Assembly session. This has been a great year for you. You have already demonstrated your presidential capacity in five sessions of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, and at two of them this year. At the same time your country has been the host for a summit meeting of the non-aligned countries in Colombo.1 Your election as President not only ensures that this session will run with unusual punctuality and efficiency, but also reflects honor on Sri Lanka and on the Asian countries which showed their wisdom in selecting you for this high post.
31.	I offer my warm felicitations to our Secretary-General and his staff on their untiring efforts in the interests of all mankind.
32.	New Zealand, as a fellow member of the Common-wealth, gives a special welcome to Seychelles as the newest Member of the United Nations. In accordance with the principle of universality, New Zealand will support the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam when it comes before this Assembly.
33.	The General Assembly is the great key forum for the discussion of world issues, and the attendance of so many distinguished political figures at this session proves this.
34.	Some might think that New Zealand is not well placed to be much more than an onlooker in such a discussion. We are tucked away at the south end of the world. We are small; we are isolated; we are rather out of the way. But I assure you that any such assumption would be wrong. In spite of our geographical position, we are very much a part of the world. We depend for our livelihood, as much as any other country in the world, on our overseas trade.
35.	When things go wrong with other parts of the world, particularly in the economic sphere, we feel the effects and we feel them heavily and badly. As a result of the recent international recession our economic fortunes have suffered a significant downturn. We are still struggling to put things right, and I am not being pessimistic when I say that we still have a long way to go. Times are difficult for New Zealand. Unemployment has increased, and belts have had to be tightened. All this has inevitably placed strains on our society.
36.	But although we are going through a lean time I have no apprehension about our future. This is because our society is fundamentally strong, and it is strong because it is fundamentally just.
37.	We are multiracial society. We are British, we are Maori, we are Polynesian, we are Chinese, we are Danish, Yugoslav, Indian, Dutch and of many other nationalities. Some might see this cultural diversity as a liability or as a source of friction. We do not. It is a strength. We believe that our society is more mature, more accommodating and richer because we have learned and are still learning to get along together. I will not pretend that stresses do not occasionally arise. The movement in recent years of large numbers of our Maori people to the cities and the immigration of other Polynesians from the Pacific Islands have created problems of adjustment that did not formerly exist. The change from a traditional community life in comparatively isolated rural or island areas to a somewhat frustrating and perplexing one in what may seem to many to be an uncaring city is never easy.
38.	I would claim, however, that the change is perhaps easier to make in New Zealand than in many other places throughout the world, and I believe that is because we have a stronger egalitarian tradition and because we believe that human rights are not the preserve of any one group. Divisions of class, status or cultural background are of less significance than they are perhaps anywhere else in the world. I know that is a bold statement to make, but I believe it to be true. To put it into our colloquial terms, we believe in giving the other chap & "fair go", and it does not matter whether the other chap is a Maori, a Samoan, an Indian, a European, or whatever. We all share the same rights and the same responsibilities.
39.	And this approach is well reflected throughout our history. Representatives might be interested to know that our indigenous people, the Maori, were granted the democratic right of universal suffrage -the "one man, one vote" that we hear so much of today-in 1867: over a hundred years ago. At that time the rest of the New Zealand community still had to have property qualifications in order to vote. The most reliable test of racial harmony is often claimed to lie in the rate of intermarriage between different groups. In New Zealand the rate of intermarriage is so high that it has been estimated that within a generation or two every New Zealander of British or European stock will have at least one close relative of Maori or Polynesian extraction.
40.	As New Zealanders, we have thus come to see clearly that our separate destiny as a nation lies in building upon the heritage of our two main cultures-that of the Polynesian and that of what we call the Pakeha, or European. What we are striving to do is to leave to our children and their children the inheritance of the best of what is to be found in the traditional values of our different cultures.
41.	This has necessarily meant coming to terms with New Zealand's geographical position. As I mentioned earlier, we are located in the far South Pacific, and so New Zealanders of all races have developed a sense of belonging to the Pacific. It is not for us an area that we look on from a long distance and with detachment, as it will be looked on by most people of the world. It is our region.
42.	Our acceptance of this identify has been accelerated by the emergence of new island nations in our neighborhood, and when I talk of "neighborhood" it is pretty vast: I am talking of an area of 2,000 to 4,000 miles wide. It has been fostered, too, by the experience we have had in administering our former Territories, the Cook Islands and Niue. The United Nations was closely associated with the process by which those Territories came to self-government, and New Zealand assisted and welcomed that association.
43.	We were pleased, earlier this year, that a Visiting Mission from the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was able to go to our remaining island Territory, which used to be called the Tokelau Islands, but is from now on to be known simply as Tokelau, to discuss its future. The Mission has since submitted its report [A/31/ 23/Rev.l, chap. XVII, annex]. We in New Zealand are giving most serious consideration to what the report has to say and, of course, particularly to its recommendations. Tokelau comprises an isolated, tiny and thinly settled group of islands. My Government will cp-operate fully with the United Nations in finding ways to meet the expressed wishes of the Tokelau people regarding their future.
44.	The process of political change is at work, not only in New Zealand's corner of the Pacific, but in other parts as well. The South Pacific has sometimes been called a quiet backwater. I doubt that that has ever really been true, and certainly in my long experience the South Pacific has always been a busy place; there is always something going on and some changes taking place.
45.	Yet I also believe it is true that the South Pacific is indeed entering upon a new era: new forms of political co-operation are evolving, notably the South Pacific Forum, in which the heads of government of the independent nations of the South Pacific meet at least once each year, with committees in between times. I had the very great privilege of presiding over the first Forum, which was held in New Zealand in 1971. There is a growing sense of collective interest evident in the work of that Forum. Perhaps the best example of this is the concerted approach its members have adopted towards those aspects of the negotiations on the law of the sea which have very great implications for all those who live in our region.
46.	New leaders have emerged and are emerging. They have new ideas and they are determined to give expression to the expectations of their people. This is a good thing, something to be encouraged. Because of the kinship link New Zealand has with the Pacific people, we are that much more aware of their aspirations for advancement and their aspirations for higher living standards. We are also aware- keenly aware-of the expectations that New Zealand and Australia inspire because we are of the relatively more affluent members of the Pacific family.
47.	My Government is committed to assisting the island countries of the Pacific, and this year a greater share than ever before of New Zealand's aid program is going into the South Pacific countries. A special effort is being made to promote employment opportunities in those countries. We will, however, continue to leave it to those countries themselves to decide their own priorities and the direction in which they wish to go in building towards self- sufficiency.
48.	We are doing all that we can to help. We look also to the United Nations and the specialized agencies to continue their good work in our region. The United Nations Development Program [UNDP], we know, faces a grave resources problem. It has, however, made a valuable contribution to the South Pacific in recent years, and this is an opportunity for me to reinforce the previous representations that the New Zealand Government has made, that the UNDP should maintain its support for the important key projects it has been involved in in the region.
49.	There has recently been a quickening of outside interest in this region. To the extent that it reflects a genuine concern to promote the well-being of the developing countries of the South Pacific, it will be welcome.
50.	Having a special interest in the South Pacific does not mean that we take a parochial view of world economic problems. The same egalitarian tradition which I mentioned earlier, the same concern for the basic human rights, leads us to attach great urgency to early progress in restructuring the world's economic and trading system along more equitable lines. We share Secretary-General Waldheim's own blunt assessment when he said: "A world economically divided could not and would not be politically stable."
51.	As a country heavily dependent on the export of a narrow range of agricultural commodities, New Zealand knows at first hand the difficulties and uncertainties faced by developing countries whose economic progress is dependent upon a stable and remunerative trade in commodities, mainly primary commodities. I have mentioned our own problems arising from the international recession. But we realize fully that many developing countries were hit even harder than we were, and that for them export earnings have shrunk to a level at which their development efforts have been crippled. We believe that improved commodity training arrangements are an essential ingredient of any new international economic order worthy of that name.
52.	Again, as a net importer of investment capital and technology, New Zealand has a special appreciation of the requirement for better and more equitable international arrangements in those two areas. My Government also believes that the daunting debt-servicing problems currently faced by the poorer developing countries demand immediate attention, and in the future the question of the terms of development assistance generally must receive continuing international consideration in a multilateral context.
53.	There has been some progress since the encouraging conclusion of last year's seventh special session of the General Assembly. The Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris and other important meetings, both within and outside the United Nations system, have provided an important element of continuity in the global consultations. The number and the intensity of these meetings reflects a growing recognition of the interrelated nature of our problems and the urgency with which we must tackle them.
54.	The fourth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development [UNCTAD] succeeded in establishing a framework and a time seals for consideration of the key question of the international commodity trade. It cleared the way, at least, for a more detailed analysis of the specific issues involved. These are welcome developments, although less progress was made in other key areas. But in the new climate, consideration of these issues will not be allowed to lapse; the debate is, fortunately, now a continuing one.
55.	International efforts are focused on many different problems-food production, human settlements, the commodities trade, the transfer of science and technology, the flow of development assistance and investment capital, and the restructuring of the United Nations system itself to make it more responsive to the current needs of the world community. In all these efforts New Zealand is committed to full and constructive participation.
56.	One of this Organization's real achievements in its 30-year history has been in the elaboration of standards for basic human rights. We know, however, that despite those standards and despite all the efforts made by men of good will, people in many parts of the world are still being denied their basic human rights. We know, too, that nowhere is the denial as blatant as it is in the countries of southern Africa. The refusal of those who rule South Africa, Namibia and Rhodesia to accept the principle of human equality has caused acute tensions and has brought the situation in the area to a critical stage. Watching the developments of the last few months, we in New Zealand, like people I know in other countries, have had the feeling that we may be seeing the beginning of a maelstrom of violence.
57.	For Rhodesia, time is rapidly running out. Until recently the Smith regime seemed determined to make no concessions to the demand for early majority rule. It has seemed more and more likely that that objective would be achieved only by armed force, with much bloodshed. My Government is, therefore, very encouraged by the decision of Mr. Ian Smith and his colleagues, belated though it may be, to accept majority rule within two years. So the way is now open for negotiations on the detailed arrangements for the transfer of power, and we in New Zealand earnestly hope that, through British good offices, these can soon begin and that they will be successful.
58.	When the Security Council imposed mandatory sanctions on Rhodesia in 1968,  the Government of which I was then head immediately put them into effect in New Zealand. Since then, successive Governments have applied the sanctions consistently and rigorously. After Mozambique had announce d its decision to apply sanctions, and in view of the consequent loss to it, my Government agreed to contribute to the programs of assistance to that country launched by the Commonwealth Secretary-General and the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Although New Zealand is not directly involved, we are prepared to play our part in any international effort to end the bloodshed and to help die people of Rhodesia to achieve a just multiracial society.
59.	Namibia, too, seems dangerously close to the brink of conflict. We in New Zealand believe that South Africa was wrong to go on occupying Namibia after its Mandate was withdrawn, and we have said so consistently. South Africa was even more wrong to try to impose its own policy of apartheid on the people of Namibia. We welcome South Africa's recent acceptance of the goal of independence for Namibia. But independence is meaningless unless it is genuinely based on self-determination. And the refusal of the South African Government to deal with the South West Africa People's Organization [SWAPO] has created a justifiable and reasonable doubt in the minds of African and other countries whether the act of self-determination envisaged by that Government will be fully genuine.
60.	As Namibia was once a League of Nations Mandate, this Organization has a special responsibility towards it: its responsibility is to see that all the people of Namibia are given the opportunity to decide freely for themselves what the future of their country should be. It is essential, therefore, that the United Nations should be given the opportunity and the means to supervise free elections in Namibia and to approve any new constitution for that country.
61.	Much is at stake in Rhodesia and in Namibia, but in the longer term the greatest potential for disaster is in South Africa itself. I think this is obvious to all men. South Africa is not in any means the only country in the world where human rights are consistently violated, and we all know this. But it is the only country where racial discrimination is the basis of the whole social, economic and political system. Our own experience in New Zealand has taught us that racial harmony is essential to the well-being of a multiracial society. The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr: MuldOon, said in a speech about a month ago:
"The New Zealand Government's attitude to apartheid is very clear: we believe it is wrong and we want to see it ended. It should now be plain even to South Africans that apartheid will not work. Based as it is on racial discrimination, it is an unjust and inhuman system. It can be maintained only by the ruthless use of force, and it cannot be maintained that way indefinitely."
62.	The rioting that has been going on around South African cities for over three months now began as a spontaneous explosion of black anger. By ruthless repression, the South African authorities have managed to confine it largely to the black townships. They have not been able to stop it. The outside .world can see that they are in a blind alley. Only a fundamental change of direction can prevent an inevitable escalation of the hatred, violence and bloodshed.
63.	Setting up what are called "homelands", or "bantustans", for. the African people of South Africa will not solve the problem. The black and colored people of South Africa cannot accept being deprived of citizenship in their own country-the country of their birth and the country they have helped to develop. They must be accepted as citizens of South Africa, entitled to a fair share in South Africa's resources. We note that many countries including in particular Britain and the other members of the European Community, have made it clear that they are unable to extend recognition to the Transkei and other homelands as sovereign, independent States:
64.	New Zealand's position is the same. Indeed, I recall that in 1971 New Zealand voted for the resolution adopted by the Assembly condemning the establishment of the bantustans [resolution 2775 E (XXVI)]. Then, as now, a National Party Government was in office in New Zealand. In 1975 New Zealand also supported the Assembly resolution calling upon Governments not to recognize any of the bantustans [resolution 3411D (XXX)]. That action was taken by a Labor Government, but it was in accordance with the policy that the previous Government had initiated. There is a consistent line of policy in New Zealand on this question.
65.	We note with regret that, 31 years after the United Nations Charter was signed, threats to the peace continue to exist in many parts of the world: notably in the Korean peninsula and in the Middle East. Good sense has prevailed here, and we are not going to have another sterile confrontation over Korea at this session, but the fact remains that the border between North and South Korea remains in a state of continuous tension and that talks between the two Governments have reached an apparent stalemate. As a result, Korea remains divided and outside the United Nations.
66.	We feel deeply for the people of Lebanon in the tragic situation in which they find themselves, a situation not of their own choice or of their own making. We are equally concerned at the lack of progress towards a solution of the Cyprus problem, despite the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and others. Again, it is the people of Cyprus who are the innocent victims. We can only join with others in saying that what is needed is simply the implementation of previous Assembly resolutions: the withdrawal of foreign troops, the repatriation of refugees and the resumption of negotiations between the two sides. New Zealand strongly supports this line of action.
67.	This has been an active year in the field of international law-making, although it has not been as productive as most of us would have wished.
68.	New Zealand attaches the greatest importance to the achievement of a new convention on the law of the sea. When you think of that vast area of ocean around us and around the Polynesian islands with which we are so closely associated, you will realize how keenly we are interested in this question. We have, therefore, shared the widespread sense of frustration at the lack of progress during the last session of the Conference on the Law of the Sea on the main issues which are delaying general agreement. We remain committed to the goal of a universally supported treaty on this vital subject. We believe that rapid progress towards this goal is now absolutely essential if the
Conference is not to lose the great chance it has to secure an equitable and stable regime for the world's oceans. In the absence of such progress, New Zealand, like many other States, will inevitably shorten its focus and concentrate on consultations and arrangements within its own region.
69.	I shall turn now to one aspect only of a subject which perhaps overrides all others in its global implications: the question of disarmament.
70.	The aspect that has especially worried New Zealanders is the question of nuclear weapons testing and proliferation. We know that to put an end to the testing of nuclear weapons is not, in itself, a disarmament measure, but we believe that it is an important confidence-building step, an essential preliminary to nuclear disarmament.
71.	It is a great relief to us in New Zealand that the testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere in our part of the world has stopped during the past 12 months. We regret that it continues elsewhere. As recently as yesterday, we have had news of substantial radioactive fall-out right here on our doorstep from a nuclear explosion many thousands of miles away. What the safety level for such fall-out is no one can be sure, but it is obviously desirable that any increase in existing levels should be avoided.
72.	However, that in itself is not enough. Only a comprehensive test-ban treaty, ending weapons testing in all environments and not only in the atmosphere, can be counted as a genuine first step on the road towards nuclear disarmament. One of the main stumbling-blocks to the conclusion of such a treaty has been the question of on-site inspection. We think it is very encouraging that, in a document recently circulated [see A/311232], the Soviet Union has now indicated willingness to consider a com-promise on this issue. The language of the Soviet note is, however, not altogether clear. It is important, we feel, that on-site inspection should not depend entirely on the consent of the State in question.
73.	Another stumbling-block in the way of a comprehensive test-ban agreement has been the unwillingness of certain nuclear Powers to take part in the negotiations. It is our hope that they will take heed cf the increasing concern of world public opinion about the ever increasing growth and proliferation of nuclear weapons and that they will adopt a more co-operative approach.
74.	In this connexion, I stress the need for the utmost control over the exportation of sensitive nuclear facilities and I am thinking particularly of processing plants. Things are bad and dangerous enough now, but they could get very much worse, and even over the short period. The suppliers of nuclear fuel and material have a responsibility not only to themselves but also to the rest of the world to ensure that their commercial activities do not facilitate nuclear weapons proliferation. Profits will be of little value in a nuclear holocaust.
75.	I have touched on several aspects of what I might call a general human rights theme: I have discussed human rights in New Zealand, economic rights in the South Pacific and the developing world generally; I have discussed human rights in southern Africa, and, in relation to disarmament, what I might call the human right to survive. I should like to conclude by referring to one further aspect of the human rights theme, and that concerns the question of international terrorism. I agree absolutely with the comment of the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual report to the Assembly on the work of the Organization that the time has come for a new and determined approach by the international community to this growing and worrying problem [see A/31/l/Add. l, sect. V]. No one can deny that the increasing frequency and scope of acts of terrorism pose a serious threat to the integrity of the whole human society as we know it. My Government therefore welcomes the initiative taken by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on the elaboration of a convention on the taking of hostages and we hope that the Assembly will be prepared to examine it in a positive spirit [A/31/242].
76.	Surely it is not too much to hope that, when this Assembly ends, its work may be marked down as a positive contribution towards strengthening economic, social and political rights, especially of all poor and oppressed peoples everywhere, and to the freeing of all mankind from the fear of nuclear destruction.
On behalf of the Soviet delegation I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the important post of President of the thirty- first session of the United Nations General Assembly. I wish you all success in the performance of this honorable and responsible task.
146.	The United Nations operates uninterruptedly all year round and, like international politics, it knows no interludes. But the annual sessions of such a forum as the General Assembly are of special significance. They provide an opportunity-now to almost 150 States -to scan the political panorama of the world in all its diversity, to identify the main problems that await solution and, most important, to provide by joint efforts, new momentum to international co-operation.
147.	The very emergence of the United Nations as an international organization on the crest of the great victory over the forces of fascism and aggression was an expression of the will of the peoples of the world to prevent another war. In the name of those who perished and those who survived, its founding States declared their determination "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".
148.	Now, as then, the peoples of the world have every right to demand of their political leaders, Governments and parliaments that efforts to strengthen peace be intensified and not slackened.
149.	We are very far from underestimating the United Nations. After all, the Soviet Union is one of its founders. The United Nations has given useful and significant support to the peoples of the world in their struggle for liberation from colonial oppression. It has also made a weighty contribution to getting negotiations under way and preparing agreements which have curbed the arms race in certain areas. In certain cases it has been helpful in extinguishing conflicts. All these things are true.
150.	Nevertheless, if the role of the United Nations is viewed in terms of the problems which still remain on the political agenda of the world there are at least two questions which arise.
151.	First, is the United Nations potential always fully exploited whenever tension grows or blood is shed in any given part of the world? No. The United Nations does not always measure up to the situation. This was true in the case of IndoChina. It is still true in the Middle East. It is true in Cyprus, and it is true in southern Africa.
152.	As a result, people's faith in the effectiveness of the United Nations and its ability to give the necessary support to the victims of aggression is undermined.
153.	When anyone succumbs to the temptation to use force to seize the lands of others or tramples upon the right of peoples to free development, then there arises the question of what has become of his signature on the Charter of the United Nations. No matter how you put it, one thing is clear: such a policy is alien to the interests of peace and to the noble goals in the name of which the new international Organization was brought into being. And this is precisely why all too often the Security Council finds itself paralyzed, while many United Nations resolutions remain mere ink and paper.
154.	The second question is this. Has the United Nations really addressed itself to the task of solving the most burning issue facing mankind today-the elimination of the threat of another world war? Unfortunately this question cannot be answered affirmatively either.
155.	Whenever the General Assembly meets, it discusses at its sessions some hundred items and adopts even more resolutions. At times the resolutions are so eloquent, and their verbal fabric so splendid, that they could be hung around this hall as slogans.
156.	But resolutions are resolutions, and at the same time there is the gigantic machinery of arms production, or, in other words, of material preparation for war, continuing to gather momentum. Figuratively speaking, the globe, or at any rate a sizable part of it, is criss-crossed with assembly lines continuously churning out ever deadlier weapons -land-based, airborne, underwater weapons and whatever others you care to name.
157.	And many political figures who have linked their careers with the arms race and who are building their policies on that basis are clamoring for the development of ever newer weapons of destruction and annihilation. Not satisfied with wingless missiles, they want winged missiles. The B-type bomber no longer suits them. They must have the B-l, or, better still, a C-type.
158.	It is indeed a fact that today the world spends 60 times more money to teach a soldier the ABCs of annihilation than to teach a child the science of creation. And, if one goes through the records of some parliaments, it would appear there is no greater evil than a reduction of military spending. As a result, record-breaking military budgets are being adopted. Those who work at the factory bench and in the fields or who are engaged in scientific and cultural activities are increasingly deprived of funds that could be used for improving nutrition, public health, education, housing and social security.
159.	Science and technology have made tremendous strides forward. Opportunities for raising the material and cultural standards of the people have increased immeasurably. But a huge proportion of the material and intellectual resources of the world are being devoured by the arms race. According to United Nations data, the world today spends on armaments about $300 billion a year, or more than a million dollars every two minutes. In the three hours of this very plenary meeting we are attending, another $90 million worth of means of destruction will have been added to the total.
160.	And what are we to say about the arguments -which have been elevated almost to the rank of theories -of those who preach, with criminal neglect of human life and the achievements of civilization, that it is better to build man's future on radio-active ashes?
161.	We shall not now go into an analysis of the causes of the arms race or their social nature, although of course we could certainly find a few things to say about this too. Now, here in this hall, where States with different social systems are represented, we should focus our attention on what concerns us all equally: the prevention of war and the consolidation of peace.
162.	The Soviet Union rejects the grim conclusion that putting an end to the arms race is beyond human ability. No one can prove that people must either constantly be at war or be preparing for mutual annihilation.
163.	For almost six decades now our country has been guided in its policies by ideas of a different kind, those of peace and friendship among nations. Lenin, the founder of the Soviet State, said, "An end to wars, peace among nations, an end to plundering and violence-that is our ideal...".
164.	The Soviet Union acts in the international arena in close unity and co-operation with its allies and friends, the fraternal socialist States. We are proud that the impact of the socialist countries on the course of world affairs is becoming ever more profound, and we are proud because that impact is used not only in the interests of those States but also for purposes of strengthening universal peace.
165.	Any objective observer can realize that the members of the Warsaw Pact, the countries of the socialist community, bring to international politics a feeling of respect for the independence and sovereignty of all nations and put forward concrete peace-loving initiatives and proposals and serve as a reliable bulwark for peoples fighting for national liberation and social progress.
166.	The Leninist ideas of peace found new, vivid expression in the decisions of the highest forum of our Party, the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, held last spring. Its program of further struggle for peace and international co-operation and for the freedom and independence of the peoples, set out in the report delivered by Leonid Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, is imbued with a sense of profound optimism and an unshakable belief in the possibility of making peace on earth enduring.
167.	As one of the major objectives of the Soviet Union's foreign policy, the Twenty-fifth Congress set the task of seeking to contain the arms race, and then to reverse the trend and begin disarmament. We have put forward numerous specific proposals. Some of them are long-term proposals; others, with goodwill on the part of our partners too, could be implemented in the near future.
168.	Now, what specifically do we have in mind?
169.	The first step would be the curbing of a further build-up of weapons of mass destruction, to be followed by their complete prohibition and elimination. The conscience of mankind demands that ultimately nuclear weapons be eliminated altogether.
170.	The Soviet Union has been, and remains, in favor of the removal of nuclear weapons from the arsenals of States, and of using nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposes. We believe that the nuclear Powers-and all other States could join them-should come to the negotiating table to examine comprehensively the problem of nuclear disarmament and to chart together ways leading to its solution. The Soviet Union is prepared to take part in such negotiations at any time.
171.	Independently of these negotiations, nuclear- weapons testing should be stopped everywhere and by all. This would put an end to the qualitative improvement of those weapons. That is the purpose of the proposal to conclude a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons testing approved by the General Assembly at its last session [resolution 3466 (XXX)]. The start of negotiations on this question is being unjustifiably delayed. The problem here is not the absence of objective conditions -they have long existed-but the unwillingness of some nuclear Powers to begin negotiations.
172.	The question of underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes cannot be allowed to become a stumbling-block: the USSR and the United States have, after all, succeeded in agreeing on this matter, and have recently signed a relevant Treaty.1 2 We hope that this Treaty will soon be ratified by the United States. On our part, there will be no delay.
173.	The problem of verification has been artificially inflated for quite some time now. Advanced techniques for identifying seismic phenomena have eliminated this point of disagreement as well. If, nevertheless, there are some who still harbor doubts on this score, we are confident that a mutually acceptable approach can be found that would remove such doubts.
174.	In short, no room has been left for any plausible excuses which would prevent the completion of the task of prohibiting all nuclear weapons tests.
175.	It is a matter of growing concern that channels for the proliferation of nuclear weapons have not yet been fully blocked. One can only imagine how much greater the risk of nuclear war would become if new States, particularly those in conflict with each other, became involved in the process of developing and stockpiling nuclear weapons.
176.	It is well known that at present international commercial exchanges of nuclear materials are increasing. In some cases, however, it is not sufficiently certain that the possession of fissionable materials could not be used for dangerous purposes or that the means of developing nuclear weapons would not fall into the hands of irresponsible persons, adventurists, or simply madmen. This is not a question of trade, but of politics and security.
12 Treaty on Underground Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes, signed at Washington and Moscow on 28 May 1976 (see document A/31/125).
177.	Surely it follows that the world must be safely protected from all such risks. The way to achieve this is to strengthen the regime on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. We should redouble our efforts to make the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] truly universal and to secure the accession to it of all States, without exception.
178.	The Soviet Union proposes that all chemical means of warfare be completely prohibited and destroyed, as has been done in respect of bacteriological weapons. If all States are not prepared to take such a step, then, to begin with, agreement should be reached on banning and eliminating the most dangerous and lethal types of chemical weapons.
179.	It is not only the means of mass destruction already accumulated that pose a threat: potentially, weapons based on qualitatively new operating principles, in terms of methods of use, targets or effects, could become just as formidable. Today such weapons may exist only as blueprints, mock-ups or ideas, but experience shows that their appearance may not be too far away.
180.	At the last session of the General Assembly, the Soviet Union proposed the conclusion of an international agreement which would preclude the development and production of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction,  Some have asked how you can prohibit something that does not yet exist. However, since the very beginning of the discussion of this matter in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva, it has become evident that there is here a subject for serious discussion. It is vastly more difficult to agree on the elimination of those types of weapons which have already been supplied to armies. The Soviet Union believes that everything possible must be done to prevent the development of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction.
181.	Conventional types of weapons are not normally included among weapons of mass annihilation. But modern tanks, aircraft, cannon and even small arms have been perfected to such a degree that they have actually become instruments capable of wiping out great masses of people.
182.	Since the Second World War, the Soviet Union has repeatedly proposed that conventional types of arms and the strength of armed forces also be reduced. We believe it imperative to discuss these questions as well.
183.	As it always has, the Soviet Union favors the dismantling of all foreign military bases on alien territories. The existence of such bases is one of the main causes of the complications and tensions in the world. This problem is no less urgent today than it was yesterday.
184.	To open up ever new avenues towards the solution of the disarmament problem, efforts are required along many lines. In some cases, the desired result is brought closer by singling out as a subject for negotiation certain types of weapon-say, strategic nuclear missiles. In other cases, the consideration of some particular aspect of the curbing of the arms race in the context of a certain region of the globe is more promising. The Soviet Union is in favor of using either of these approaches, or of combining them when circumstances permit. That also determines the attitude of our country towards regional measures of military detente, including the possibility of creating zones of peace or nuclear-free zones.
185.	We consider it reasonable that a number of Asian and African States desire to turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. In this connexion, the essential point is that there should be no foreign military bases in the area which constitute the main element of a permanent military presence. As for the Soviet Union, it has never had and does not have any intention of building military bases in the Indian Ocean.
186.	In solving the problem of foreign military bases along these lines, the Soviet Union is prepared, together with other Powers, to seek ways of reducing on a reciprocal basis the military activities of non-coastal States in the Indian Ocean and the regions directly adjacent thereto. Our country has shown its readiness to contribute to the realization of the idea of turning the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace, but of course, this should not create any obstacles to freedom of navigation or scientific research in that Ocean. If due account is taken of our approach by the States concerned, the Soviet Union will be able to participate in consultations on matters relating to preparations for convening an international conference on the Indian Ocean.
187.	Among the various methods of securing the curtailment of the arms race there is another one which, as it were, combines the various possibilities, and that is the reduction of military budgets.
188.	Three years ago, the General Assembly approved our proposal that the military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council be reduced by 10 per cent while a part of the money thus saved could be used to provide assistance to developing countries [resolution 3254 (XXIX)]. Because of the position taken by some States, the practical solution of this problem has been blocked. Wishing to break the deadlock in this matter, we are prepared to look for mutually acceptable specific figures with which the reduction could be started. As a first step, a figure either greater or smaller than 10 per cent could be agreed upon as soon as for 1977, next year. But it is necessary to begin negotiations on this question.
189.	The opponents of reductions of military budgets are resorting to every possible means to frustrate any agreement about this. They are endeavoring to prove that inflated military budgets are necessary in the interests of peace, higher employment in industry and the reinforcement of negotiating positions, primarily in negotiations with the Soviet Union. All these arguments are illusory. Those who use them are well aware that they are turning the truth and standing it on its head. But, of course, they do not want to tell the truth. Those who base their policy not on deceiving people but on revealing to them the true causes of such an international phenomenon as an uncontrolled arms race cannot reconcile themselves to that, and they even feel it necessary to say so from this lofty rostrum of the United Nations.
190.	So far, the pace of the arms race has far outstripped the efforts of States to arrest it, and this gap is growing. It is time, and everything possible must be done not only to narrow this gap and even to eliminate it totally, but also to ensure that disarmament negotiations outstrip the arms race in terms of effectiveness, thereby facilitating its termination. The Soviet Union continues to believe that if the elimination of one type of weapon cannot be immediately agreed upon then, to begin with, its production should be substantially limited. But in any case, the important thing is to make a start.
191.	No one today will deny that the arms race has assumed unprecedented dimensions. This makes it imperative for all States, nuclear and non-nuclear, great and small, developed and developing, to combine their efforts to arrest it.
192.	That is why the Soviet Union has proposed, and continues to propose, that the problem of disarmament be considered in its entirety at the broadest and most authoritative forum-a world disarmament conference. An overwhelming majority of the States of the world have declared themselves in favor of convening such a conference. But the implementation of this proposal continues to meet with the objections of some big Powers.
193.	In this regard it has been suggested that it would be appropriate to hold a special session of the General Assembly to discuss disarmament questions. Well, this, too, is a suitable forum if it is viewed as an intermediate stage in the preparations for a world conference. But it must really be a special kind of session, not a routine one. We see its task as that of paving the way for a world conference and finally ensuring a real break-through in solving disarmament problems. Its work must reflect the grave responsibility of all States of the world, especially the great Powers.
194.	Such, fundamentally, is our approach to the problem of stopping the arms race and of disarmament. Such is the essence of the Soviet Union's memorandum on these questions which we are submitting for consideration at this session and circulating as an official document of the United Nations [A/31/232],
195.	Some of the provisions of the memorandum have already been proposed earlier by us, and others have been put forward for the first time. I should like to express the confidence that this important document will be viewed by States Members of the United Nations as reflecting the sincere efforts of the Soviet Union, of our people, to help banish the threat of a world war of annihilation.
196.	Neither in the years preceding the Second World War nor in the first few post-war decades did there exist the objective conditions for making progress towards ending the arms race and towards disarmament such as those that exist today. It will be recalled that it has recently proved possible to achieve international understandings which impose certain limits on the arms race in some areas. As far as one can judge, an important agreement on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques seems to be within reach. A number of questions relating to disarmament are now being discussed among States.
197.	Pride of place belongs, for obvious reasons, to the continuing talks between the Soviet Union and the United States of America on strategic arms limitation. The importance of these talks far transcends the interests of just our two countries. We are ready actively to continue our efforts to translate the well-known Vladivostok understanding into the text of an agreement.
198.	There can hardly be anyone who would doubt that the fullest guarantees of peace will be provided by general and complete disarmament. Ever since Lenin's days, Soviet foreign policy has been aimed at achieving that ultimate goal.
199.	But along with efforts to solve that historic task, it is possible and necessary to seek by other means, too, a reduction of the risk of the outbreak of war. Now, what is of decisive importance today? Above all, a firm agreement between States not to use force in international relations.
200.	It could be argued that the principle of the renunciation of the use or threat of force is already embodied in the United Nations Charter. This is true. But it is also true that many States are seeking ways of putting this principle into practice. It is no accident that it was considered necessary to lay special emphasis on it in recent bilateral and multilateral international treaties and agreements.
201.	The principle of the non-use of force has been developed in detail in the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The need to abide strictly by this principle has on more than one occasion been stressed by non-aligned States, and particularly at their highest forums.
202.	There is another important consideration. When the Charter of the United Nations was being signed, nuclear weapons were virtually non-existent. Their emergence-and especially their growth into a huge complex of various kinds and types of weapon-is a qualitatively new factor. It radically changes our concepts of the consequences of armed conflict. Therefore, it was not without reason that the General Assembly of the United Nations in its special resolution adopted in 1972 linked renunciation of the use of force with the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. Thus, the question of how States should deal with each other without seriously endangering the security of the peoples of the world has not become a whit less urgent.
203.	There are certainly enough unresolved problems in today's world. They were bequeathed to us by the Second World War and the period of the "cold war", and they continue to arise now and again in the course of the current development of international relations.
204.	These knots of differences among States should be untied and outstanding problems should be resolved at the conference table, by peaceful means. The principle of renunciation of the use of force must become an iron law of international affairs. That is the purpose of the proposal made from the rostrum of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union concerning the concluding of a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations.
205.	We note with satisfaction that that proposal has met with a broad response and has aroused the interest of many States. At the same time, we are asked what the Soviet Union has in mind in terms of the specific contents of such a treaty.
206.	The answer to this question is to be found in the draft world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations which the Soviet Union is submitting to the General Assembly [A/311243].
207.	The essence of the proposed treaty lies in the idea that in their relations with each other, as well as in their international relations in general, all parties to it will strictly abide by the undertaking to refrain from the use or threat of force either against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
208.	They will accordingly refrain from the use of armed forces involving the employment of any types of weapon, including nuclear weapons, on land, at sea, in the air and in outer space and will not threaten to use such forces.
209.	They will have to reaffirm the undertaking to settle disputes among themselves solely by peaceful means in such a way as not to endanger international peace and security.
210.	There is, of course, a fundamental difference between the launching of hostilities for the purposes of aggression and the legitimate right to repel aggression or eliminate its consequences. Can the Arabs, for instance, resign themselves to the loss of their lands? And do the colonial peoples have no right to fight for their independence till final victory? They do indeed have an inalienable right to that.
211.	The substance of the matter is the prevention of aggression. In this case there will be no further need to use force to repel it. The source of the evil is aggression and not the desire to restore justice; that is the cause and not its effect. Underlying our draft treaty -and I want to lay special emphasis on this -is the definition of aggression worked out by the United Nations, and everyone voted in favor of that document [resolution 3314 (XXIX)].
212.	The treaty takes fully into account the system of bilateral and multilateral relations of States that has developed in the world. One of its articles provides that nothing in the treaty affects the rights and obligations of States under the United Nations Charter and treaties and agreements concluded by them earlier.
213.	It is envisaged that the treaty would be open for signature by any State of the world at any time. This means that, first, it would be of a general, universal nature. Secondly, for the signatory States the treaty would enter into force upon ratification. Consequently, there would be no need to wait for the accession to the treaty of a specific number of countries.
214.	According to our draft, the Secretary-General of the United Nations would be the depository of the treaty. The United Nations as a whole would be called upon to lend all its moral and political prestige in support of the treaty.
215.	The conclusion of the treaty we are proposing would be a major step bringing the world closer to the time when it will prove possible to eliminate entirely the threat of war and aggression. Supplementing and reinforcing the provisions concerning the non-use of force contained in various international instruments, the treaty would offer new and more reliable guarantees of security to all countries, big and small, and strengthen their confidence that their peaceful life would not be disrupted.
216.	The treaty would undoubtedly also expedite the implementation of effective disarmament measures. The draft clearly provides that the parties will make all the necessary efforts to that end.
217.	Whose rights and interests would be infringed by such a treaty? Who would fail to benefit from it? Every State that really wants peace and international co-operation would stand to gain from it. The conclusion of such a treaty would be of benefit to peace throughout the world.
218.	The Soviet Union hopes that the General Assembly will thoroughly consider the proposal to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations and declare itself in favor of it.
219.	These are the new and concrete initiatives designed to stop the arms race and exclude the use of force in relations among States which have been proposed by the Soviet Union in this important forum. We are convinced that the fundamental strengthening of the bulwark of universal peace depends to a decisive degree on progress precisely in those two directions. The political climate in the world and the processes of relaxation of international tension prevailing in it are conducive to an undertaking of the implementation of these initiatives in a practical and serious manner.
220.	The relaxation of tension and the attitude of States towards it are now in the searchlight of world politics. This alone shows that detente is not a myth or a catchword. Underlying it is a real change-over from confrontation and brinkmanship to peaceful and mutually beneficial co-operation among States and the investing of such co-operation with ever greater material content.
221.	Not a single State, not a single Government-if, of course, it really wishes to remain in touch with reality should hesitate in choosing its policy: either to promote the further reduction of tension and the elimination of the remnants of the cold war or to kindle conflict and friction. Every Government, every statesman should consider it an honor to be in the mainstream of the forces working for the further reduction of tension in the world.
222.	Statesmen who are directly responsible for the foreign policy of their countries should be imbued with the awareness that the course towards solving international problems, including the most urgent and complicated ones, through negotiations -and negotiations alone- equally serves the interests of all peoples and all States. And if that is so, then is it permissible to favor detente today and oppose it tomorrow? Is is permissible, while talking about one's desire to improve relations among States, particularly among the major Powers, at the same time in actual fact to follow in the wake of those who in major politics see no further than the buttons on their military tunics? To invoke in this regard some kind of considerations of domestic policy means to regard detente as the mere small change of political dealings, and not as a firm and noble guideline for ensuring peace,
223.	Some attempts have also been made to interpret detente as if it almost amounted to sanctioning interference in the domestic affairs of other States. How else can one describe the false solicitude of certain people for the rights of citizens in other countries? In actual fact these people are extolling those renegades who believe that the laws of their own country were not written for them to obey. Those who display such touching solicitude for them should open their eyes and take a good look at themselves and around them and see how matters stand in their own house in so far as real, not imaginary, human rights violations are concerned.
224.	We believe that the foreign policy of States in matters relating to peace should be determined and pursued consistently and in good faith. We welcome statements precisely in favor of such a policy from the rostrum of this world Organization. As for the Soviet Union, its position has been determined with utmost clarity by the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Expressing the will of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, of the entire Soviet people, Leonid Brezhnev has stated that our country would
"...do everything possible to deepen international detente and to embody it in concrete forms of mutually beneficial co-operation between States,"
That is our firm foreign policy line, one which the Soviet Union will steadfastly follow.
225.	Experience has shown that if States, no matter how different, take account of reality and exert their will for the same goal-the strengthening of peace- the results are impressive. Europe is a compelling example of that. The year that has passed since the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe shows that the development of the situation there is, on the whole, marked by a realization of the understanding approved at Helsinki.
226.	There are, however, some who are not averse to grumbling. There are various things in the Final Act of the all-European Conference which are not to their liking. We also could point out quite a number of provisions which do not go as far as we would like. But what has been accepted by all the participants and solemnly sealed by the signatures of the leaders of States should be implemented-and implemented fully. That naturally applies also to the clauses relating to the inadmissibility of outside interference in the domestic affairs of States. That is how the Soviet Union acts and intends to act.
227.	Of course, this is not only a question of the Helsinki decisions. All the treaties and agreements concluded in recent years in the interests of a peaceful future for Europe should be scrupulously observed by all parties. I should like to emphasize particularly that attempts to undercut the Quadripartite Agreement on West Berlin, which has been serving the cause of improving the situation in the center of the European continent for five years now, run counter to these interests.
228.	In the light of the results of the all-European Conference new possibilities have opened up for expanding relations between States in Europe in the political, economic, scientific and technological fields, as well as in the sphere of culture, contacts, information and education. The Soviet Union has put forward concrete proposals for organizing multilateral co-operation in such important fields as energy production, transport and protection of the environment.
229.	The task of supplementing political detente with military detente is now coming to the fore in European affairs. What does that mean primarily? It means a successful conclusion of the Vienna talks on mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe, where the concentration of armed forces and armaments is higher than in any other part of the world.
230.	The Soviet Union and other socialist countries taking part in the negotiations are seeking to make the discussions constructive. We have given figures with regard to the total strength of the armed forces of the Warsaw Treaty countries stationed in the zone of reductions, including land forces. It is now our partners' turn to respond. If no attempts are made to obtain unilateral military advantages, the negotiations in Vienna will also succeed.
231.	It is well known how important for the international situation is the state of Soviet-American relations. As a result of the agreements and understandings reached between the USSR and the United States of America in previous years, the necessary conditions have been created for continuing to build those relations on a constructive foundation.
232.	So far as concerns the Soviet Union, it is not guided in its policy by temporary considerations of the moment. The true interests of both countries and the interests of peace are served by only one course of action-that of acting in conformity, with a course jointly formulated in recent years, with the spirit and letter of the agreements that have been concluded. The Soviet Union expects that the United States will proceed precisely in that way. That will primarily determine further developments.
233.	Relations between the Soviet Union and France are developing in a favorable direction. This is something which has been reflected in the signing of many agreements, including the Declaration on the further development of friendship and co-operation, singed last October. The recent Soviet-French agreement to prevent the accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons  is along the same lines. In so far as concerns the Soviet Union, we will consistently follow the line we have taken in our relations with France.
234.	A great deal of what has been achieved in relations between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany and, above all, the conclusion of the Moscow Treaty between the two States on 12 August 1970, has marked the end of a whole phase in the post-war history of Europe. A fundamentally important page was turned in the right direction. The Soviet Union believes that further development and deepening of co-operation with the Federal Republic of Germany-in the expectation, naturally, that the policy of that country will be determined by the interests of peace, including the interests of peaceful development and good neighborliness in Europe is desirable.
235.	The relations between the Soviet Union and practically all States which are known as "Western"-Great Britain or Denmark, Italy or Belgium, Canada or Sweden- are increasingly assuming the character of normal, mutually advantageous co-operation.
236.	The successes of the policy of detente by no means signify that it no longer has any opponents. Ill-assorted forces often presenting a common front against it are easily found in Europe and elsewhere-in fact, they reveal themselves every day.

231. The fruits of the policy of detente must be accessible to all peoples. It is well known, however, that the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus are still threatened. Tensions in the Middle East have not abated.
238.	There can be no doubt that, so long as the occupation by Israel of Arab lands continues, so long as the legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine are trampled upon, the Middle East will continue time and again to be in a state of fever.
239.	It is now common knowledge that thousands of people have been killed or crippled in Lebanon in recent months. The tragic events which have occurred in that country are the direct result of imperialist aggression against the Arabs. The events in Lebanon are a direct consequence of the lack of an overall settlement in the Middle East. The blow is being aimed primarily against the patriots of Lebanon and the valiant Arab people of Palestine, whose just struggle cannot but evoke our admiration.
240.	The Soviet Union believes that the crisis in Lebanon must be settled in a peaceful, democratic way by the Lebanese themselves, without any outside interference, on the basis of the preservation of the territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of Lebanon.
241.	The protracted nature of the tension in the Middle East gives us no grounds for concluding that the situation there is hopeless. A good basis for establishing peace in that area has been worked out through the efforts of many
States, including the Soviet Union. What it boils down to is: the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied in 1967; the satisfaction of the legitimate national demands of the Arab people of Palestine, including their inalienable right to create their own State; and the furnishing of international security guarantees for all States in the Middle East, including Israel.
242.	Is there anything here that could fail to be to anyone's liking, provided that there is a real intention to live in peace with one's neighbors?
243.	Unfortunately, the international machinery for producing the necessary agreements on the Middle East-the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East-is still inactive. The Soviet Union is in favor of a resumption of its work, and the sooner the better, for a consideration by it of all the major issues involved in a Middle East settlement—I repeat, all the major issues involved in such a settlement.
244.	It is becoming ever more urgent to spread detente to Asia. Conditions are ripening there for tire consolidation of peace through the joint efforts of the Asian States. This is demonstrated by a fact of vast historical significance- the end of the war in IndoChina and the formation of a new major peace-loving State, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Soviet Union is confident that the voice of an independent, united Vietnam will soon be heard from this rostrum too. We insist that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam be admitted to the United Nations without delay.
245.	Friendly co-operation between the Soviet Union and India is an important stabilizing factor in the Asian continent. Mutual understanding and confidence between the two States were vividly manifested once again during the recent visit to the Soviet Union of Mrs. Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister of the Republic of India.
246.	Along with the trend towards an improvement of the situation in Asia, there are other facts. In that part of the world, too, circles are active which are by no means loath to create tension by stepping up military preparations, particularly in the area bordering on the southern frontiers of the Soviet Union. History knows how such efforts have ended and this should not be forgotten.
247.	The question of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea should be finally resolved. We support the proposals of the Korean Democratic People's Republic for the peaceful reunification of Korea without outside interference. As we know, last year's session of the General Assembly adopted a resolution in this regard [resolution 3390 (XXX)] on the creation of favorable conditions for converting the armistice in Korea into a lasting peace and for expediting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. That resolution should be put into effect.
248.	The Soviet Union continues, as it has done in the past, to attach great importance to its relations with the People's Republic of China. The normalization of those relations would undoubtedly have a positive effect on the situation in Asia, and, indeed, have even wider international repercussions. Our position in this respect as regards the People's Republic of China has been made quite clear by the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and that position is fully valid today.
249.	The situation in the south of Africa is a subject requiring the most serious attention. The rulers of the Republic of South Africa and of Southern Rhodesia and all those who support and arm them are now demonstrating and would have us believe that they have resigned themselves to the inevitability of the process of national liberation and that they are trying to adapt themselves to it.
250.	But in actual fact everything possible is still being done to repress the just struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and of the indigenous people of the Republic of South Africa for their legitimate rights and for an end to the hateful policy of racism. Every possible method is being resorted to, from direct suppression and violence to attempts to divert the national liberation movement from genuine independence and freedom through political gimmickry and financial hand-outs.
251.	What is being sought from these people before the eyes of the whole world? A renunciation of their inalienable right to free and independent development, a development along the path of social progress. But we are confident that the inexorable course of events and the facts of life itself with its political realities will put everything in its proper perspective. Peoples have learned and have learned well to distinguish between truth and falsehood.
252.	Today, as always, the Soviet Union stands firmly by the side of the fighting peoples of southern Africa. We are in favor of the unconditional ending of the policy of apartheid and racism in South Africa, of the immediate withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia, of the unreserved transfer of all power to the people of Zimbabwe. No one will ever see the Soviet Union failing to oppose attempts to prolong colonial and racist oppression under whatever guise.
253.	It is worth recalling, particularly in this hall, that on 14 December 1960 thunderous applause greeted the adoption of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)]. Its adoption signified that historically the hour had struck for the complete elimination of colonial domination in the world.
254.	We have all witnessed the failure of the attempt to stifle with the help of arms the young independent State of the People's Republic of Angola. If there are still Governments which would impede the exercise of its legitimate right to participate in the work of the United Nations, they stand to gain nothing by that action; they only stand to lose. Angola will without any doubt take its lawful and proper place in this hall.
255.	We should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Republic of Seychelles on its admission to the United Nations and to wish the people of that country success in the building of a new life.
256.	Thousands of miles separate the Soviet Union from Latin America, but our people have feelings of friendship towards its peoples and wish to have good relations with Latin American countries. So much greater, then, are our bitterness and indignation at tHe unabated violations of human rights and liberties in several parts of that continent, primarily in Chile, where these rights and freedoms are being flagrantly and criminally trampled under foot. Together with all progressive mankind we demand freedom for Luis Corvalan, arrested three years ago, and for other Chilean democrats.
257.	Recently, problems of the restructuring of international economic relations have been assuming increasing importance in world affairs. We support the just demands of the developing countries to do away with discrimination and artificial barriers in international trade, to eliminate all instances of inequality, the imposition of will and exploitation in international economic relations. On behalf of the Soviet Union, the Soviet delegation intends to make a special statement on these matters at this session of the General Assembly.
258.	Among topical issues of international affairs a prominent place now belongs to questions relating to the co-operation of States in the uses of the world's oceans. A search for ways of establishing such co-operation is, as we know, under way at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, the latest round of which came to an end just a few days ago, The Soviet Union believes that the issues facing that Conference should be resolved by its participants on a mutually acceptable basis. No one should try to impose on the Conference any arbitrary or one-sided decisions which have nothing in common with the interests of justice and the fruitful co-operation of States in such an important field as the use of the world's oceans.
259.	The present international situation is far from being monochrome. Along with the positive changes which have occurred in the world, which have been characteristic of recent times, certain phenomena of a different kind have been noted, namely, opposition to detente. This requires the vigilance and active efforts of all those who cherish the cause of peace. And yet the overall political background of the world today gives grounds for looking to the future with optimism,
260.	The States of the socialist community have thrown their prestige, their material and foreign policy resources onto the scales of the policy of defending peace. The newly independent countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America have resolutely favored the strengthening of international security. This has also been demonstrated by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries in Colombo.
261.	A sound tendency is emerging in the policy of a number of capitalist States and gathering momentum, although not without snags. The essence of this trend is the recognition in practice of the principles of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems. Certain public circles, movements and political parties which consistently advocate peace among nations and social progress are being listened to more and more.
262. We are convinced that, in the light of present-day dynamics of the correlation of forces in the world, with detente making ever more confident headway, the United Nations should exploit all its possibilities as a reliable instrument for maintaining and strengthening peace. But it will be able to fully evince this quality only when all its Member States are firmly abiding by its Charter and observing it.
263.	The Soviet Union unswervingly strives to ensure that the questions discussed at sessions of the General Assembly are resolved in such a way as to be of benefit to the peace, co-operation, freedom and independence of the peoples of die world. And at this session too we are determined to co-operate constructively with all those who support these great humane goals which meet the aspirations of all peoples.
Let me first congratulate this body for electing Ambassador Amerasinghe of Sri Lanka to preside over this thirty-first session of the General Assembly. He is a diplomat of great, international stature who, among his many distinctions, has provided indispensable leadership to the crucial negotiations on the law of the sea.
144.	I would also like to pay a tribute to the Secretary- General for his tireless efforts on behalf of the world community. He successfully embodies the Charter's prin¬ciples of fairness, impartiality and dedication to the causes of global peace and human dignity.
145.	The United Nations was born of the conviction that peace is both indivisible and more than mere stability, that for peace to be lasting it must fulfill mankind's aspirations for justice, freedom, economic well-being, the rule of law and the promotion of human rights. But the history of this Organization has been, in considerable measure, the gradual awareness that humanity would not inevitably share a single approach to these goals.
146.	The United Nations has survived-and helped to manage-30 years of vast change in the international system. It has come through the bitterness of the cold war. It has played a vital role in the dismantling of colonial empires. It has helped to moderate conflicts, and is even now manning truce lines in critical parts of the world. It has carried out unprecedented efforts in such areas as public health, development assistance and technical co-operation.
147.	But the most important challenge for this Organization still lies ahead: to vindicate mankind's positive and nobler goals and help nations to achieve a new understanding of community.
148.	With modern communications, human endeavor has become a single experience for peoples in every part of the globe. We share the wonders of science and technology, the trials of industrialization and social change, and a constant awareness of the fate and the dreams of our fellow men.
149.	The world has shrunk, but the nations of the world have not come closer together. Paradoxically, nationalism has been on the rise at the precise time when the most serious issues we all face can only be resolved through a recognition of our interdependence.
150.	Fragmentation has affected even this body. Nations have taken decisions on a bloc or regional basis, or by rigid ideologies, before even listening to the debate in these halls; on many issues positions have been predetermined by prior conferences containing more than half the membership of the United Nations. The tendency is widespread to come here for battle, rather than negotiation. If these trends continue, the hope for world community will dissipate and the moral influence of this Organization will progressively diminish.
151.	This would be a tragedy. Members of this Organization are today engaged in a multiplicity of endeavors to find just solutions for complex and explosive problems. There is a fragile tranquility, but beneath the surface it is challenged by fundamental forces of change -technological, economic and social. More than ever, this is a time for statecraft and restraint, for persistence but also for daring in the pursuit of peace and justice. The doctrines of perpetual strife produce only bloodshed and bitterness; they unleash the forces of destruction and repression and plant the seeds of future conflict. Appeals to hatred-  whether on the basis of race or class or color or nationality or ideology-will in the end rebound against those who launch them and will not advance the cause of freedom and justice in the world. 
152.	Let us never forget that the United Nations benefits the smaller and Weaker nations most of all; for without the rule of law, disputes will be settled as they hive been all too frequently and painfully in history: by tests of strength. It is not the weak that will prevail in s world of chaos.
153.	The United States believes that this thirty-First session of the General Assembly must free itself of the ideological and confrontational tactics that marked some of its predecessors and dedicate itself to a program of common action.
154.	The United States comes to the General Assembly prepared to work co-operatively on programs of common action. We will offer concrete proposals. We will listen carefully to the ideas of others. We will resist pressure and we shall seek co-operation.
155.	Let me, in this spirit, discuss the three principal challenges we face: the problem of peace, the challenge of economic well-being, and the agenda of global interdependence.
156.	The age of the United Nations has also been an age of frequent conflict. We have been spared a third world war, but we cannot assume that this condition will prevail forever or without exertion. Our generation must build out of the multitude of nations a structure of relations that frees the energies of nations and peoples for the positive endeavors of mankind, without die fear or the threat of war.
157.	Central to American foreign policy are our sister democracies, the industrial nations of North America, Western Europe, the southern Pacific and Japan, and our traditional friends in the Western Hemisphere. We are bound to these nations by ties of history, civilization, culture, shared principles and generations of common endeavors.
158.	Our alliances, founded on the bed-rock of mutual security, now reach beyond the common defense to a new range of issues: the social challenges shared by the advanced technological societies; common approaches to easing tensions with our adversaries; and shaping positive relations with the developing world. The common efforts of the industrial democracies are not directed at exclusive ends, but as a bridge to a broader, more secure and co-operative international system and to increasing freedom and prosperity for all nations.
159.	The United States is proud of its historical friendships in the Western Hemisphere. In the modern era these friendships must be, and they are, based on equality and mutual benefit. We have a unique advantage in this Hemisphere: the great dialog between the developed and the developing nations can find its most creative solution in the Hemisphere where modern democracy was born, and where co-operation between developed and developing, large and small, is a long-standing tradition.
160.	Throughout history, ideology and power have tempted nations to seek unilateral advantage. But the inescapable lesson of the nuclear age is that the politics of tests of strength has become incompatible with the survival of humanity. Traditional power politics becomes irrational when war can destroy civilized life and when neither side can gain a decisive strategic advantage.
161.	Accordingly, the great nuclear Powers have particular responsibilities for restraint and vision. They are in a position to know the full extent of the catastrophe which could overwhelm mankind. They must take care not to fuel disputes if they conduct their rivalries by traditional methods; if they turn local conflicts into aspects of a global competition, sooner or later their conflicts will grow out of control.
162.	The United States believes that the future of mankind requires coexistence with the Soviet Union. Tired slogans cannot obscure the necessity for a more constructive relationship. We will insist that restraint be reciprocal, not just in bilateral relations, but around the globe. There can be no selective detente. We will maintain our defenses and our vigilance. But we know also that tough rhetoric is not strength and that we owe future generations more hopeful prospects than a delicate equilibrium of awesome forces.
163.	Peace requires a balance of strategic power. This the United States will maintain. But the United States is convinced that the goal of strategic balance is achievable more safely by agreement than through an arms race. The negotiations on the limitation of armaments are therefore at the heart of United States-Soviet relations.
164.	Unprecedented agreements limiting and controlling nuclear weapons have been reached. An historic effort has been made to place a ceiling on the strategic arsenals of both sides in accordance with the Vladivostok communique of 24 November 1974. And once this is achieved we are ready to seek immediately to lower the levels of strategic arms.
165.	The United States welcomes the recent progress that has been made in further curtailing nuclear-weapons testing and in establishing a regime for peaceful nuclear explosions for the first time. The two treaties now signed and awaiting ratification should be the basis for further progress in this field.
166.	Together with several of our European allies, we are continuing efforts to achieve a balanced reduction in the military forces facing each other in central Europe. In some respects this is the most complex negotiation on arms limitation yet undertaken. It is our hope that, through patient effort, reciprocal reductions will soon be achieved that enhance the security of all countries concerned.
167.	But coexistence and negotiations on the control of arms do not take place in a vacuum. We have been disturbed by the continuing accumulation of Soviet armaments and by recent instances of military intervention to tip the scales in local conflicts in distant continents. We have noted crude attempts to distort the purposes of peaceful diplomacy and to impede hopeful progress towards peaceful solutions to complex issues. These efforts only foster tensions; they cannot be reconciled with the policy of improving relations, and they will inevitably be
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
uneasy armistice, both sides must recognize that ideology and power politics today confront the realities of the nuclear age and that a striving for unilateral advantages will not be accepted.
168.	In recent years, the new relationship between the United States and the People's Republic of China has held great significance for global security.
169.	We came together out of necessity and a mutual belief that the world should remain free of military blackmail and the will to hegemony. We have set out a new path -in wide-ranging consultations, bilateral exchanges, the opening of offices in our respective capitals and an accelerating movement towards normalization. And we have derived reciprocal benefits- a clearer understanding of the aspirations of our peoples, better prospects for international equilibrium, reduced tensions in Asia and increased opportunities for parallel actions on global issues.
170.	These elements form the basis for a growing and lasting relationship founded on objective common interest. The United States is committed to strengthen the bonds between us and to proceed towards the normalization of our relations in strict conformity with the principles of the Shanghai communique of 27 February 1972. As this process moves forward, each side must display restraint and respect for the interests and convictions of the other. We will keep Chinese interests in mind on all international issues and will do our utmost to take account of them. But if the relationship is to prosper, there must be similar sensitivity to our views and concerns.
171.	On this basis, the progressive development of our relations with the world's most populous nation will be a key element of the foreign policy of the United States.
172.	The world today is witness to continuing regional crises. Any one of them could blossom into larger conflict. Each one commands our most diligent efforts of conciliation and co-operation. The United States has played, and is prepared to continue to play, an active role in the search for peace in many areas -southern Africa, the Middle East, Korea and Cyprus. Let me deal with each of these.
173.	Racial injustice and the grudging retreat of colonial power have conspired to make southern Africa an acid test of the world's hope for peace and justice under the Charter. A host of voices have been heard in this chamber warning that, if we failed quickly to find solutions to the crises of Namibia and Rhodesia, that part cf the globe could become a battleground with consequences for every part of the world.
174.	I have just been to Africa, at President Ford's request, to see what the United States could do to help the peoples of that continent achieve their aspirations to freedom and justice.
175.	An opportunity to pull back from the brink now exists. I believe that Africa has before it the prize for which it has struggled so long-the opportunity for Africans to shape a future of peace, justice, racial harmony and progress.
176.	The United Nations since its beginning has been concerned with the issue of Namibia. For 30 years that Territory has been a test of this institution's ability to make its decisions effective.
177.	In recent months, the United States has vigorously sought to help the parties concerned speed up the process towards Namibian independence. The United States favors the following elements: the independence of Namibia within a fixed, short time-limit; the calling of a constitutional conference at a neutral location under the aegis of the United Nations; and the participation in that conference of all authentic national forces, including specifically the South West Africa People's Organization Progress has been made in achieving all those goals. We will exert our efforts to remove the remaining obstacles and bring into being a conference which can then fashion, with goodwill and wisdom, a design for the new State of Namibia and its relationship with its neighbors. We pledge our continued solicitude for the independence of Namibia so that it may, in the end, be a proud achievement of this Organization and a symbol of international co-operation.
178.	Less than a week ago the Rhodesian authorities announced that they were prepared to meet with the nationalist leaders of Zimbabwe to form an interim Government to bring about majority rule within two years. That is in itself an historic break from the past. The African Presidents, in calling for immediate negotiations, have shown that, they are prepared to seize this opportunity. And the Government of the United Kingdom, in expressing its willingness to assemble a conference, has shown its high sense of responsibility and concern for the rapid and just independence of Rhodesia.
179.	Inevitably, after a decade of strife, suspicions run deep; many obstacles remain. Magnanimity is never easy, and less so after a generation of bitterness and racial conflict. But let us not lose sight of what has been achieved: a commitment to majority rule within two years; a commitment to form immediately a transitional Government with an African majority in the cabinet and an African prime minister; and a readiness to follow that with a constitutional conference to define the legal framework of an independent Zimbabwe.
180.	The United States, together with other countries, has made major efforts; and we will continue to do what we can to support the hopeful process that is now possible. But it is those in Africa who must shape the future. The people of Rhodesia and the neighboring States now face a supreme challenge. Their ability to work together and their capacity to unify will be tested in the months ahead as never before.
181.	There may be some countries which see a chance for advantage in fueling the flames of war and racial hatred; but they are not motivated by concern for the peoples of Africa, or for peace. And if they succeed they could doom opportunities that might never return.
182.	In South Africa itself, the pace of change accelerates. The system of apartheid-by whatever name-is a denial of our common humanity and a challenge to the conscience of
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
have shown wisdom in facilitating a peaceful solution in Rhodesia. The world community takes note of it and urges similar wisdom-while there is still time-to bring racial justice to South Africa.
183.	As for the United States, we have become convinced that our values and our interests are best served by an Africa seeking its own destiny, free of outside intervention. Therefore we will back no faction, whether in Rhodesia or elsewhere; we will not seek to impose solutions anywhere. The leadership and the future of an independent Zimbabwe, as for the rest of Africa, are for Africans to decide. The United States will abide by their decision. We call on all other non-African States to do likewise.
184.	The United States wants no special position or sphere of influence in Africa. We respect African unity. The rivalry and interference of non-African Powers would make a mockery of Africa's hard-won struggle for independence from foreign domination. It will inevitably be resisted.
185.	Every nation which has signed the Charter is pledged to allow the nations of Africa, whose peoples have suffered so much, to fulfill at long last their dreams of independence, peace, unity and human dignity in their own way and by their own decisions.
186.	The United Nations, since its birth, has been involved in the chronic conflict in the Middle East. Each successive war has brought greater perils, an increased danger of great-Power confrontation and more severe economic dislocations.
187.	At the request of the parties, the United States has been actively engaged in the search for peace in the Middle East. Since the 1973 war, statesmanship on all sides has produced unprecedented steps towards a resolution of that conflict. There have been three agreements that lessen the danger of war; and mutual commitments have been made to pursue the negotiating process with urgency until a final peace is achieved. As a result, we are closer to the goal of peace than at any time in a generation.
188.	The role of the United Nations has been crucial. The Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East met in 1973 under its aegis, and the implementation of subsequent agreements has been negotiated in its working groups. Security Council resolutions form the only agreed framework for negotiations. I want to compliment the Secretary- General and his colleagues in New York, Geneva and on the ground in the Middle East for their vigorous support of the peace process at critical moments.
189.	The United States remains committed to help the parties reach a settlement. The step-by-step negotiations of the past three years have now brought us to a point where comprehensive solutions seem possible. The decision before us now is how the next phase of negotiations should be launched.
190.	The United States is prepared to participate in an early resumption of the work of the Geneva Conference. We think a a preparatory conference must be useful for a discussion of the structure and agenda of future negotiations; but we are open to other suggestions.
191.	The groundwork that has been laid represents an historic opportunity. The United States will do all it can to assure that by the time this Assembly meets next year it will be possible to report significant progress towards a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
192.	Since the General Assembly last met, overwhelming tragedy has befallen the people of Lebanon. The United States strongly supports the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that troubled country. We oppose partition. We hope that Lebanese affairs will soon be returned to the hands of the people of Lebanon. All Members of the United Nations, and all the conflicting parties in Lebanon, have an obligation to support the efforts of the new President of Lebanon to restore peace and to turn energies to rebuilding the nation. And the agencies of the United Nations system can play an important role in the reconstruction effort.
193.	The confrontation between North and South Korea remains a threat to international peace and stability. The vital interests of world Powers intersect in Korea: conflict there inevitably threatens wider war.
194.	We and many other United Nations Members welcome the fact that a contentious and sterile debate on Korea will be avoided this fall. Let this opportunity be used, then, to address the central problem of how the Korean people can determine their future and achieve their ultimate goal of peaceful reunification without a renewal of armed conflict.
195.	Our own views on the problem of Korea are well known. We have called for a resumption of a serious dialog between North and South Korea. We are prepared to have the United Nations Command dissoJved so long as the Armistice Agreement is either preserved or replaced by more durable arrangements. We are willing to improve relations with North Korea, provided that its allies are ready to take similar steps towards the Republic of Korea. We are ready to talk with North Korea about the peninsula's future, but we will not do so without the participation of the Republic of Korea.
196.	Last fall the United States proposed a conference including all the parties most directly concerned- North and South Korea, the United States, and the People's Republic of China to discuss ways of adapting the Armistice Agreement to new conditions and replacing it with more permanent arrangements.  On 22 July, I stated our readiness to meet immediately with those parties. I reaffirm that readiness here today.
197.	If such a conference proves impracticable right now, the United States would support a phased approach. Preliminary talks between North and South Korea, including discussions on the venue and scope of the conference, could start immediately. In that phase the United States and the People's Republic of China could participate as observers or in an advisory role, if the parties so desired. If such discussions yielded concrete results, the United States and China could join the talks formally. This, in turn, could set the stage for a wider conference in which other countries could associate themselves with arrangements that guarantee a durable peace on the peninsula.
198.	We hope that North Korea and other concerned parties will respond affirmatively to this proposed procedure or else offer an alternative suggestion.
199.	The world community is deeply concerned over the continuing stalemate on the Cyprus problem.
200.	Domestic pressures, nationalistic objectives, and international rivalries have combined to block the parties from taking even the most elementary steps towards a solution. On those few occasions when representatives of the two Cypriot communities have come together, they have fallen into inconclusive procedural disputes. The passage of time has served only to complicate domestic difficulties and to diminish the possibilities of constructive conciliation.
201.	All concerned need to focus on committing themselves to achieving the overriding objectives: assuring the well-being of the suffering Cypriot people and ensuring peace in the eastern Mediterranean.
202.	A settlement must come from the Cypriot communities themselves. It is they who must decide how their island's economy, society and government shall be reconstructed. It is they who must decide the ultimate relationship of the two communities.
203.	The United States is ready to assist in restoring momentum to the negotiating process. We believe that agreeing to a set of principles might help the parties to resume negotiations. We would suggest some concepts along the following lines. A settlement should preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The present dividing lines on Cyprus must be adjusted to reduce the area currently controlled by the Turkish side. The territorial arrangement should take into account the economic requirements and humanitarian concerns of the two Cypriot communities, including the plight of those who remain refugees. A constitutional arrangement should provide conditions under which the two Cypriot communities can live in freedom and have a large voice in their own affairs. Security arrangements should be agreed upon that would permit the withdrawal of foreign military forces other than those present under international agreement.
204.	I have discussed this approach with the Secretary- General and with several Western European colleagues. In the days ahead, the United States will consult along these lines with all interested parties. In the meantime, we urge the Secretary-General to continue his dedicated efforts.
205.	I shall now turn to the problems of economic development. The economic division of our planet between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, between the industrial and developing nations is a dominant issue of our time. Our mutual dependence for our prosperity is a reality, not a slogan. It should summon our best efforts to make common progress, to bring mankind's dreams of a better life to closer reality in our lifetime.
206.	There are many reasons why co-operation has not made greater strides. The industrial democracies have sometimes been more willing to pay lip service to the challenge of development than to match rhetoric with real resources. The countries with non-market economies are quite prepared to undertake verbal assaults, but their performance is in inverse ratio to their rhetoric. Their real contribution to development assistance has been minimal. Last year, for example, the non-market economies provided only about 4 per cent of the public aid flowing to the developing nations. The developing nations are understandably frustrated and impatient with poverty, illiteracy and disease. But often they have made demands for change that are as confrontational as they are unrealistic. They sometimes speak of new economic orders as if growth were a quick fix requiring only that the world's wealth be properly redistributed through tests of strength instead of a process of self-help extending over decades. Ultimately, such tactics lose more than they gain, for they undermine the popular support in the industrial democracies which is imperative to provide the resources and market access -available nowhere else- to sustain development.
207.	I believe that the objectives of the developing nations and the objectives of the industrial nations are complementary. Indeed they must be, for neither side can achieve its aims at the expense of the other. They can be realized only through co-operation.
208.	We took a major step forward together a year ago at the seventh special session of this Assembly, and we have since followed through on many fronts. We have taken steps to protect the economic security of developing nations against cyclical financial disaster. The newly expanded compensatory finance facility of the International Monetary Fund has disbursed over $2 billion to developing nations in this year alone. Replenishments of the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank will provide additional resources for development. World-wide food aid has been expanded. With a United States contribution of $200 million, we have brought the International Fund for Agricultural Development close to operation.
209.	The United States has continued this process by putting forward a number of new proposals at the fourth session of UNCTAD in May 1976. We committed ourselves to improvements in the quality of aid. We agreed to a serious effort to improve markets of 18 basic commodities. These measures, undertaken since we met here just a year ago, assist, not with rhetoric and promises, but in practical and concrete ways, the peoples of the world that are struggling to throw off the chains of poverty.
210.	Much remains to be done. First, the application of science and technology is at the very heart of the development process. The United States, conscious of its pioneering role in technology, has put forward three basic principles, which we shall support with funds aid talent: to train individuals who can identify, select and manage the future technology of the developing world; to build both national and international institutions to create indigenous technology; and to spur the private sector to make its maximum contribution to the development and transfer of technological progress. 
211.	To achieve these goals, we are today extending an invitation to the world conference on science and technology for development, now scheduled for 1979, to meet in this country. In preparation for that meeting, we have asked members of the industrial, academic and professional scientific communities throughout the United States to meet in Washington in November. They will review the important initiatives this country can take to expand the technological base for development and they will strive to develop new approaches.
212.	Secondly, the ministerial meeting of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris should be given new impetus. We are making several new proposals. We will seek to help nations facing severe debt burdens. We will advance new ideas for expanded co-operation in energy.
213.	Thirdly, the industrial democracies have been far too willing to wait for the demands of the developing countries rather than to advance their own proposals. Now, however, the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development have, at the suggestion of the United States, agreed to examine long-range development planning and to develop a more coherent and comprehensive approach to global growth and economic justice.
214.	Fourthly, natural disasters each year take thousands of lives and cost billions of dollars. It strikes most those who can afford it least-the poorest peoples of the world. The United Nations has a unique capacity to address these global concerns and thus improve man's odds against nature. We urge this body to take the lead in strengthening international co-operation to prevent and alleviate natural calamity.
215.	Our dream is that all the children of the world can live with hope and widening opportunity. No nation can accomplish this alone; no group of nations can achieve it through confrontation. But together there is a chance for major progress-and in our generation.
216.	It is an irony of our time that an age of ideological and nationalistic rivalry has spawned as well a host of challenges that no nation can possibly solve by itself: the proliferation of nuclear weapons technology; the problems posed by the law of the sea; and the horrible new tool of tenor that cJiims innocent victims on every continent.
217.	The growing danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons raises stark questions about man's ability to ensure his very existence. We have lived through three perilous decades hi which the catastrophe of nuclear war has been avoided, despite ? strategic rivalry between a relatively few nations.
218.	But now a wholly new situation impends. Many nations have the potential to build nuclear weapons. If this potential were to materialize, threats to use nuclear weapons, fed by mutually reinforcing misconceptions, could become a recurrent feature of local conflicts in every' quarter of the globe. And there will be growing dangers of accidents, blackmail and nuclear terrorism.
219.	Unless current trends are altered rapidly, the likelihood of nuclear devastation could grow steadily in the years ahead. We must look to the roots of the problem. Since the 1973 energy crisis and drastic rise in oil prices, both developed and developing nations have seen in nuclear energy a means both of lowering the cost of electricity and of reducing reliance upon imported petroleum. In an age of growing nationalism some see the acquisition and expansion of nuclear power as symbols of enhanced national prestige, and, let us be frank, as a means to provide themselves a future option to acquire nuclear weapons.
220.	A nation that acquires the potential for a nuclear weapons capability must accept the consequences of its action. It is bound to trigger offsetting actions by its neighbors and stimulate broader proliferation, thereby accelerating a process that ultimately will undermine its own security. And it is disingenuous to label as "peaceful" nuclear devices which obviously are capable of massive military destruction.
221.	Time is of the essence. In no area of international concern does the future of this planet depend more directly upon what this generation can do or fails to do. We must move on the following three broad fronts.
222.	First, international safeguards must be strengthened and strictly enforced. The supply and use of nuclear materials associated with civilian nuclear energy programs must be carefully safeguarded so that they will not be diverted. The physical security of nuclear materials must be increased. The International Atomic Energy Agency must receive the full support of all nations in making its safeguards effective. Any violator of these safeguards must face immediate and drastic penalties.
223.	Secondly, adherence to safeguards, while of prime importance, is no guarantee against future proliferation. We must continue our efforts to forge international restraints against the acquisition or transfer of reprocessing facilities and of enrichment facilities which produce highly enriched uranium.
224.	Thirdly, we must recognize that one of the principal incentives for seeking sensitive reprocessing and enrichment technology is the fear that essential non-sensitive materials will not be made available on a reliable basis. Nations that show their sense of international responsibility by accepting effective restraints have a right to expect a reliable. economical supply of peaceful nuclear reactors and associated non-sensitive fuel. The United States, as a principal supplier of these items, is prepared to be responsive in this regard.
225.	In the near future President Ford will announce a comprehensive American program for international action on non-proliferation that reconciles global aspirations for assured nuclear supply with global requirements for nuclear control. In that way we hope that the 9.tom can be seen once again as a boon, and not as a menace, to mankind.
226.	Another issue of vast global consequence is the law of the sea. The negotiations which have just recessed in New York represent one of the most important, complex
and ambitious diplomatic undertakings in history.

227.	We have traveled an extraordinary distance in these negotiations in recent years, thanks in no small part to the skill and dedication of the distinguished President of this Assembly. Agreement exists on key concepts: a 12-mile territorial sea; free passage over and through straits; a 200-mile economic zone; and important pollution controls. In many fields we have replaced ideological debates with serious efforts to find concrete solutions. And there is growing consensus that the outstanding problems must be solved at the next session.
228.	But there is hardly room for complacency. Important issues remain which, if not settled, could cause us to forfeit all our hard-won progress. The Conference has yet to agree on the balance between coastal-State and international rights in the economic zone; on the freedom of marine scientific research; on arrangements for dispute settlement; and, most crucially, on the regime for exploitation of the deep sea-beds.
229.	The United States has made major proposals to resolve the deep sea-bed issue. We have agreed that the sea-beds are the common heritage of all mankind We have proposed a dual system for the exploitation of sea-bed minerals by which half of the mining sites would be reserved for the International Authority and half could be developed by individual nations and their nationals on the basis of technical capacity. We have offered to find financing and to transfer the technology needed to make international mining a practical reality. And in light of the many uncertainties that lie ahead, we have proposed that there be a review-for example after 25 years-to determine whether the provisions on sea-bed mining are working equitably.
230.	In response, some nations have escalated their demands and the stridency with which they advocate them.
231.	I must say candidly that there are limits beyond which no American administration can, or will, go. If attempts are made to compel concessions which exceed those limits, unilateralism will become inevitable. Countries which have no technological capacity for mining the sea-beds in the foreseeable future should not seek to impose a doctrine of total internationalization on nations which alone have this capacity and which have voluntarily offered to share it. The United States has an interest in the progressive development of international law, stable order and global co-operation. We are prepared to make significant sacrifices for this- but these sacrifices cannot go beyond equitable bounds.
23*2. Let us therefore put aside delaying tactics and pressures and take the path of co-operation. If we have the vision to conclude a treaty considered fair and just by mankind, our labors will have profound meaning not only for the regimen of the oceans but for all efforts to build a peaceful, co-operative and prosperous international community. The United States will spend the interval between sessions of the Conference reviewing its positions and will approach other nations well in advance of the next session at the political level to establish the best possible conditions for success.
233.	A generation that dreams of world peace and economic progress is plagued by a new, brutal and indiscriminate form of violence: international terrorism. In the year since I last addressed this body there have been 11 hijackings, 19 kidnappings, 42 armed attacks and 112 bombings perpetrated by international terrorists. Over 70 people have lost their lives and over 200 have been injured.
234.	It is time this Organization said to the world that the vicious murder and abuse of innocents cannot be excused by the invocation of lofty motives. Criminal acts against humanity, whatever the professed objective, cannot be excused by any civilized nation.
235.	Hie threat of terrorism should be dealt with through the co-operative efforts of all countries. More stringent steps must be taken now to deny skyjackers and terrorists a safe haven. Additional measures are required to protect passengers in both transit and terminal areas, as well as in flight.
236.	The United States will support new initiatives which will ensure the safety of the innocent. The proposal of the Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany against the taking of hostages [7th meeting, para.,113] deserves the most serious and sympathetic consideration of this Assembly.
237.	The United States will do everything within its power to work co-operatively in the United Nations and in other international bodies to put an end to terrorism. But we have an obligation to protect the lives of our citizens as they travel at home or abroad, and we intend to meet that obligation. If multilateral efforts are blocked, then the United States will be forced to act through its own legislative processes and in conjunction with others willing to join us.
238.	Terrorism is an international problem. It is inconceivable that an organization of the world's nations would fail to take effective action against it.
239.	The final measure of all we do together, of course, is man himself. Our common efforts to define, preserve and enhance respect for the rights of man thus represent an ultimate test of international co-operation.
240.	We Americans, in the year of our bicentennial, are conscious -and proud of our own traditions. Our founders wrote 200 years ago of the equality and inalienable rights of all men. Since then the ideals of liberty and democracy have become the universal and indestructible goals of mankind. But the plain truth -of tragic proportions-is that human rights are in jeopardy over most of the globe. Arbitrary arrest, denial of fundamental procedural rights, slave labor, the stifling of freedom of religion, racial injustice, political repression, the use of torture, and restraints on communications and expression these abuses are far too prevalent.
241.	The performance of the United Nations system in protecting human rights has fallen far short of what was envisaged when the Organization was founded. The principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are clear debates of this body and in other forums have been marred by hypocrisy, double standards and discrimination. Flagrant and consistent deprivation of human rights is no less grave in one country or one social system than in another. Nor is it more acceptable when practiced upon members of the same race than when inflicted by one race upon another.
242.	The international community has a unique role to play. The application of the standards of the Universal Declaration should be entrusted to fair and capable international bodies. But at the same time let us ensure that those bodies do not become platforms from which nations which are the worst transgressors pass judgment on the alleged shortcomings of others.
243.	Let us together pursue practical approaches: to build on the foundations already laid at previous sessions of the General Assembly and in the Commission on Human Rights to lessen the abominable practice of officially sanctioned torture; to promote acceptance of procedures for protecting the rights of people subject to detention, such as access to courts, counsel and families,-and their prompt release or fair and public trial; to improve the working procedures of international bodies concerned with human rights, so that they may function fairly and effectively; to strengthen the capability of the United Nations to meet the tragic problems of the ever growing number of refugees whose human rights have been stripped away by conflict in almost every continent. The United States pledges its firm support to these efforts.

244.	The challenge to statesmanship in this generation is to advance from the management of crises to the building of a stable and just international order, an order resting not on power but on restraint of power, not on the strength of arms but on the strength of the human spirit.
245.	Global forces of change now shape our future. Order will come in one of two ways: through its imposition by the strong and the ruthless or by the wise and far-sighted use of international institutions through which we enlarge the sphere of Common interests and enhance the sense of community.
246.	It is easy and tempting to press relentlessly for national advantage. It is infinitely more difficult to act in recognition of the rights of others.
247.	Throughout history the greatness of men and nations has been measured by their actions in times of acute peril. Today there is no single crisis to conquer. There is, Instead, a persisting challenge of staggering complexity: the need to create a universal community based on co-operation, peace and justice.
248.	If we falter, future generations will pay for our failure. If we succeed we shall have been worthy of the hopes of mankind.
249.	I am confident that we can succeed.
250.	And it is here, in the Assembly of nations, that we should begin.
We, the delegation of the People's Republic of China,
have come to attend the present session of the United Nations General Assembly today at a time of immense grief for the people of all nationalities in China. Chairman Mao Tsetung, the most esteemed and beloved great leader and teacher of the Chinese people, passed away on 9 September The passing of Chairman Mao Tsetung is a loss beyond measure to the 800 million Chinese people. But for Chairman Mao, there would have been no victory of the Chinese revolution. But for Chairman Mao, there would have been no new China of today. Without the victory of the Chinese revolution under the leadership of Chairman Mao the world would not have changed so vastly as it has. Hie extremely sorrow-stricken Chinese people are determined to turn grief into strength, to carry out Chairman Mao's behests and to carry through to the end the cause of the proletarian revolution in China which Chairman Mao pioneered. The Chinese people's revolutionary cause has worthy successors. Chairman Mao Tsetung has left us forever, but the magnificent contributions he made in revolutionary theory and practice are immortal. The radiance of Mao Tsetung thought will always illuminate our road of advance.
21	Here I Wish to express once again, on behalf of the Chinese Government and people, our deep gratitude to the representatives of many countries who have at various meetings of the United Nations tendered condolences on the passing away of Chairman Mao Tsetung.
22	Chairman Mao Tsetung drew a whole series of profound conclusions from the contemporary international situation The complete correctness of these conclusions is being more and more corroborated by the developing situation.
23. Back in the early 1960s, Chairman Mao Tsetung vividly portrayed the contemporary world situation in these verses:
"The Four Seas are rising, clouds and waters raging, The Five Continents are rocking, wind and thunder roaring."
The world situation has been in a stats of great turmoil. All the political forces in the world have undergone drastic division and realignment as a result of prolonged contests of strength and struggles. On the one hand, there is the rise of the third world; on the other hand, there is the rivalry tor hegemony between the two super-Powers-the Soviet Union and the United States. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution -this has become an irresistible trend of history. Looking around the globe, one cannot find a single place of tranquility. "The wind sweeping through-the tower heralds a rising storm in the mountains." The factors for both revolution and war are increasing. As Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out, the current international situation is characterized by great disorder under heaven, and it is excellent: this great disorder is a good thing, and not a bad thing, for the people. It throws the enemies into disarray and divides them, while awakening and tempering the people, thus pushing the international situation to develop further in a direction favorable to the people and unfavorable to imperialism and social-imperialism.
24. Making a penetrating analysis of all the basic contra-dictions of our time and the division and realignment of all the political forces in the world, Chairman Mao Tsetung advanced his great strategic concept of the three worlds. He pointed out that the United States and the Soviet Union make up the first world; the developing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America and elsewhere constitute the third world; and in between the two is the second world composed of Europe, Japan, Canada and other countries. Lenin once said: "Imperialism is the progressing oppression of the nations of the world by a handful of great Powers; it is an epoch of wars among these Powers for the extension and consolidation of national oppression." At present, the Soviet Union and the United States, the two super-Powers constituting the first world, are the biggest international oppressors and exploiters of our time and they are the sources of a new world war. While the developed countries of the second world oppress and exploit third-world countries, they themselves are at the same time subjected to super-Power oppression, exploitation, control or threats. The numinous third-world countries are most heavily oppressed and exploited by colonialism and imperialism; they are the main force in the fight against imperialism, and particularly against super-Power hegemonism.
25. Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out: "Who are our enemies? Who are our friends? This is a question of the first importance for the revolution."' Chairman Mao s concept of the three worlds provides orientation for the workers and oppressed nations and oppressed peoples of the world in their fight in the realm of international class
struggle.
26 In the past year, the struggle against colonialism, imperialism and hegemonism waged by the people of the third-world countries has made great progress, though it suffered temporary setbacks in individual places These people have further awakened and have strengthened their unity in struggle. The heroic people of Egypt, unable to bear social-imperialist bullying and oppression any longer, resolutely abrogated the Egyptian-Soviet treaty. The Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries withstood outside pressure and maintained the position of opposing imperialism, and particularly super-Power hegemonism. The people of Asia, Africa and Latin America have come to see more and more clearly the true colors of social-imperialism. The great African people are now launching an offensive on barbarous racism, and the handful of colonialists have been cornered m southern Africa. The situation there is complicated owing to the meddling of the two super-Powers. But the long- tempered African people are clear-headed. They do not believe the nice words of imperialism and social- imperialism, nor are they intimidated by their bluster. They will surely win their liberation by relying on their own armed struggle, strengthening their unity and persisting in this course. Chairman Mao Tsetung said:
"The evil system of colonialism and imperialism arose and throve with the enslavement of Negroes and the trade in Negroes, and it will surely come to its end with the complete emancipation of the black people."
The future of Africa is infinitely bright.

27. Strategically, Europe is the focus of contention between the Soviet Union and the United States for world hegemony. The so-called "European Security Conference" was in fact a "European Insecurity Conference". There are always some people in the West who want to urge social-imperialism eastward and divert this peril towards China, thinking it best if all is quiet in the West. The "European Security Conference" reflected such a Munich line of thinking. After the Conference concluded last year, these people thought that henceforth there would be peace and tranquility in Europe. But since that Conference, the military threat posed by the Soviet Union against Western Europe and its political subversion there have been on the increase, and Europe is not more secure, but in greater danger. The desire of the European people for peace is understandable. But the Soviet Union has played up the "European Security Conference" with ulterior motives. It attempts thereby to put Western Europe off guard, divide and crush it piecemeal and ultimately seize the whole of Western Europe. The fact that strategically Europe is the focus of contention between the two hegemonic Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, is determined by their fundamental interests. Some people take the lead hi appeasing and making concessions to the expansionists, attempting to shift this strategic focus by recognizing their sphere of influence and giving them small favors. But such an attempt cannot be realized. The continued pursuit of such a policy will result in lifting a rock only to drop it on one's own feet. Forces opposing appeasement are now rising in the West. The unity of the West European countries has made new progress. We support the unity of Western Europe and wish to see Western Europe grow strong.
28. The rivalry between the two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and She United States, extends to all parts of the globe. The United States has vested interests to protect around the world, and the Soviet Union seeks expansion. This state of affairs is unalterable. In this world-wide rivalry, the expansionist activities of the Soviet Union are all-pervasive. A Soviet leader has openly declared that there is no corner of the earth that is not taken into account by them. Now more and more people have come to realize that the so-called "irreversible process of detente" constantly peddled by Soviet social-imperialism is but a fraudulent and hollow phase; every day it talks "peace" but practices expansion; every day it talks "disarmament" but practices arms expansion. Soviet social-imperialism is the biggest peace swindler and the most dangerous source of war today. The continued fierce rivalry between the two super-Powers is bound to lead to war some day. This is independent of mail's will. The so-called "balance of power" is only a temporary, superficial and even deceptive thing. It cannot be relied upon to maintain peace. As Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out, in an era when classes exist, war is a phenomenon between two periods of peace. The danger of a new world war is visibly growing, and the people of all countries must get prepared.
29. There is now a strange phenomenon in the world. Some people are terrified at the mention of the Soviet Union, thinking that it cannot be touched. This is superstition. Soviet social-imperialism is nothing to be afraid of. It is outwardly strong but inwardly weak. Alienated from the people, it is essentially feeble, it faces economic difficulties and ever-sharpening class contradictions and contradictions among its nationalities. Carrying out expansion everywhere and committing all sorts of evils, it has affronted the people of the East European countries and of the world. Its offensive posture bears the seed of defeat. Chairman Mao Tsetung pointed out long ago: "All reactionaries are paper tigers.""The revisionist Soviet Union is a paper tiger too." All the countries that are subjected to super-Power aggression, subversion, interference, control or threat should unite and wage a tit-for-tat struggle against it. "The people, and the people alone, are the motive force in the making of world history." The destiny of mankind is definitely not to be decided by any super-Power.
"People of the world, be courageous, dare to fight, defy difficulties and advance wave upon wave. Then the whole world will belong to the people. Monsters of all kinds shall be destroyed."
30.	Following Chairman Mao Tsetung's teachings, the Chinese Government and people firmly and unswervingly support the just struggles of all oppressed nations and oppressed peoples. Now, I would like to state our consistent position on some of the issues to be considered by the current session of the General Assembly.
31.	We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania in their just struggle against white racism and for national liberation. We warmly support the relevant resolutions adopted by the recent Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity and the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries [see A/311197], We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe in their armed straggle against the Smith white minority regime. We firmly support the people of Namibia in their aimed struggle against forcible occupation by the reactionary authorities of South Africa ai d for national independence. We warmly hail the powerful mass movements of the people of Azania against racial discrimination and apartheid. We strongly condemn the Soviet Union for disrupting the unity of the Angolan national liberation movements and carrying out armed intervention in Angola. We are firmly opposed to the rivalry between the two super-Powers in southern Africa, and especially to social-imperialist attempts to seize the opportunity to sow discord and carry out armed intervention while pretending to support the national liberation movements.
32.	We firmly support the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in their just struggle for the restoration of their national rights and the recovery of their lost territories and against the rivalry between the super-Powers for hegemony in the Middle East. We sincerely hope that the various political forces in Lebanon, together with the Arab States concerned and the Palestinian people, will set store by the national interests of Lebanon and the militant unity of the Arab countries and find a reasonable solution to their temporary differences through peaceful consultations free from super-Power interference.
33.	We firmly maintain that the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus should be respected. We earnestly hope that the Greek and Turkish communities of Cyprus and the countries directly concerned will guard against super-Power meddling and gradually eliminate their differences through patient consultations on the basis of equality and in the spirit of mutual understanding and mutual accommodation.
34.	We firmly support the Korean people in their just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland. United States aggression and its interference in Korea are the main cause for recurrent tensions in Korea and for the failure to achieve an independent and peaceful reunification. The United Nations Command must be dissolved, and the United States armed forces must be withdrawn from South Korea. The division of Korea must end, and the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea must be realized. This is not to be hindered by any force on earth.
35.	We firmly support the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to membership in the United Nations. The United States threat to use the veto is utterly unjustifiable. We firmly support the just struggle carried on by the people of East Timor under the leadership of the Frente Revolucionaria Timor Leste Independente [FRETILIN] in defence of the independence and territorial integrity of their country chainst foreign aggression. We hold that the position of the Association of South-East Asian Nations for the establishment of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality free from interference by foreign Powers should be respected.
36.	We firmly support the proposal of the Government of Sri Lanka to declare the Indian Ocean a zone of peace.4 We firmly support the proposal of the Government of Pakistan to establish a nuclear-free zone in South Asia.s We firmly support the solemn statement of the King of Nepal declaring Nepal a zone of peace. We firmly support the reasonable position taken by Bangladesh on the question of sharing the water of the Ganges river.
37.	We firmly support the just struggle of the third-world countries for the establishment of the new international economic order. To attain this aim, the third-world countries have, since the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, made many efforts at various international conferences. But owing to obstruction by the super-Powers, these efforts have so far not achieved the progress they ought to have. Facts prove that the superPowers will never lightly give up their prerogative of exploiting and plundering the developing countries. We approve of dialogue, but first of all one must be strong. The developing countries can wrest back, step by step, positions on the economic front occupied by the super-Powers only if* they maintain independence and self-reliance, fully exercise their state sovereignty, take firm hold of their national resources, develop and expand their national economies, consolidate and expand the associations of raw material-producing countries and strengthen their mutual help and co-operation.

38.	As for the question of disarmament, our consistent position and views are known to all. The Soviet representative puts forward in this forum every year a sham disarmament proposal of one description or another to achieve a demagogic effect. It is not worth while here to comment on such old stuff in new concoctions.
39.	The Chinese Government and people are determined to carry on the cause left behind by Chairman Mao, to adhere to the basic line of our Party and to keep to Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs. This has been solemnly declared in the message to the whole party, the whole army and the people of all nationalities throughout the country issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China, the Council of State of the People's Republic of China and the Military Commission of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and in the memorial speech by Comrade Hua Kuo-feng, First Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and Premier of the Council of State, at the mass memorial meeting to mourn our great leader and teacher, Chairman Mao Tsetung. The revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs laid down for us by Chairman Mao personally are a beacon that has illuminated and will forever illuminate the successful advance of our external work. The Chinese Government will continue unswervingly to implement Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs, keep the people in mind, place hopes in them, uphold proletarian internationalism, and never seek hegemony or to be a super-Power. We will strengthen our unity with the international proletariat and the oppressed nations and oppressed peoples the world over, our unity with the people of the third-world countries and our unity with all the countries subjected to aggression, subversion, interference, control or bullying by imperialism or social-imperialism so as to form the broadest possible united front against imperialism, and particularly against the hegemonism of the two superPowers, the Soviet Union and the United States. We consistently maintain that all countries, big and small, should be equal. The affairs of any country should be managed by its own people; world affairs should be managed by all countries in the world. As in the past, we will establish or develop relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence.
40.	Chairman Mao Tsetung taught us that "In our inter-national relations, we Chinese people should get rid of great-Power chauvinism resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely."  We will follow this instruction of Chairman Mao in handling all our foreign relations. China is still a developing socialist country. However great our future achievements in national construction, we will keep firmly in mind Chairman Mao's teaching always to be modest and never become arrogant, not even after a hundred years, and never become cocky, not even after the twenty-first century.

41.	China is a vast and richly endowed country with a population of 800 million. Chairman Mao Tsetung taught us: "China ought to make a greater contribution to humanity." At present, under the leadership of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the Chinese people are taking class struggle as the key-link, keeping to the Party's basic line and policies for the entire historical period of socialism, persevering in the continued revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat, consolidating the great unity of the people of all nationalities under the leadership of the working class and based on the worker-peasant alliance, deepening the struggle to criticize Teng Hsiao-ping and repulse the rightist deviationist attempt to reverse correct verdicts, consolidating and developing the victories of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution, combating and preventing revisionism, consolidating the dictatorship of the proletariat, working hard independently and self-reliantly, to build China into a powerful socialist country, and striving to make a greater contribution to humanity. Following the consistent teachings of Chairman Mao, we are determined to strengthen our preparedness against war, heighten our vigilance and be ready at all times to wipe out any enemy that dares to invade China. We are determined to liberate Taiwan. Under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, we Chinese people are fully confident that we will triumph over domestic and foreign enemies, overcome all difficulties and achieve our objectives.
42.	Surveying the whole world, we see that there is great disorder under heaven and that the situation is excellent. The way ahead is tortuous, but the future of mankind is bright. The people of China are ready to join hands with the people of all other countries in our common endeavor.
The delegation of the Federal Republic of Germany is pleased that this thirty-first session of the General Assembly of the United Nations meets under the chairmanship of a man who belongs to one of the leading nations of the group of non-aligned countries. He has acquired the highest personal respect among our nations both in his capacity as spokesman of his country at the United Nations and as President of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, one of the most important conferences of our time.
60.	I combine my congratulations for the new President with my thanks to the outgoing President, the Prime Minister of Luxembourg, Mr. Thorn, who gave exemplary and balanced guidance to the work of our Assembly and whose country and personality symbolize the best traditions of a Europe that stands for peace and justice.
61.	I am furthermore pleased to welcome the Republic of Seychelles to our midst. With the admission of this one hundred and forty-fifth Member, the United Nations has taken a further step towards universality.
62.	This General Assembly of the United Nations, like the previous one, must continue to promote the idea of co-operation between all States of the world. Co-operation means combining all our efforts in the search for peaceful solutions to the problems that make it so difficult for the peoples of this globe to live peacefully together. Let us not forget that at the end of this century the world will have twice as many people to feed and twice as many jobs to find.
63.	In the year that has passed since the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, it has been possible to lead the world economy out of the deepest recession since 1930, but the world is still far away from lasting, stable growth and continuing acceleration. In the past year international peace has been maintained, but the conflicts in the Middle East, in Cyprus and elsewhere continue to smolder, and in southern Africa the task is to avoid a racial war. At the same time, new forms of illegal force, such as the seizing of hostages, have been developing into a world-wide plague. Whereas old conflicts basically remain unresolved and new ones are already pushing their way to the surface, the potential of destructive weapons in all parts of the world is growing and so is the capability of manufacturing nuclear weapons.
64.	The year 1975 brought no progress towards accomplishing so urgent a task as reducing military expenditure. On the contrary, we are faced with the threat of another build-up in the arms race.
65.	This year the International Covenants on Human Rights entered into force, but in many parts of the world the individual is still denied the most elementary human rights: his right to life and to personal safety, his right to equality without regard to race, his right to move freely, his right to free expression, and his basic economic and social rights.
66.	In a world threatened in this way it is our duty to create durable foundations for peace and co-operation. The one needs the other: we cannot achieve peace without the will to co-operate beyond frontiers, and co-operation will remain ineffectual without peace. Thus the future of this planet really does depend on whether we achieve a break-through to that co-operation.
67.	Awareness of this began to dawn following the crises of recent years, and this gives us good reason to be hopeful. It is significant that the Conference of non-aligned States in Colombo and, similarly, the Conference of the Group of 77 in Mexico  have so unequivocally supplemented the principle of national sovereignty and independence by the principle of international co-operation "as the basis of a secure world order". My Government has made this view the guideline for its action in international relations.
68.	The Federal Republic of Germany will therefore continue at this session, as at previous ones, to pursue a policy aimed at safeguarding peace and securing international co-operation. The foundations and objectives of our policy remain unchanged: European union; our firmly rooted position within the Atlantic Alliance, which ensures the balance of power and is thus the prerequisite for peace in Europe; the policy of detente towards the States of Eastern Europe, and partnership and an equitable reconciliation of interests with the third world.
69.	The members of the European Community have made encouraging progress towards creating stable structures for co-operation in a spirit of solidarity. For centuries the history of Western Europe was a series of wars. Even in this century it has been the source of two world wars. Today, however, the people in the European Community see their future as a common future-so thoroughly has the situation changed within the span of a single generation. Outside Europe this may not seem an earth-shaking event, but all, I am sure, should be able to judge from it what can be achieved through goodwill in relations between peoples.
70.	The members of the Community have set themselves the task of together putting into practice the great historic concept of freedom and human dignity. We adhere to the aim of European union. Yet the Community is not inward-looking. It is not a closed community whose responsibility stops at its own front door. It actively supports efforts towards peace and justice and towards a world economy that is open for trade and investment. It is the biggest trading partner in the world. And it is, in particular, a partner of the third world: as the most important source of investment capital and technology, as the most important trading partner, and as a pioneer in the creation of equal, balanced relations between industrialized and developing countries.
71.	The previous speaker, the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, who spoke on behalf of the nine member States of the European Community, has been able to show how far our common aims extend in foreign policy as well.
72.	The Federal Republic of Germany is a member of the North Atlantic Alliance. It understands that alliance and its role in it as a contribution to the safeguarding of peace in our region. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] is a pact for peace, and it is in line with that understanding of its role that it renders an active contribution of its own to detente. This alliance testifies to the close and manifold ties existing between Western Europe, the United States and Canada.
73.	On the basis of the European Community and the Atlantic Alliance, a policy of realistic detente towards the East became possible for Western Europe, That policy starts from the following consideration: if we cannot remove the ideological division and the basic differences between political and social systems in Europe, then it is all the more urgent to resolve conflicts by negotiation or at least to mitigate them and to discover areas where co-operation between East and West is possible, to the mutual advantage of both and for the benefit of the peoples of both sides.
74.	The policy pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany in concluding treaties with the Soviet Union, the Polish People's Republic, Czechoslovakia and the other members of the Warsaw Pact serves this very aim. We attach special importance to the further development of the relationship between the two German States on the basis of treaty arrangements. The policy of detente pursued by the Federal Government is a long-term policy and it consistently continues the policy initiated by Willy Brandt and Walter Scheel.
75.	The nations of Europe, the United States and Canada held the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. They laid down principles for peaceful relations and agreed on a whole series of specific arrangements. Among other tilings, these arrangements are intended to foster economic and scientific co-operation, regulate humanitarian questions and facilitate contacts between people in East and West and the exchange of ideas and information; in the military field, they are intended to build up confidence.
76.	All those arrangements must now be put into practice. The more co-operation across the ideological barrier becomes possible and the less energy is wasted in sterile confrontation, the more will the nations of Europe be able to contribute to an equitable reconciliation of interests between the industrialized countries and countries of the third world.
77.	This year, too, we have resolutely pursued our treaty policy. The agreements concluded with the Polish People's Republic have removed burdens of the past and opened up hopeful prospects for relations between the two countries. The relaxation of tension in Europe brought about since 1970 would not have been possible without an improvement of relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the USSR. Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union will also in future be of particular importance for the process of detente. For this reason, great significance attaches to the visit of Mr. Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to the Federal Republic of Germany which is planned to take place in the course of this year.
78.	No nation can be more interested in co-operation across the frontiers of different systems than the German people which is compelled to live in two States. Through Germany runs the frontier which divides Europe. Our negotiations with the German Democratic Republic have also been, and will continue to be, concerned with easing conditions for the people and with further developing co-operation. To pursue a policy of detente in a divided country and for a divided country is a great and, at the same time, a difficult task; but we Germans know that there is no acceptable alternative.
79.	A great deal has been made possible by negotiations between the two German States; much has been achieved in the way of practical improvements; it has been possible to alleviate human suffering; human contacts between Germans have become increasingly possible. But all objectives have not been attained-far from it. As before, the aim of our policy is to overcome the painful consequences of the division of Germany by patient negotiation.
80.	The Federal Government is not resigned to the reality of a frontier where only recently shots were still fired from the other side. This must at last be stopped. The Federal Government will not tire in its efforts to achieve this too by means of its policy of detente.
81.	In the heart of Germany also lies the city which for better or worse, has been a touchstone of detente- Berlin The Federal Government will not relax its efforts to promote the viability of West Berlin. For Berlin, the strict observance and full application of the Quadripartite Agreement of 3 September 1971 is of essential importance. The Federal Government will, as before, ensure that West Berlin continues to be included in international co-operation. The more we succeed in this the less will be the danger of the city's again becoming a source of international crises.
82.	The Federal Republic of Germany, whose foreign policy has been a policy of and for peace from the very first day of its existence, will unflinchingly continue its policy of detente and thus contribute to the safeguarding of peace. It remains its political objective to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will regain its unity through free self-determination. For us, history has not yet passed its final verdict on the division of the German nation.
83.	It will be of decisive importance for the progress of detente whether the current negotiations on the second SALT agreement and on the balanced reduction of ground forces in central Europe prove successful. For nothing could constitute a greater threat to detente than another arms race.
84.	The Federal Government will make special efforts in talks with the United States, the Soviet Union and other countries concerned, to get the stagnant expert discussions on mutual and balanced force reduction in Vienna going again. This was announced by Chancellor Schmidt last week.
85.	Peace itself and efforts to safeguard it by means of more stable structures are jeopardized by unrelenting efforts in nearly all parts of the world to build up arms strengths. Exports of conventional weapons in particular have increased rapidly.
86.	The monstrous waste of scarce resources in the industrialized countries as in the developing countries works to the detriment of the people.
87.	We must not give up hope because of the disappointing results in the field of arms control and disarmament so far. In the process of detente efforts must be redoubled to halt the arms race and, both world-wide and regionally, to translate into reality effective measures of arms control and arms limitation.
88.	Balanced and controlled disarmament remains one of the most urgent tasks. But it is high time words were followed by deeds. The world needs plough and workbench more urgently than rifle and missile.
89.	In Europe, within the framework of the negotiations in Vienna, the Federal Government will continue to seek the establishment of an equal and hence stable relationship of power in central Europe.
90.	The Federal Government welcomes the request made by the non-aligned States in Colombo calling for a special session of the General Assembly to deal with questions of world-wide disarmament [see A/31/197, annex IV, resolution 12] and is ready to play a constructive part in it.
91.	But we still live in a heavily armed world. All the more urgent, therefore, is the one principal task of international politics: to ward off dangers for peace in time, and that means resolving conflicts without war.
92.	Consequently, we look with anxiety towards a region whose unresolved problems are a constant threat to world peace: the Middle East. The guidelines for a solution to the Middle East conflict were mapped out long ago. They are based on resolutions of the Security Council, complemented by a large consensus of international opinion that the national rights of the Palestinian people must also be taken into consideration. Thus, at the 1974 session of the General Assembly,  the Federal Republic of Germany stated that a peace settlement, apart from providing for the termination of the territorial occupation, should make allowance for the right of self-determination of the Palestinian people, including the right to establish a State authority, and for Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries.
93.	It is not a question of keeping on repeating the principles governing a solution; it is a question of putting them into practice. The Federal Republic of Germany, together with its partners in the European Community, has a vital interest in a peaceful solution to the conflict in its neighboring region to the south, and today it is more than ever convinced that a solution is possible.
94.	Our special interest in this region also finds expression in the Euro-Arab dialog. No one can today speak of the Middle East problem without including the tragic developments in the Lebanon. Efforts have been of no avail to stop hostilities that have taken a heavy toll of human life and are destroying a country in which the seed of violence has sprung up. We appeal to all concerned to stop the terrible bloodshed.
95.	A second source of danger for international relations has developed in southern Africa. It is impossible to imagine the consequences which a racial war embracing the whole region would have. All countries in that region are aware of this. The Federal Republic of Germany has, therefore, not abandoned hope of a peaceful solution being achieved.
96.	But it knows that only where no one attempts to hold up a historically necessary change can we expect peaceful developments, can we feel that peace is secure.
97.	Everyone must realize, also in southern Africa, that racism and colonialism no longer have a place in this world. The sands have run out.
98.	Southern Africa, too, must determine its own destiny. There is only one way to attain this: blacks and whites must develop some form of co-operation based on equality, which will prove a sound foundation also in the future;
there must be majority rule, but at the same time safeguards must be provided for the rights of the minority.
99.	In Rhodesia, as we hope, the first and decisive step in this direction has now been taken. This could well be the beginning of an era of people of all races in southern Africa living peacefully together.
100.	Recent developments confirm in an impressive manner the correctness of the position we have always taken: that only the renunciation of force prevents the catastrophe of a racial war which would otherwise be unavoidable. The urgently required changes in southern Africa can be brought about only by peaceful means and by negotiation. A turn of events is foreshadowed for which all concerned deserve thanks and appreciation the Secretary of State of the United States, the British Government, and those African statesmen who are working with perseverance for a peaceful solution of this pressing problem.
101.	As regards the Namibia problem, we reaffirm the demands: that the rule of South Africa should end and the earliest possible date for independence be fixed in a binding manner; that the competence of the United Nations to lead the former Mandated Territory to independence should be recognized; and that in exercising the right of self-determination under the supervision of the United Nations all political groups in the country should participate in the preparations for independence.
102.	Only the speedy fulfillment of all these demands will prevent any further aggravation of the situation. The Federal Government will assist a free Namibia as far as possible in building up its economy.
103.	We appeal to the Government of the Republic of South Africa to give up the policy of apartheid and not to oppose necessary reforms any longer. Only those who are prepared to carry out the necessary changes can preserve the heritage of the past.
104.	We support the appeal of President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia to the white population in southern Africa to join with the other parts of Africa in creating a new society which is not based on color. Only then will it be possible for a new society of black and white Africans with equal rights to master together the great task of developing the continent.
105.	The efforts made by the community of nations to control the use of force must now also include the new illegal forms of force which in recent years have come to be a problem assuming more and more menacing proportions.
106.	The most widespread of these new forms of violence, and one of the most murderous, is the taking of hostages. The growing number of acts involving the taking of hostages has spotlighted the extent of the threat, None of the 500 million passengers traveling on airliners every year can be sure not to be among the next victims.
107.	Acts involving the taking of hostages are not the problem of just one State or another or of any group of States; they are a problem concerning us all. The United Nations bears a special responsibility. The Secretary-
General in his annual report on the work of the Organization rightly pointed that out [see A/31 (1 (Add. 1, sect. VI}.
108.	What is at stake is the protection of human beings, the sovereignty of States, the safety of international traffic and an international order free from violence. The taking of hostages is a particularly cruel act of violence which indiscriminately claims or threatens the lives of helpless people, of women and children. For this reason, the Geneva Convention of 1949 prohibits this act as a means of warfare.
109.	It is an act offending the dignity, safety and fundamental rights of the individual person, that is, basic values the protection of which is proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex].
110.	Those taking hostages attempt to blackmail sovereign States and to confront them with the unbearable choice of either yielding to their demands or risking the lives of the hostages taken. Acts involving the taking of hostages are a threat to international relations. The efforts made by all States to settle international conflicts peacefully and also the endeavors of this world Organization to make peace more secure are placed in jeopardy by criminal acts of violence committed by a few.
111.	International conferences and diplomatic exchanges are thus threatened. In exploiting the particular vulnerability of aeroplanes, the taking of hostages above all imperils international air traffic,
112.	Our peoples expect the United Nations to exhaust all possibilities of checking this method of using brute force. We must face up to this danger which affects us all and initiate an objective discussion on possible steps. After the bitter experiences of recent months, the Governments of all countries should unite in condemning the act of taking hostages as a particularly abhorrent crime and in introducing world-wide measures against it.
113.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany deems it necessary that the United Nations should draft a convention banning the taking of hostages internationally and making sure that the perpetrators are either extradited or brought before a court in the country in which they have been seized. We are convinced that it should be possible soon to arrive at such a convention within the framework of the United Nations. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will therefore request that an item on international action against the taking of hostages be included in the agenda of this General Assembly as an important and urgent matter.
114.	General acceptance of and respect for human rights is an inalienable element of any order of peace and worldwide co-operation.
115.	This is one of the noblest aims of the United Nations. The concept of human rights has played a decisive role in the emergence of the United Nations. The year 1976 is a historic year for human rights and for the United Nations. It is the year in which the international covenants on human rights-the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights- have entered into force. Both Covenants guide our action. The Federal Republic of Germany orients its policy towards the developing countries in keeping with demands embodied in the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
116.	We advocate in the strongest possible terms respect for basic human rights not only in Germany but all over the world. Our policy serves the individual human being; only the realization of his rights and his dignity lends ultimate meaning and purpose to all our efforts to ensure political and economic co-operation. And this includes the right of all men to live under conditions which are really consistent with human dignity.
117.	The year 1976, with its important events in the field of human rights, now confronts us with the task of translating into reality the principles of law which we have worked out. In this new phase too the United Nations must remain the champion of human rights. An institution should therefore be established which should ensure comprehensive and world-wide protection of human rights. What we need is an independent, international authority making objective judgments in order to ensure that human rights are safeguarded in all parts of the world. Such an authority would not be directed against anybody; it would be there for somebody, namely, the individual human being and his rights.
118.	The phase of codifying human rights was long and difficult; it lasted 30 years. The implementing phase will perhaps be even more difficult, but this should not lead us to believe that we can take that much time again.
119.	Much patient negotiating will be necessary. Our aim must be to guarantee the application of human rights throughout the world by means of an institution which would prevent the question of human rights from being abused for political purposes.
120.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is aware that this is a difficult task. But it is convinced that the aim of establishing an international court for human rights can be attained. Its belief is strengthened by its experience with the protective system of the European Convention on Human Rights,  which has proved its value for more than two decades and which will not lose anything of its importance should the United Nations establish an institution along its lines.
121.	I have already pointed out that it is also the application of human rights that makes it incumbent on us to reduce the economic gap between the rich and poor countries. The difference in prosperity between North and South is a threat to peace and stability throughout the world. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany notes with great satisfaction that the will for co-operation which is the prerequisite to any effective action in this field has grown in all parts of the world and is today actually unchallenged.
122.	The seventh special session of the General Assembly last year, the Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris, the fourth session of UNCTAD in Nairobi and also the Conference of the non-aligned States in Colombo have confirmed this principle.
123.	It is a positive sign that such complicated problems as those of raw materials and energy and the reorganization of the law of the sea are negotiated at international conferences. But now it is essential to achieve rapid and concrete results. Solemn declarations of intent are not enough to feed the people in the poorest countries. A hard year lies behind us. In 1975, the year of the nadir of recession, the national products of the free-market industrialized countries fell and, although the developing countries' national products continued to rise, their growth rate declined and, in many developing countries, dropped below the growth rate of the population.
124.	The gap between industrialized and developing countries decreased for the first time, but it decreased because the world as a whole became poorer. The world all of a sudden became aware of the magnitude of the threat. We had to realize that development as such can be accelerated only within an international economy which, as a whole, is expanding. It was this experience that increased the awareness of the need for co-operation and made 1975 the year of a common departure.
125.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany realizes without any illusions that up to now we have come only a short way together, but even along this short distance we certainly have scored results.
126.	First, in 1975 there was a sharp rise in the flow of capital into the developing countries. The countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development increased their official and private capital transfers to the unprecedented amount of $39 billion, which is an increase of 40 per cent. This means that for the first time ever the target of the capital transfer amounting to 1 per cent of gross national product was reached. The Federal Republic of Germany exceeded that target by having attained 1.18 per cent. At the same time, there was an increase in the capital influx from the States, of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries [OPEC].
127.	Secondly, progress was made in the efforts to stabilize the developing countries' export earnings. The International Monetary Fund considerably widened the possibilities of taking up compensatory credits in the event of a decline in export earnings. The European Community in the Lomé Convention set up the world's first stabilizing system for commodity exports from developing countries.
128.	Third, progress was also made in the opening of markets to third-world exports. The multilateral trade negotiations in Geneva have made this objective a focal subject for talks. This year, too, the European Community plans to increase essentially the possibilities for tariff-free imports of industrial goods from developing countries. In 1975 the Federal Republic of Germany increased its imports of manufactures from developing countries by one quarter and that in a year of heavy recession.
129.	Fourth, and finally, to promote the development of agriculture in the third world it was decided to set up a fund which will make available considerable funds to increase agricultural production.
130.	To speed up the development of the third world is the common task of all countries. It requires that the developing countries themselves concentrate their strength and efforts on the development goal. It also requires that they assist one another. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany therefore appreciates it that the Colombo Conference strongly emphasized the idea of collective self-help.
131.	Already now the oil-producing countries substantially contribute to the transfer of resources to developing countries in want of capital. At the latest conference of OPEC they also showed their readiness to share in the responsibility for the world economy as a whole.
132.	But the largest external contribution to development undoubtedly has to come from the industrialized countries. In the past, the free-market industrialized countries have already been a motor of third-world development. The power of that motor must grow even stronger. The integration of the countries with a centrally-controlled economy into the world economic system -an integration which has begun in recent years -now opens up the possibility that those countries, too, will finally become a motor of development. That possibility should, however, be pursued. Trade between free-market industrialized countries and centrally-planned industrialized countries has almost quadrupled during the past four years. It is necessary now to increase trade between centrally-planned industrialized countries and developing countries with similar speed.
133.	The potential is enormous. Whereas free-market industrialized countries absorb three quarters of the developing countries' exports, the share of the centrally-planned industrialized countries in these exports is no more than 4 per cent.
134.	When we look ahead, the question is, What can we and what must we do together now in order to promote the equitable reconciliation of interests between industrialized and developing countries?
135.	First, in the four commissions of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation-on energy, commodities, finance and development - we must quickly find concrete solutions to the problems defined in the initial phase of the Conference.
136.	Second, at the meetings and conferences on commodity problems decided on by the fourth session of UNCTAD we must achieve rapid and appropriate results.
137.	Third, we would like to see all industrialized countries, whatever their economic system, make greater efforts with regard to the transfer of capital and technology to developing countries. The developing countries, for their part, should create the prerequisites for these efforts to be successful.
138.	Fourth, we regard the intensified industrialization of the developing countries as an urgent requirement. We therefore participate in all efforts contributing to that goal and are prepared to open our markets still further. We are aware of the adjustment problems entailed for our own economy and shall be prepared for this.
139.	Fifth, the solution of the problem of indebtedness becomes an ever-more pressing requirement. Like other countries, the Federal Republic of Germany gives the solution of that problem priority attention. In the spirit which has imbued the Federal Republic of Germany in rendering its financial assistance and in continuing to render such assistance, it will, together with other donor countries, use its full energies to help solve the problem of indebtedness. We do this because we have full confidence in the future of the developing countries and their peoples.
140.	The success of our endeavors to build a co-operative world will be decisively influenced by the outcome of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, We have declared the sea the common heritage of mankind. It is now essential to translate this principle into reality, and that means establishing a legal system governing the seas which will take into account the interests of all States in a well-balanced manner. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will actively participate in the work on these problems because it is convinced that the problems of die developing countries are the problems of the industrialized countries as well. That is a new piece of knowledge which all of our citizens do not yet find it easy to accept. In our countries many people still have to learn that their own destiny is connected with that of all others.
141.	In all industrialized countries a great deal of information and education is still necessary to make it understood that the North-South dialog is concerned not with the giving and taking of alms, but with our common future.
142.	The Secretary-General in the introduction to his report to the General Assembly on the work of the Organization correctly defined the role of the United Nations when he characterized our time as a period of transition in which we must overcome the antagonism between the principle of national sovereignty and the regulatory principles governing an interdependent world. Only co-operation can help us steer this development in such a way that it will benefit mankind as a whole,
143.	In this co-operation a central role falls to the United Nations as the only world-embracing organization, a role which no one else and nothing else can play. According to the mandate of the Charter, our Organization is to be the center in which the nations of the world will harmonize their actions to attain the common objectives of peace and progress. Let us at this thirty-first session of the General Assembly fulfill this mandate which the Charter gives us. Let us continue to work on the great task of building a world to conform to the vision of our Charter: a world of peace, a world of economic and social progress, and a world in which the freedom and dignity of man are a reality.
144.	My country is today more convinced than ever that in creating the United Nations mankind endowed itself with a great opportunity. We understand only too well the impatience of many who are waiting for their most elementary rights to come true. Nor do we underrate the difficulties which the United Nations is having in trying to close the big gap between demands and reality. We do not close our eyes to the obstacles besetting the road to an equitable and peaceful world-wide order. Only the spirit of co-operation on a basis of partnership can help us to go forward. Let us therefore use the opportunity we have.
Mr. President, first of all I should like to express to you my warmest congratulations upon your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. The great talent of the Permanent Representative of SriLanka, of the President of the Conference on the Law of the Sea and of the representative in New York of the presidency of the non-aligned countries is known to all. I have no doubt that at this session it will increasingly manifest itself. The co-operation of the French delegation will be yours in helping you to bring to a successful conclusion your difficult task in the next few weeks.
90.	I should also like to pay a tribute to the outgoing President, Mr. Gaston Thorn, who at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly displayed qualities of intelligence and character which made him the candidate of the group to which France belongs. An illustrious European and hence familiar with international problems, he found here a scene that' was equal to the exceptional talents and gifts which brought him to the head of the Government of a country united to France both by the ties of history and geography and by those of the heart, will and reason.
91.	Lastly, I am particularly pleased to find here again my friend Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who was so frequently for me a welcoming and understanding interlocutor and to tell him to what extent France appreciates the talent, the authority and the tact with which he accomplishes his lofty and difficult mission. Our confidence in him has never been wanting, and he still has our full support.
92.	It is not without some emotion that, after having been twice accredited to the United Nations and, just recently, the Permanent Representative of France for more than four years, I address the Assembly today in this familiar setting in my capacity as Minister of Foreign Affairs. I recognize the honor but also the weight of the duty which falls to me in this circumstance when once again, this time vested with broader responsibilities, I must make France's voice heard. My task is lightened by the pleasure I feel at seeing so many familiar faces and at drawing on such recent memories.
93.	It will not surprise members of the Assembly that as a former Permanent Representative I am tempted to review the world situation in the light of our Charter. This document, written 30 years ago, is still the basic instrument of international co-operation. Do not its preamble and the purposes and principles it lays down for oar Organization in memorable words contain a statement of the aspirations that should determine the action of peoples and States? A comparison between what should be and what actually is should serve to stimulate reflection and spur efforts so that, in this necessarily interdependent world where we live, war, poverty, intolerance and discrimination will no longer have to be put up with as inevitable ills.
94.	To save succeeding generations from the scourge of war: that is the first goal set by the Charter. Although there is now no military conflict between States in the conventional sense of the word, how can we fail to see that overt or potential hotbeds of crisis persist or have developed quite recently?
95.	The crisis in Lebanon, a country to which France is deeply attached, is a tragic illustration of this fact. That country, once a model of coexistence among different communities, has been subject to uncontrolled outbreaks of violence for more than a year now. An implacable mechanism has consistently kindled new flames from the smoking ashes of each previous outbreak. What is at stake is Lebanon's very existence and the survival of its people in all their richness and diversity. It rests with the Lebanese people themselves to find through dialog a political solution which, alone, can put an end to these fratricidal struggles.
96.	On behalf of the French Government, I should like to express again to Mr. Elias Sarkis, the new President of the Lebanese Republic, our heartfelt wishes for the success of the difficult task he is undertaking and our hope that once peace is restored the Lebanese people will be able to devote their efforts to the necessary work of reconstruction.
97.	I should like to state here that the crisis in Lebanon will be resolved only by a settlement based on the unity, integrity and sovereignty of the country. The French Government, for its part, remains available and, in particular, willing to facilitate any meeting or any search for reconciliation, which obviously presupposes a definitive cessation of the fighting. With a view to this, France is maintaining close contact with all the parties to the conflict.
98.	Deeply moved by the suffering of the entire Lebanese people, we have endeavored to provide humanitarian aid. Assistance has been granted to Lebanese nationals temporarily living in France and large shipments of medical supplies have been sent to Lebanon itself. Moreover, we are ready to lend our help, in conjunction with our partners in the European Community, to the reconstruction of Lebanon.
99.	But the solution of the Lebanese tragedy cannot be separated from the solution of the Palestinian problem and the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. These three questions are in fact inextricably linked. It is for that reason that in the latter two cases we reaffirm both the necessity to implement Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) and the basic nature of the three principles upon which any lasting settlement must necessarily rely: withdrawal from the territories occupied by Israel in June 1967, recognition of the Palestinians' right to a homeland, and the right of all States in the area, including Israel, to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries.
100.	The basis of any just and lasting settlement can be found in the application of those principles, especially as regards the Palestinians. That people, raised in hardship and made strong by suffering, has now taken its place as a necessary partner in any negotiation. It has become quite obvious that no solution to the conflict is possible unless the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to express its national identity becomes a reality. But how can that right be exercised without a territorial base which, at the proper time, could be given the structures of statehood?
101.	Close to the Middle East is another area of tension, Cyprus. The United Nations feels especially responsible because it decided on the framework and guidelines for a settlement there. We are obliged, unfortunately, to recognize that the resolution adopted by our Assembly two years ago [resolution 3212 (XXIX)] has so far remained a dead letter.
102.	Indeed, a settlement can result only from an agreement between the communities of the Republic of Cyprus. The United Nations has never ignored this. France and her European Community partners have, for their part, tried to persuade the parties involved to set aside passion and resentments, even when justified, in order to begin genuine negotiations and reach a settlement in keeping with law and justice. Such a settlement must preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and must be acceptable to all Cypriots.
103.	The Secretary-General, who was entrusted by the Security Council with a mission whose importance deserves special emphasis, has tried in every way he has felt possible to carry out this mission successfully. He is striving and will continue to strive with ail his well-known dedication to bring about a real resumption of and progress in inter- communal negotiations and to help them to move forward. We consider his contribution indispensable in attaining the goal we all seek: the restoration of peace in Cyprus and a return to its former prosperity.
104.	I have cited only the examples of Lebanon, the Middle East and Cyprus here, but this by no means implies that the solemn pact that commits us "to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another" is being respected everywhere else.
105.	I note, however, that in South-East Asia, where the guns have at last fallen silent, the possibility does exist for the principles of our Charter now to find fruitful application. And what more fervent hope could we have for South-East Asia, so long divided and battered, than that peace should take hold, independence assert itself and co-operation increase in a spirit of tolerance? The recent improvement of bilateral relations among the various States of the region gives ground for hope that the time will come for a free and harmonious concertation; it gives hope that a regional grouping can be formed in mutual respect, a grouping that will make it possible to ensure the neutrality of South-East Asia as a whole and to pool efforts to meet the challenge of development. Who can fail to see how valuable an example the success of such an undertaking would be?
106.	Nobody, of course, should put himself in the place of the nine countries of South-East Asia to assess the timeliness of one move or another or suggest the most appropriate ways in which they might co-operate. But it is our task to increase the chances of success and eventually to uphold the results of any initiative which would spare over 300 million people the dangers of new conflicts and the effects of confrontations which are not their own.
107.	France, which has so many ties with that part of the world and whose sole ambition is to best serve the interests of the countries there, is for its part determined, along with all those who share its concern, to make every effort to further this end.
108.	Peace, the goal which is central to our action, is the product of an equilibrium which is built on the independence of States and nations, to be sure, but it also needs broader foundations. Back in 1945 did we not, after all, proclaim our "faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small"?
109.	Much has been said and done, right here and elsewhere, towards the realization of this noble goal. But we are forced to note that there are distressing situations in the world today which may at times actually jeopardize peace. Those situations arise from the failure to recognize the fundamental rights of the human person.
110.	I am thinking most particularly of southern Africa, where tension and confrontation are becoming more acute. This development justifies the part we are taking and the support we are giving to the efforts to prevent a fatal escalation. It is all too evident that racial discrimination is the underlying cause of the crisis, though situations may differ here and there. France -and I want to say this with the greatest possible emphasis-rejects and condemns the policy of apartheid. The recent tragic incidents should have made South Africa's leaders realize at long last that such persistent contempt for the dignity of the human person in itself constitutes a source of perpetual conflict among men, and this could lock their country in a deadly cycle of unrest and repression.
111.	The fact that France, like other countries, but to a lesser extent than some, maintains commercial relations with South Africa obviously should not be interpreted as contradicting its position on apartheid. The peaceful nature of a recent contract in the electro-nuclear sector has been amply demonstrated, as is witnessed, moreover, by the international guarantees that have been granted by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
112.	The French Government's condemnation of racial discrimination and other aspects of the policy followed by Pretoria led it to adopt an increasingly restrictive policy with regard to the delivery of arms and ultimately to prohibit any new contracts or further sales. I informed the Security Council of this on 19 June in my capacity as Permanent Representative.  I am saying it again here as a member of the French Government.
113.	Elsewhere in southern Africa, the situation is of still more immediate concern. It is a matter of urgency that Namibia should in accordance with United Nations resolutions accede to sovereignty and independence under the supervision of our Organization after a constitutional process in which the political groups, the principal one being SWAPO, should participate. In several instances, we, together with our European partners, have approached Pretoria to that effect.
114.	It is no less urgent a matter for the majority to accede to power in Rhodesia. Accordingly we welcomed 
the announcement in which the illegal regime in Salisbury has at long last accepted that principle following the recent mission to southern Africa by the Secretary of State of the United States, In this matter, as in the question of Namibia, he has had our encouragement. Without concealing from ourselves the difficulties that still have to be overcome, we want to note the decisive step that has been taken and the change in thinking that it shows. In so far as the two communities and the African leaders directly concerned are prepared with the assistance of the administering Power to draw conclusions from this, it seems to us that prospects for a peaceful settlement may be foreseen, in accordance with the wish that France has always expressed.
115.	The right of peoples to self-determination is written into our Charter. It has been the guiding principle through-out our policy on decolonization, and it is still our foremost criterion in defining the future of peoples and the framework for their existence.
116.	With regard to the Comoros, France has scrupulously applied this principle, and we intend to remain faithful to it. Although we have raised no obstacle to the admission of the State of the Comoros to the United Nations, our attitude has frequently not been understood. I do not wish to harp on misunderstandings that I should like to see overcome. What is past is past; we are looking only to the future. I can tell you that the proposal on the status of Mayotte, to be submitted to the French Parliament, will indeed leave open all possibilities for the future, with due respect for the wishes of the peoples.
117.	In the French Territory of the Afars and Issas, France is engaged in a process that will lead in a democratic manner to independence, if such is the wish of the population. Our intentions are, I believe, now understood, especially by those who are concerned most particularly with the peaceful settlement of this question, and under-stood by all those who have wanted to listen to us. We hope that all the States which call for this evolution will contribute to it as the process develops.
118.	At this point I should like to emphasize that the issue of development is one of major importance for the African continent. Absolute priority has to be given to enabling African States rapidly to improve the lot of their peoples. This is one of the governing principles of France's African- policy. Therefore, the President of the Republic recently proposed the creation of a fund for African advancement, an instrument of solidarity for the financing of development projects that are of special interest, particularly for the least favored countries.
119.	The need to give priority to development problems quite naturally leads us to hope that Africa will remain free from ideological conflicts and will not become a pawn of Powers outside the continent. As Mr.Giscard d'Estaing recently said:
"Africa must be left to the Africans, and the only competition that serves its interest is competition, the sole objective of which is the economic, social and cultural development of Africa."
120.	Latin America too aspires to define its identity still more clearly. Its vast reservoir of human and intellectual potential, its rich cultural past and its very considerable resources assure for this continent a promising future. The affinity we have with its peoples makes us particularly sensitive to the respect for human dignity and the tolerance enjoined on us by our Charter, of which, as we know, Latin American nations have so frequently set an example.
121.	Respect for the rights of the human person is not an obligation incumbent on States alone. Our laws and customs impose it on individuals as well. Here I should like to add France's voice to the universal cry of condemnation and anguish that is aroused by acts of terrorism. The point is not to determine whether certain forms of violence generate others, but to condemn such acts in their principle and to repress them because they involve innocent people, without distinction as to age or sex, making them instruments of intolerable blackmail.
122.	The measures that should be taken to end this outrage are part of the yet unfinished labor of defining, and especially of ensuring, proper respect for human rights.
123.	We fully approve of the initiative taken by the Federal Republic of Germany to combat the taking of hostages, and we will support it to the full.
124. But it is not enough to remove the most imminent threats of conflict and the most brutal manifestations of violence or better to guarantee the exercise of justice. The authors of the Charter knew full well that the freedom of mankind is but an empty phrase if the material prerequisites for existence are not satisfied. Hence the ultimate grand design which they assigned to our Organization: namely, to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
125.	Of course, the results achieved cannot yet be considered satisfactory: the intolerable gap between the multitude of poor countries and the small minority of developed countries remains an object of scandal. It explains one of the predominant factors of tension in our world. But the United Nations effort to attain the objective of economic progress and justice deserves recognition. Over the years, right in this very place, I have witnessed the growing importance accorded development and co-operation. The seeds of these concepts were in the text of the Charter. Thirty years later, they have become an imperative.
126.	France, for its part, believed in this effort-an effort made within our Organization, by our Organization. At the early sessions of UNCTAD, France presented specific ideas on the percentage of public aid for development, generalized preferences and the organization of raw-materials markets, which have made considerable headway. France closely associated itself with the elaboration of the Inter-national Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade [resolution 2626 (XXV)] and confirmed its interest in this collective effort. When it became evident that new relations had to be established between the producers and consumers of energy, the French Government turned first to the United Nations to deal with this problem. Lastly, France has participated unconditionally and without ambiguity in the immense undertaking of joint reflection required to set up a new international economic order. For, indeed, this is precisely what has to be done: to replace the disorder in world economic relations, and the relations of force permeating them, by the quest for rationality and justice; and to ensure lastingly, at the world level, as was stated last year by the President of the Republic, a better balance of trade, economic activity, currencies and revenues.
127.	We are still wide of the mark, but progress has been made. Indispensable transfers of resources from the developed countries to the developing world are on the rise. That will be the case this year for the volume and percentage of French public aid. But what can and should evolve are the very structures of international trade. In this respect, I think that we must not underestimate the positive results of the fourth session of UNCTAD. After years of procrastination, the international community has finally committed itself to work for the organization of markets. France, whose delegation to that Conference took the initiative of making certain proposals concerning the centralized financing of buffer stocks of raw materials and which participated very closely in the drafting of the fundamental resolutions, is firmly resolved to participate actively and in good faith in the implementation of the principles approved in Nairobi.
128.	The negotiations to begin shortly in Geneva on this vital question and the discussions to be continued on other important problems will require the understanding and patience of us all. Reason and realism preclude recourse to slogans and rejection of the facts. This law of life is even more binding in debates on the full range of economic problems, from energy to development, as is the case in the only forum with such a complete agenda- the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, which is being held in Paris at present.
129.	It is only natural that the tensions of international life should be reflected in the work of that Conference since the justifiable impatience of the third world is so keen and since it is so difficult to define truly valid solutions in these diverse areas, even when agreement can be reached on the principles to be respected and the goals to be attained.
130.	But the instrument is there if we want to, and if we can, go further. It is a unique instrument, with advantages recognized by all the participants, an instrument that can easily be used to complement the large meetings of the United Nations.
131.	The world conferences held in recent years have broadened our field of action. I will mention, in particular, the United Nations Conference on the. Human Environment, held in Stockholm last year, the Second General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in Lima last year, and, more recently, the International Labor Organization's Tripartite Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labor. As the goals defined by Governments in their successive assemblies acquire world-wide importance, the variety of means and solutions must also grow. No prejudices should be allowed to limit the choice of methods needed to attain the desired goals.
132.	The specific role of the United Nations is not to tackle each and every problem. It is still less to serve as an arena for conflicts in which the stakes would be the ephemeral, and useless, victory of one ideology over another. As the Charter says so well, the Organization must be "a center for harmonizing the actions of nations" for purposes they hold in common. What we expect from it, through reflection, discussion and practical action, is that it arrive at and constantly perfect an overall strategy to build this more effective, more equitable economic order.
133.	There is no doubt that laying the foundations of this new order will be a lengthy task, because it involves nothing less than getting the world started in a new phase of organization and setting up a global system that reconciles the liberal principles of the old order with new measures governing structure and organization.
134.	The basics are already present, namely, each nation's acceptance of this common endeavor of justice. As for concrete measures, we must still avoid getting bogged down in facile ultimatums and ready-made solutions. We have yet to listen to our partner, and confirm our faith in negotiation and co-operation, as the Economic and Social Council asked us to do at its session this summer in Abidjan. In order for us to be faithful to the spirit of the Charter, we must still combine perseverance, courage and realism.
135.	To "live together in peace with one another as good neighbors" is the last great aspiration that the Charter proposes to our peoples.
136.	The organization of regional relations, particularly in Latin America and Africa, corresponds to this desire. I shall refrain from making an assessment which our friends from these regions might find out of place. I shall merely recall the progress made in Europe.
137.	The fratricidal wars of the past now belong to history. The distrust and antagonism of former days have been replaced by entente, co-operation and organization.
138.	The organization is, first of all, that of the Europe of the nine members of the European Economic Community; Year after year, whatever the difficulties, whatever the hazards, which sometimes come from abroad, that Europe is making progress. The United Nations knows this. When I was Permanent Representative and one or another question was being examined, so many people used to ask me, "What are the nine going to do? ". This vitality of the Community stems from its very nature as the framework for reconciliation and co-operation among nations	were once enemies but which have today deeded to work together. For this purpose, there have been set up structures and institutions which, instead of being fixed once and for all, are slowly but surely evolving. "Progress", wrote an author in ancient times, "is when something grows while remaining itself'. This could be the motto of the European Communities. Thanks to the traditions of the States that comprise it, this group of nations has also chosen to be a center of exchange and dialog. Sometimes denounced for being a closed bloc, it has proved its ability to be open towards the rest of Western Europe as well as towards countries to the east of our old continent and, since the Lomé Convention,  towards 46 countries lying across the seas.
139.	The existence and soundness of the Community cannot be demonstrated better than by the passage in the address delivered yesterday by its current President, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, on behalf of the member countries. The French delegation fully agrees with everything he said in that capacity about economic and political problems.
140.	Nothing illustrates this better, also, than the role played by the Community here at the United Nations and in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe-the culmination of several years of patient effort to end the divisions caused by the Second World War and a point of departure for a pattern of development which, with time and experience, would reveal a clearer picture of a Europe at last consistent with its geographical designation.
141.	What happens on the European continent does not, however, exempt us from observing that the world is still far from the state of neighborly relations prescribed by the Charter. There has not been a global conflict in 30 years; probably not so much because peace feigns in the full sense of the word as because destructive capabilities neutralize each other.
142.	That is why France believes that, foremost among our concerns, should be the quest for an agreed disarmament between States. That undertaking, which got its start shortly after the Second World War, is marking time. Fifteen years ago the study of general plans for disarmament was in fact abandoned in favor of the study of partial measures. But the agreements reached in that direction-some of which have some merit-should not conceal the unremitting arms race, which leaves an awesome threat weighing on the world.
143.	Nevertheless, some initiatives are taking shape to revise the very structures of the disarmament effort. My Government is following them with interest. It is prepared to support any proposal aimed at genuine disarmament, that is, at the effective destruction of weapons of all types, nuclear and conventional, in accordance with a reasonable time-table and under effective international control.
144.	Since the very birth of the United Nations, it has ' been fashionable to criticize and even lampoon our Organization for its shortcomings and relative ineffectiveness.
145.	I would like to say here that France does not share that skepticism. It considers the United Nations an in-dispensable and irreplaceable instrument for dialog and co-operation among the peoples of the earth. It realizes that, in the maintenance of peace and in many aspects of economic development, the Organization has rendered services which are so easily forgotten because they were so effective. Lastly, it is aware of the fact that the shortcomings of the United Nations are a product of the political divisions in the world. As a minor, it shows nations their own reflection; as a forum, it allows aspirations to be expressed in a political and diplomatic framework; and as an instrument, it is the natural tool of those who want to use it and who know how.
146.	The Organization today extends, with but a few exceptions, to the dimensions of the globe. Five years ago it took an important step in this direction-although it was merely a reasonable step-by restoring China to its rightful place here. In this way, the representatives of that immense nation were able to bring to us here the echo of the great voice that fell silent early this month.
147.	The Organization must truly become a world body, that is, it must welcome the States which apply for membership once they have met the recognized criteria of international law and once they have declared their willingness to respect the Charter.
148.	Accordingly, while France is pleased to welcome the admission of the Republic of Seychelles, with which it has historical affinities, it hopes that the doors of the Organization will be opened to VietNam -with which it particularly intends to develop its relations-to Angola and, generally speaking, to all those that request membership. By the same token, it speaks out against any attempt to prevent or suspend a State's membership. Whatever complaints are brought against the States thus threatened, such extreme measures would in no way facilitate the search for settlements-quite the contrary.
149.	To find what unites us and overcome what divides us, harness our mutual determination to build and repress the instinct that urges us to destroy, work together for the liberty, happiness and dignity of mankind-that, to my mind, is a program that is just as relevant and imperative in 1976 as it was in 1945. That is also the reason for my country's acceptance of the ideals of the Charter and the action of the United Nations.
150.	This acceptance is no mere formality. It is based on the conviction that, beneath frequently militant positions, there is a large community of needs which is expressed here. Over and above the verbal battles and attempts to gain the advantage, there is a growing recognition of the real ills that set mankind: economic crises, deterioration of the environment, mass poverty, over-population and war. Rooting out those scourges is a long-range task; but the future of coming generations and the survival of humanity are at stake. Such a task demands that concertation win over confrontation, that everyone agree to lend himself to dialog; it demands the patient and resolute efforts of countries which are capable of looking beyond groups and blocs. France intends to be among them.
The thirty-first session of the General Assembly is an auspicious occasion for the Commonwealth. It is particularly gratifying to the United Kingdom that the President of this session should be not only a distinguished and longstanding servant of the United Nations but also an outstanding representative of a Commonwealth country. I extend to you, Mr. President, the warm congratulations of my Government on your election. At the same time, I should like to pay my country's tribute to the Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, for his unremitting efforts over the last five years to promote peace and international understanding.
44.	I also take pleasure in welcoming here for the first time the Republic of Seychelles, a country whose membership in the United Nations was sponsored by the United Kingdom and by fellow members of the Commonwealth [A/31/L.1 and Add.l and 2]. I take this opportunity to convey my Government's thanks for the kind words of the President of Seychelles in his address to the Assembly last week [1st meeting].
45.	It is self-evident that the British Government's foreign policy should reflect the values of the British people themselves. We in Britain are trying to create a society based on the ideals of morality, equality and justice, the United Kingdom is no less committed to these ideals in its foreign policy.
46.	This is a fundamental fact which shapes my Government's attitude to the great challenges facing the international community today: the search for peace; the establishment of a proper economic balance between developed and developing countries; the promotion of human rights; and the maintenance of the rule of law. It is appropriate that on my first visit to the General Assembly as British Foreign Secretary I should at the outset reaffirm unequivocally my country's commitment to support and sustain the efforts which are being made to meet these challenges.
47.	This is also a pledge of support for the United Nations itself. More than ever before, the problems that confront our societies can be effectively tackled only on a regional, or even a global, basis. "Interdependence" is a fashionable word; it is on everybody's lips these days-but rightly so. There is not a nation represented here today that can confidently assure its security and prosperity in isolation. With universal membership as its ultimate goal, with international co-operation and the peaceful settlement of disputes as its ideals; and with its ability to offer the world's nations a forum in which they can discuss their problems freely and openly, the United Nations is uniquely placed to meet the challenges of an interdependent world. That is why today, as over the last 31 years, support for the United Nations is an axiom of British foreign policy.
48.	It would be invidious to arrange these challenges according to some neat order of priorities. We need to meet them all if we are to create the better world we seek. The deprivation of human rights is just as offensive to human dignity as economic deprivation. The establishment of the rule of law is inseparable from the establishment of conditions of peace and security.
49.	But, this said, the relationship between the developed and developing countries is a matter of particular concern to the international community at the present time. Tue gap between the rich and the poor countries is not just a matter of economics; it is a moral question which requires a firm and principled stand. The United Kingdom's position was demonstrated when, in July, at a time of severe economic pressures, we exempted one programme, and one programme alone, from the widespread cuts in public expenditure-the overseas aid programme. Within this programme, moreover, it is our policy to put increasing emphasis on the poorer countries; and not just the poorer countries, but the poorest people in those countries. For when we say that we want a fair and rational world economic system in the management of which the developing countries will have their proper share, we mean also that the poor countries of the world should obtain a new deal, which enables them to offer their peoples the prospect of lives no longer dominated by hunger and chronic insufficiency.
50. Now we should not belittle what has already been achieved in the comparatively short time since the seventh special session of the General Assembly last year. The Conference on International Economic Co-operation has now resumed its detailed work in the four critical areas of energy, raw materials, development, and finance; and I hope that this work will culminate in a successful ministerial conference at the end of the year and in a major and positive step forward in the north-south dialogue. The fourth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in May, for all the initial difficulties which beset it, also marked a significant stage in this dialogue. Eleven out of 13 resolutions  were adopted by consensus and an important programme of work was set in train to which the United Kingdom is determined to contribute positively. There- have also been major international monetary reforms to the benefit of the poorer countries. So something, though not enough, has been achieved in the past 12 months.
51. It is especially pleasing to the United Kingdom that the European Community has taken effective action in this field I welcome the words of the Netherlands Foreign Minister, speaking on behalf of the Community, when he addressed the Assembly last week [7th meeting]. Of particular significance was his reference to an outward- looking Europe. For Britain, an essential justification for the Community's very existence and for our membership of it is that it should play an active and constructive role in the world, so enabling its member States to contribute more effectively to the solution of international problems than if they were acting on their own. The Community has played just such a role in the dialogue between the developed and developing worlds, deploying its collective economic strength to excellent effect. In his speech, Mr. van der Stoel rightly stressed the importance of the Lome Convention,  which grants, as representatives know, preferential access to Community markets to some 50 developing countries and offers a scheme for the stabilization of export earnings for certain raw materials. In recent years, the Community has also steadily improved its generalized scheme of preferences, a scheme which is revised every year and is now of particular benefit to the poorer countries. And, of course, at the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, the Community speaks for all its nine members.
52. The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has an important contribution to make to the dialogue between the industrialized and developing nations. The concept of an international authority to administer the mineral resources of the deep sea-bed for the benefit of all mankind is bold and imaginative. Her Majesty's Government has played a full part in attempting to promote general agreement on the structure of the authority, on the regime itself, and on the many other issues which are currently before the Conference. But while-and you know better than anyone, Mr. President-the Conference has made progress on other issues, we are disappointed by the lack of movement on this basic question of the deep sea-bed. At the fifth session, some States seemed to abandon their previous willingness to consider possible compromise solutions. The United Kingdom was not among these. We shall persist in our efforts to find solutions acceptable to all, and we hope that, before the next session of the Conference, other States will also consider carefully how we might achieve consensus.
53. It is a measure of the size of the problem that so much still remains to be done before a proper balance is achieved between the richer and the poorer "amongst the nations": a balance which is an essential pre-condition of a more civilized international order. I fully understand the impatience in some quarters: it is, after all, literally a matter of life and death for many people that effective remedies be found for poverty and starvation-and found quickly. But the lesson of the past three years is that no one gains from confrontation: our economies are too closely interconnected. The dialogue must continue, because on its successful outcome depends the ability of the poorer countries to secure the real transfer of resources that they so desperately need. What we are searching for, and must seek with sympathy and imagination, is a new relationship based upon justice and a balance of mutual advantage.
54.	However, the North-South dialogue is about political as well as economic partnership. This brings me to an area of the world in which we find distilled all the challenges that confront this Organization today. I refer of course, to southern Africa. There the need for international cooperation and peaceful reconciliation is overwhelming if multiracial societies are to be able to live in freedom and prosperity.
55.	In Rhodesia, I believe, the acceptance of majority rule by the illegal regime-a turning point the achievement of which is largely due to the skill and energy of the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr. Kissinger-has given us at long last the basis for a peaceful settlement. That, as Mr. Callaghan, my Prime Minister, made clear earlier this year, was the essential first requirement. We must now seize this opportunity to make real progress towards an independent government that will truly represent the peoples of Zimbabwe.
56.	Britain will continue to play a constructive role in this. As you will know, I have agreed, in response to the requests of all the parties concerned, to convene a conference to discuss the early formation of an interim government. I am sure you will agree that Mr. Ivor Richard has all the right qualifications to be chairman of that conference. I may add that his knowledge and experience of the United Nations was an important factor in my choice.
57.	I emphasize that, while we are ready to help in whatever way is appropriate, we look to the parties concerned-the parties on the spot-to work out for themselves the best means of achieving a rapid transition to independence based firmly on majority rule.
58.	All of us hope that the threat to peace and stability which Rhodesia has posed for too many years will soon be at an end. Once the interim government has been established, the justification for the various pressures which have been maintained against the illegal regime should fade away. At that stage there should no longer be any reason for the international isolation of Rhodesia. But until that time comes, it would be right for the international community to continue with the enforcement of economic sanctions. We cannot afford to let the momentum of the present initiative be lost.
59.	I hope that when I next have the honor of addressing the Assembly we shall have seen great progress. We all look forward to welcoming a truly independent Zimbabwe into the international community and to giving it our full support and encouragement.
60.	In South Africa, the rioting which broke out in Soweto in June and which has since spread widely has revealed-if indeed any such revelation were needed-the strength of black African bitterness against the evils of apartheid. Britain has consistently condemned apartheid; we condemn it now. The violence and bloodshed in South Africa have shown in the most tragic way that apartheid is not only unjust; it will not work. There must, and indeed there will, be change. We have always hoped that such change could take place peacefully. But time is running out. We urge the South African Government to accept the need for a fundamental reappraisal of its racial policies, so that a society can be built in South Africa in which all South Africans, regardless of color, can live and work in peace, equality and mutual respect.
61.	In the past year Namibia has rightly remained the subject of extensive debate, both in the General Assembly and in the Security Council. We were pleased to vote in favor of Security Council resolution 385 (1976) of 30 January. This was a constructive attempt to press on towards the common aim of securing South Africa's withdrawal from its unlawful occupation of the Territory. The United Kingdom has been active in a number of contexts and we have repeatedly make our views clear to South Africa, both in bilateral and in multilateral approaches. We hope that Mr. Kissinger's success in producing movement over Rhodesia will be followed by similar success in producing movement on Namibia. We fully support his efforts and those of the African leaders directly concerned to help to bring Namibia to early self-determination and independence.
62.	If our efforts to achieve international co-operation and peaceful reconciliation in southern Africa fail, we face the prospect of a catastrophic conflict that not only will engulf the peoples of the region but could also have serious results for world peace.
63.	We hear much about the need for detente, in the aftermath of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. But recent history has given a forcible reminder to us all-and particularly to those, like the Soviet Union, who disparage the present attempts to bring peace to southern Africa-that, in the pursuit of detente, the need for a sense of responsibility is world-wide and not confined to Europe.
64.	We cannot limit detente by geography or by subject. More important, if we are to achieve a genuine detente on a world-wide scale, we must all as a first step honor the undertakings which we gave when we pledged ourselves to the United Nations Charter. This requires a high degree of restraint and mutual tolerance between nations. We are a long way yet from bringing these qualities to international life. Nowhere is this need for restraint more necessary and obvious than in the field of arms control. It is crucial that the international community take urgent steps to curtail the proliferation of nuclear and conventional weapons. Lord Goronwy-Roberts, my Minister of State, will set out the British Government's views on disarmament at greater length in the First Committee.
65.	The concept of the peaceful settlement of disputes is, of course, far older than that of detente. The United
Nations has from its inception seen continuous attempts to apply it in the Middle East. Yet the unresolved conflict there remains one of the great threats to the peace and prosperity of the world. I endorse everything the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands has said on this subject on behalf of the nine members of the European Community. We urgently want to see negotiations leading to a peace agreement supported and sustained by the world community. It is a tragedy that lack of mutual trust causes both sides to adopt so cautious an approach to negotiation when they both stand to gain so much. Of course no one can guarantee in advance that negotiations will lead to a lasting peace but, unless the opportunity is grasped now, the chances of success will surely diminish as time passes,
66.	An enduring settlement must of course be based on compromise; but that compromise must fulfill the basic aspirations of all the parties and leave no underlying grievances to fester and yet again to threaten the peace of the area. On the one hand, the Arabs must accept that Israel is a fact and that its right to exist is not in question. No peace can survive unless the Arab States give Israel formal recognition, within secure, recognized and commonly agreed boundaries, as a permanent feature of the geography and politics of the Middle East.
67.	On the other hand, if Israel is to obtain this recognition, it must, in a settlement, put an end to the territorial occupation which it has maintained since the war of 1967. The nine members of the European Community have declared that that is an essential element in a settlement. On behalf of the British Government I underline that need today. A settlement must also provide a place for the Palestinians, whose fate is at the very heart of the Middle East dispute. They regard themselves and are now generally recognized as a people distinct from their Arab neighbors, with their own strong aspirations towards nationhood. One essential element in a settlement will be a land for the Palestinians, not necessarily a sovereign State, but a place where they will be free to look after their own affairs.
68.	There are things which both sides can do now to help prepare for the negotiations which must come, and I hope will come soon. Above all, both sides must show restraint: the Israelis, by not seeking to change the situation in the occupied territories; the Arabs, by validating their claims that they really want peace.
69.	In the thirty-first year of its existence, the United Nations has come close to its goal of universal membership. The welcoming of new Member States, a feature of past General Assemblies, will become an increasingly rare occurrence as the age of decolonization draws to a close. Universality will not of itself bring greater mutual understanding; the more diverse the membership, the greater the challenge to consensus. The prospect of universal membership therefore obliges us more than ever to ensure that the Organization functions promptly and effectively in the interest of world peace and harmony.
70.	There are surely a number of ways in which we can increase the effectiveness of the Organization. I have already mentioned the Conference on the Law of the Sea; a successful conclusion of that Conference would bring a vast new area of human activity under international regulation and add immeasurably to the Organization's standing. Again, the activities of the United Nations should be more closely harnessed to the promotion of the international rule of law. There are also specific measures that the United Nations could take to tackle international violence. For example, the Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany has put forward a proposal for a United Nations convention against the taking of hostages [A/31/242]. I strongly support that proposal and hope that other members will do so too.
71. But I want to sound a warning. Sometimes the work of our specialized conferences and agencies is made more difficult by the introduction of divisive political issues into their proceedings. I believe that the huge majority of professionals and experts attending those meetings are becoming more and more concerned at what they regard as unnecessary obstruction of their work. The British Government shares that concern. We want to make the specialist and technical work of the United Nations as effective as we can. In many areas of our shared concern, we cannot afford the luxury of prolonged political debate when the harsh realities of, for example, water shortages, starvation and waste of resources cry out for immediate joint action. Of course the political issues of the day are crucial to us, and must be debated; free debate is the life-blood of this Organization. But at the United Nations we have plenty of opportunities for the political disputes and issues of the day. We have this Assembly and its Committees and we have the Security Council. But we cannot afford to allow those disputes to reduce the effectiveness of specialist international co-operation. If this trend persists, there will be a growing pressure to achieve results outside the United Nations system. And so I appeal to all Members of this Organization to maintain the effectiveness of our work together in the many fields where joint action is in the interest of us all.
72. I also believe that we should identify those areas where our aspirations and standards of conduct are not negotiable and should enjoy the full support of the membership of the United Nations. I refer in particular to the question of human rights. The normative work of the United Nations in drafting instruments has, I think, in general been well done. We already have the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which has been the inspiration of many constitutions and conventions, including the European Convention to which the United Kingdom has long been a party. The year 1976 has now seen the entry into force of the two International Covenants on Human Rights [resolution 2200 A (XXX)]. These give legal force to the rights set out in the Universal Declaration. The United Kingdom's ratification of the Covenants last May reflects the seriousness of its approach. We hope that other States will join us in ratifying and giving full support to the Human Rights Committee, whose task it will be to supervise the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with vigor and impartiality. But vital though it is, legislation alone cannot of course guarantee human rights. We must all approach this question with frankness, with honesty and, where necessary, with self-criticism. Our task is to arrest and reverse the present erosion of human rights in the world. We shall not accomplish this if we allow human rights to become, as is too frequently the case today, a playground for political propaganda, hypocrisy and cynicism.
73.	Our task is to create a world in which all men can live in peace, prosperity and freedom, guaranteed by the rule of law. This is an ambitious goal and some may despair of ever reaching it. But I believe that if we approach the problems that beset us in a spirit of peaceful reconciliation, co-operation and restraint-and if, above all, we display these qualities in our dealings with one another in this Organization-the task will not appear so daunting and the goal will not prove impossible of achievement.
Let me begin by extending to the President my Government's warm congratulations on his unanimous election to be President of the thirty-first session of the General Assembly. We are happy indeed that this high office has been filled by his country this year, and that the choice has fallen on him in particular. It is a mark of international tribute to Sri Lanka and its noteworthy role in the United Nations. It is also yet another mark of recognition of his own wide experience and skill in conference diplomacy. We feel sure that the success of the thirty-first session is in safe hands.
48.	I wish to place on record also our appreciation of the work of his distinguished predecessor, the Prime Minister of Luxembourg who under difficult circumstances maintained a high standard of leadership and objectivity.
49.	It is customary for us to say a few words about our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim. He has tried always to represent the United Nations as accurately as possible. He has reaffirmed his faith in the United Nations when it was most needed. His loyalty to the principles and purposes of the United Nations has been demonstrated on many an occasion, when a lesser man might have faltered. We wish him many more years of dedicated service to the United Nations.
50.	We are glad to welcome Seychelles, our youngest Member. The attainment of its independence through peaceful constitutional means is a tribute to the maturity of its people and its leaders.
51.	It is unfortunate that Viet Nam and Angola have not yet' been admitted to the United Nations, despite their clear entitlement to membership. The peoples of these two countries have had to wage prolonged and bitter struggles for winning their national independence, and having won their birthright, their Governments have applied for admission to the United Nations. This is a remarkable manifestation of their belief that the best guarantee of their independence and future development lies in joining the United Nations. And yet, our doors remain closed to them for reasons that do not carry conviction. We feel sure therefore that there will be a change of heart. We reaffirm our support for the admission of Viet Nam and Angola and we have every expectation that they will soon be seated among us.
52.	An important recent event was the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries held in Colombo in August 1976. It was the largest ever of its kind and demonstrated that, despite their diversity, non-aligned countries are united in their struggle for freedom, equality and peace. The fact that most States on attaining independence from colonial rule have joined the non-aligned family is proof of the continued validity and importance of non-alignment. My Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, stated at the Colombo Conference that in a fast changing world non-alignment remains the bulwark of the ever widening area of peace, a shelter against external pressures and a catalyst for a new world economic order based on equality and justice. The Action Program for Economic Co-operation adopted by the Colombo Conference [A/311197, annex III] is a significant achievement and provides a basis for further collective action.
53.	The United Nations has now been in existence for 30 years and it has seen dramatic changes in the world. It has survived the years of the cold war and has entered a period of detente between the great Powers. It has managed to contain situations of active hostilities and in the process it has acquired useful experience in peace-keeping operations. Its membership has increased rapidly and the United Nations has become a hallmark of independence of countries that have liberated themselves from colonial rule.
54.	The United Nations stands for the promise of peace, equality, justice and full opportunities for the common man everywhere. When one examines the resolutions adopted by the United Nations on a wide variety of subjects, one sees that a quiet revolution has been taking place during the last 20 years- a revolution in the realm of ideas about the quality of peace and the quality of life for all in the future.
55.	On the one hand, the United Nations has been trying to cope with current problems and controversies. Some-times these are issues that could be resolved outside the United Nations by the countries concerned. It is our belief that if the United Nations is to survive and grow into a cooperative organization equipped to deal with problems of the future, we should not unduly burden it with issues that lend themselves to solutions outside the United Nations in conformity with the principles of its Charter. After all, Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter stipulates that all Members shall settle their disputes themselves by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security and justice are not endangered.
56.	On the other hand, there are other types of issues that concern a number of countries and they seem to need the healing hand of the United Nations. But the experience of dealing with even such issues indicates that in the final analysis it is necessary for the parties directly involved to sit together and negotiate practical and reasonable solutions to their mutual benefit. This is as true of the Cyprus question as it is of the Korean question or any other such question for that matter. We wish to draw attention to this basic fact of life, because it is often forgotten in the early stage of most problems. As a consequence the credibility of the United Nations is placed under increasing strain.
57.	Issues that directly pose a continued threat to inter-national peace and security merit our attention as a matter of priority. The situation in the Middle East has been a source of grave anxiety. Another war in that region will affect all of us in one way or another. It will almost certainly plunge the peoples of that region into disasters of unprecedented magnitude. The continuing civil war in Lebanon makes us very sad, because of the heavy loss of life and destruction of property. It has also added a new dimension to an already complex situation.
58.	There is no doubt that peace must come eventually to that troubled part of the world. The essential ingredients for a peace settlement have already been set out in Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973). In subsequent resolutions the United Nations has recognized the national rights of the Palestinian people and affirmed the vital importance of the exercise of those rights for the maintenance of peace in that region. The root of the problem of course is the continuing occupation of Arab lands and territories by Israel. Ways and means must be found for implementing the Security Council resolutions and a proper climate for their implementation should be quickly created by an early resumption of the work of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East.
59.	The process of decolonization has maintained its momentum everywhere, except in southern Africa. We had hoped that after the withdrawal of Portuguese colonialism, white minority rule elsewhere in southern Africa would quickly yield to majority rule. But it would seem that our hopes were based on wrong premises. The national liberation movements have been left with no option but to resort to armed struggle. It is particularly sad that the peoples of southern Africa should have to make many more sacrifices before winning their freedom, because it is within the competence of the United Nations to prevent them by taking enforcement action.
60.	In Zimbabwe the time is overdue for the introduction of majority rule. The question of a constitution, safeguards for minorities, etc. surely must follow the establishment of majority rule. Diplomatic efforts are being made by front-line African States and others to resolve the problem democratically and peacefully through negotiations. The regime of Ian Smith clearly has no basis in law or in the will of the people, and it must yield to majority rule without any delay, if further bloodshed is to be avoided. The United Kingdom, whose legal responsibility continues, could play a helpful role at the present juncture.
61.	It is necessary to remind ourselves that the Territory of Namibia has international status and that South Africa's presence there is illegal. South Africa's open challenge to the authority of the United Nations has remained unanswered in effective terms. Almost every Member of this Organization agrees that steps should be taken to retrieve in practice what the United Nations legally holds in trust, which is the Territory of Namibia and the destiny of its people. But nothing has been done so far except to adopt recommendatory resolutions. Nothing could cause greater harm to the credibility of the United Nations than its failure to assume in practice responsibility for what belongs to it in law. The implications of this should be squarely faced by those countries that support the legal position but are not prepared to enforce it. Here again, diplomacy seems to be at work to bring together representatives of the people of Namibia to discuss and agree upon the process towards their independence within a short period of time. The United Nations cannot afford to fail in Namibia, because the Members of this Organization have a collective legal responsibility for its independence.
62.	The infamous policy of apartheid, which is the device employed by the white minority regime in South Africa to perpetuate its rule, has been roundly condemned by nearly all Members of the United Nations. That policy, racist in concept and rooted in slavery, contains within it the seeds of its own violent destruction. It is a flagrant violation of the concept of equality of human beings regardless of color or race. We see already the beginnings of its end and we hope it will be peaceful. We extend our sympathies to the victims of racist oppression in Soweto and Cape Town.
63.	We hope that the white rulers in South Africa, in order to avoid further loss of life and property, will give up the policy of apartheid and replace it with a forward-looking enlightened policy that will enable all persons, regardless of race or color, to live together on a basis of complete equality. The intention of the white South African Government to grant so-called independence to Transkei sad to create similar "bantustans" is no solution. It is nothing more than the logical extension of the policy of apartheid and is intended to create satellite black areas without any real independence. It will intensify racial discrimination rather than eliminate it, and it should be rejected by the United Nations.
64.	Turning now to some other important problems, may I mention that while we have welcomed the state of detente in East-West relations, we have always stressed that efforts to consolidate and intensify detente should respond positively to the anxieties and aspirations of the rest of the world. This can best be done through meaningful disarmament measures, through implementing agreed measures for securing a rational and equitable new economic order, and through non-interference in the internal affairs of developing countries. It is only through such steps that detente can spread to all regions and create its own momentum for establishing mutually co-operative and beneficial relations between all States.
65.	The frightful dilemma facing mankind today is the incredible accretion of enormous military power by a few countries and their seeming inability to deescalate the arms race. They seem to be under a strange compulsion to race faster and faster in order to remain in the same position of parity. The price of this parity is reported to be Of the order of $US 300 billion per annum at present. Despite the astronomical waste involved in the diversion of vast resources for achieving the so-called balance of strategic power or mutual deterrence, war continues to remain a likely consequence. It is significant that the United States Secretary of State should have cautioned that any one of the current regional crises could blossom into a larger conflict [11th meeting].
66.	The rest of the world cannot remain insensitive to this prospect. It seems unlikely that there will be significant progress in social reform and economic development in developing countries as long as world military expenditure continues to grow at the present rate. My delegation has been among the foremost to propose a variety of disarmament measures since 1950 but it is regrettable that little progress has been made. The need for a world disarmament conference has become increasingly urgent. It might be useful by way of preparation to have a special session of the General Assembly to be devoted exclusively to disarmament. If we can have world conferences on space, atomic energy, environment, human settlements, trade and development, and so on, there is even greater reason and greater urgency for organizing a world conference on disarmament.
67.	Several speakers have referred to the problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. India has consistently supported efforts in the direction of achieving nuclear disarmament. We are surprised that attempts are continuously being made to confuse the question of non- proliferation of nuclear weapons with the legitimate right of all Member States to engage themselves in programmers involving peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We reject the thesis that access to the benefits of nuclear energy should be limited only to a few nations, or that only some countries can be trusted to behave in a responsible manner in embarking upon and implementing programs in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
68.	The initiative of the USSR in proposing a treaty on non-use of force in international relations is a positive step and deserves the most careful consideration by the General Assembly. It is in fact an attempt to elaborate the principle already enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter that all members shall refrain from the threat or use of force in their international relations.
69.	Another initiative of the USSR, which is of direct interest to us, is the statement made by the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union the other day that his country did not have "any intention of building any military bases in the Indian Ocean" [7th meeting, para. 185] and that it was "prepared, together with other Powers, to seek ways of reducing on a reciprocal basis the military activities of non-coastal States in the Indian Ocean and the regions directly adjacent thereto" [ibid., para. 186]. This is a welcome statement. We trust that it will be reciprocated by other great Powers so that existing foreign military bases such as Diego Garcia are eliminated and the Declaration of the General Assembly that the Indian Ocean shall be a zone of peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)] can become a reality.
70.	India attaches great importance to the work of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. While it has succeeded in evolving a consensus on many important issues, the search for a consensus is still continuing on the remaining issues like the system of exploitation of the- international sea-bed area and its resources which are the common heritage of mankind. The developing countries, which have suffered from the consequences of colonial domination and the arbitrary operations of an unjust economic order, cannot be deprived of their legitimate share in the vast sea-bed resources by technologically advanced countries unilaterally exploiting these resources.
71.	I should like to say a few words about a problem that has been recently plaguing many countries and affecting the lives of all travelers. It is the pernicious practice of making hostages of innocent persons for political or other reasons. I feel sure that this practice deserves to be condemned by all States in the strongest terms. But what is more important is that we should all do something more to put an end to it. The initiative taken by the Federal Republic of Germany to propose an international convention against the taking of hostages [A/311242] is timely. The terms of such a convention should be so drafted as to secure the widest possible support.
72.	In our part of the world, India has been pursuing a deliberate policy of normalizing and improving relations with all its neighbors. We intend to continue to persist in developing good neighborly relations with all.
73.	The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan referred the other day [8th meeting] to the so-called dispute relating to Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India. He also referred to the resolutions of the Security Council of 1948 and 1949. Those resolutions were not implemented at that time because Pakistan did not fulfill certain essential preconditions that had been laid down in them. As a consequence the resolutions became obsolete and this was repeatedly made clear to the Security Council. In our opinion it is now entirely unrealistic to hark back to those resolutions. The Simla Agreement of 2 July 1972, however, provides a practical and realistic basis for overcoming all impediments to friendly and co-operative relations between India and Pakistan. The implementation of that Agreement has already resulted in a large measure of normalization of relations in several fields. It is our intention to persist in this process because we believe that it can lead to stability and durable peace in the subcontinent.
74.	With Bangladesh we wish to develop, on a basis of equality, close and friendly relations to our mutual benefit. Unfortunately Bangladesh has chosen to bring before this General Assembly certain misconceived allegations concerning the equitable sharing of the waters of the river Ganga during the lean period of the dry season every year. My delegation expressed our views on this issue when the question of the inclusion of the item came up before the General Assembly [4th meeting], I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate our firm belief that the discussion of this question in the United Nations will only serve to complicate the situation and impede bilateral negotiations.
75.	I should like to turn now to the struggle in the United Nations for a square deal for developing countries-a struggle that has already entered its second decade with no promise or even hope of an early solution. The grievances and expectations of developing countries have been clearly set out in previous sessions of the General Assembly and in various other conferences. But we still seem to be convening one conference after another for no ostensible reason other than to repeat and reaffirm earlier resolutions. Developing countries find themselves in a state of political independence in an economic environment over which they have little control and which they have inherited through historical circumstances. They are in the grip of forces manipulated by developed countries largely for their own benefit. Such a situation is likely to lead to the permanent impoverishment of developing countries, while developed countries continue to prosper at the expense of others. This state of affairs is both immoral and intolerable. Decisions already taken and measures agreed on at earlier conferences should be speedily implemented through constructive negotiations.
76.	The indebtedness of developing countries has exceeded $US 15O billion with repayments increasing every year. Developing countries now face the dilemma of either not paying their debts, or suspending altogether the process and tempo of their national development. This problem can be resolved only if the international community as a whole draws up mutually agreed norms for affording realistic and immediate relief to debtor countries. Even a 5 per cent reduction in the military budgets of developed countries could facilitate the transfer of much needed resources and open for two thirds of mankind vast opportunities for development.
77.	The survival of mankind in all its many splendored diversity depends on planned expansion of areas of equitable interdependence. My Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi observed recently at the Colombo Conference of non-aligned countries:
"The community of nations should jointly and peace-fully achieve that elusive equation between global production and consumption that yields the right share for each nation. Patchwork remedies are no substitute for genuine reform. We need a global perspective plan that would relate resources to human needs and provide a system of early warning of imbalances and disasters. Improved terms of trade and credit, easier access to markets and better value for raw materials and industrial goods are all essential to secure greater equity in the distribution of benefits."
78.	To that end we need to evolve a global ethic, a code of conduct and a set of principles for managing interdependence for the purpose of sustaining economic development. We need also the sort of interdependence among nation States that preserves their sovereignty, transcends political ideologies, harmonizes the actions of States for common ends, strengthens the weak and prevents their exploitation by the strong, prohibits policies which beggar one's neighbor and envisages an equal share in decision-making.
79.	Recognition of this mutuality of interests and of the need to rearrange the present economic system on a more equitable basis should influence the attitudes of the affluent countries in such a manner that their people respond readily and positively to the modest national objectives of developing countries. Unfortunately, the response of the developed countries so far indicates a certain wavering of political will to meet the full dimension of the challenges and opportunities inherent in the present situation, as evidenced by the slow progress made by the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation. Perhaps fear of the unknown future, or reluctance to reduce wasteful consumption, is at the root of their inadequate response.
80.	Surely, they must realize that there can be no freezing of the status quo of dependence between the developed and developing countries. The present situation must inevitably evolve into a new order of equitable interdependence and mutual benefit. Self-serving short-term remedies will not meet the long-term requirements of the present situation. So far as the developing countries are concerned, they should be prepared to safeguard their own interests through a higher level of individual and collective self-reliance as well as mutual co-operation.
81.	The strength of the developing countries rests, of course, entirely on their own unity and their sense of purpose. Theirs is not the strength that comes from numbers alone but rather from the shared awareness that they form the backbone of peace-loving nations. They represent not only the majority of the nation States of the world but also the majority of the world's population. Their aspirations therefore acquire a special meaning for mankind's future, for they represent the hard core of suffering humanity. Their collective position should make an appropriate impact on the attitudes of developed countries and their peoples.
82.	As the United Nations enters the fourth decade of its existence, I would like to recall in conclusion the words of our former Prime Minister and leader Jawaharlal Nehru, who said on the first day of our independence: "Peace is said to be indivisible; so is prosperity, and so also is disaster in a world that can no longer be split into isolated fragments."
Permit me to join the representatives who have spoken before me in the general debate to proffer to you, Sir, the congratulations of the delegation of Israel on your unanimous election to the high and responsible office of President of the General Assembly.
122.	I also tender my delegation's good wishes to Mr. Gaston Thorn, who presided over the deliberations of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly with such distinction, and to our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his devotion and assiduity in the performance of his onerous duties.
123.	What is the aspect of the'United Nations as it enters into its fourth decade? Physically, the Organization works well. One must ask, however, if the principles of the United Nations Charter, as they were determined in San Francisco 31 years ago, have proved equally resilient; if intellectually and morally the United Nations has withstood the test of experience -the experience of a generation which, although it has been spared the devastation of a world war, has still seen major armed conflict, massacre, political terrorism, slavery, tyranny, persecution, hunger and poverty in all too many areas on the surface of the globe for every minute the United Nations has been in existence. Regrettably, the answer must be negative.
124.	It is indisputable that world public opinion has become increasingly disenchanted with the United Nations; increasingly frustrated by the opportunism and hypocrisy of so much of its debates and decisions; increasingly disgusted by the power of a mechanical majority to bend the Organization to its own purposes, by, for example, transforming an initiative designed to outlaw terrorism into an apologia for terrorism; or by converting the Commission on Human Rights into a forum in which the guilty are the accusers and the innocent condemned, In the twisted terminology which is used here a defeated aggressor is portrayed as a victim, a successful defender as an aggressor; those who refuse to treat with their neighbors are hailed as lovers of peace, and those who seek peace negotiations branded as warmongers.
125.	The list of discrepancies between the current practices of the United Nations and what the Charter says is long, and there is no need to labor the point.
126.	To a great extent the General Assembly has become an arena for empty rhetoric and arbitrary recommendations which have little to do with right, justice and international reality. Indeed, there appears to be no limit to the absurdity which the General Assembly, as it operates today, can reach it even achieved a record in futility by adopting, at the same session, two conflicting resolutions on the same subject.
127.	Two further examples from the record of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly demonstrate that clearly. One is the ludicrous and evil attempt to stigmatize the national liberation movement of the Jewish people as racism and racial discrimination; the other is the bizarre episode of the Committee of 20 members, from the resolution which the General Assembly was not competent to adopt; through the biased and non-representative com-position of the Committee itself, to the report of the Committee which is not only a flagrant intervention in the domestic jurisdiction of a Member State but also a prescription for its dismemberment by stages.
128.	History will consign these resolutions to oblivion, and those countries which supported their adoption will bear the shame.
129.	But the United Nations system is an essential feature of the international scene of our times and it is hardly possible to conceive of a world without it. It must be cured, however, of the grave maladies which afflict it: there must be a return to the Charter; there must be an end to the rancorous confrontation which is the dominant feature of our deliberations; consultation and agreement must be restored to their primary place; the United Nations, and particularly the specialized agencies, must abandon the dangerous path of politicization along which they are being dragged by Arab obsessions about Israel, so that they may devote themselves to the social, humanitarian, scientific and technical tasks which they were set up to perform and which they perform very well when they are allowed to do so; and, lastly, there must be full participation of all Members in all United Nations activities on an equitable basis, by strict alphabetical rotation, instead of the discriminatory bloc system.
130.	The effort to bring into being a new order in international economic and trade relations has become a major focus of interest and debate throughout the world and in the United Nations system.
131.	Israel belongs to a small group of countries in the developing world which, though meagerly endowed by nature, have by hard work and the application of science and technology reached a promising level of development.
These countries have a special role to play because they show what can be done even in the most difficult of circumstances.
132.	It is thus important, I believe, that developing countries consider not only what the fortunate countries of the industrialized world can do for them but what they can do for themselves and what they can do for one another. As our sage Hillel taught some 2000 years ago: "If I am not for myself, who will be for me; but if I am only for myself, what am I; and if not now, when? "
133.	For our part we have tried, at the seventh special session and at the fourth session of UNCTAD, to present some ideas which some delegations found useful and constructive.
134.	What we can best do is to put our experience in overcoming some of the major problems which beset a large part of the developing world at the disposal of all who wish to avail themselves of it. For many years now it has been the policy of the Government of Israel to conduct programs of technical co-operation with other emerging and developing countries and, indeed, it is a source of pride to us that, with all the limitations which nature has imposed on us, and saddled as we are with tremendous burdens caused by the absence of a peace settlement in the Middle East, we are at this very moment co-operating in one technical field or another with over 50 countries represented in this hall.
135.	One such important field is water development in semi-arid climates. In view of the forthcoming United Nations water and desertification conferences scheduled to take place next year, the practical experience of Israel in water exploration and management as well as in the development of highly efficient methods of irrigation, which has already aroused much interest in a number of countries with similar problems to our own, might well prove to be susceptible of wider application.
136.	The Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has just concluded its fifth session here in New York, and it is a matter of some disquiet that it has not achieved any significant progress in the direction of an acceptable international agreement.
137.	The trend towards unilateral decisions by individual States concerning the increase in the width of their territorial sea or the proclamation of economic zones is asserting itself without a parallel international reaffirmation of proper rules to guarantee the essential freedom of navigation and overflight on the seas and through and over straits. This is a regrettable situation which cannot but result in an increase in international tensions.
138.	Another problem which is still without solution is that presented by the lofty idea that the sea-bed beyond the economic zones constitutes the common heritage of mankind. A realistic compromise between this concept and its practical application for the benefit of all nations is still apparently far away.
139.	A goodly number of representatives who have spoken before me have raised their voices in condemnation of
international terrorism, which these last few years has spread over the face of the earth like a malignant cancer.
140.	There is no excuse for terrorism. No cause can justify or condone it. It is a criminal activity, totally indiscriminate in its effects, which by design strikes at the very elements of the population that every society tries to protect-the innocent, the weak, the defenseless, children and women.
141.	The record of the United Nations in combating terrorism is dismal. In 1972, after the massacre of the Israeli athletes at the Olympic Games by a gang of Arab terrorists, the Secretary-General proposed an item for the agenda of the General Assembly on measures to prevent terrorism and other forms of violence which endanger or take innocent human lives or jeopardize fundamental freedoms.7 We all know what happened to that praise-worthy venture: it was deliberately sabotaged by a group of States whose interest was not to prevent terrorism but to encourage, aid and abet it on the evident assumption that, because it seemed to serve their own interests, they would be immune from harm.
142.	They were grievously mistaken. Nobody is immune; and some of the States whose representatives were the most eloquent in thwarting any effective United Nations action have themselves been victims of terrorism in the past few weeks-Yugoslavia, India; Egypt and even Syria. Ilie item, now distorted so as to appear like an apology for and justification of terrorism instead of a call for action to suppress it, is still on the agenda of the General Assembly, but is is conceded by all that nothing will ever come of it.
143.	The issue is a fundamental one for the international community, for the attitude this Organization takes on the question of terrorism is a very clear reflection of its moral strength and international responsibility.
144.	The terrorism of today is especially deadly for three principal reasons: the availability to terrorists of sophisticated modern weapons capable of causing mass loss of life and destruction; the complicity of certain States which supply these weapons, frequently delivered in their diplomatic bags, and which provide the terrorists with shelter and comfort; and the abhorrent practice of taking innocent hostages as a means of blackmail.
145.	The rescue by Israel in July of the hostages hijacked to Entebbe in the Air France airbus has shown that given the will it is possible for even a small State to combat terrorism effectively. However, operations such as that would not be necessary if potential hijackers and terrorists knew that nowhere in the world would they get refuge and support.
146.	Israel thus welcomes the proposal made on 28 September by the Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany that the United Nations should draft a convention banning the taking of hostages internationally and providing for the prosecution or extradition of the perpetrators f 7th meeting, para. 113]: This is an important step in the right direction and the General Assembly would lose all credibility as an effective international instrumentality if it failed to take it.
147.	But in view of the extreme gravity of the problem and the sorry performance of the United Nations in dealing with it, we would be deluding ourselves if we imagined that that would be enough. Only by close multilateral co-operation and concerted organized action between States which really intend to fight terrorism will this atrocious crime be suppressed.
148.	The enemies of Israel in this Organization strive mightily to convince the world of similarities between Zionism and apartheid, and make much of the relations between Israel and South Africa to bolster a fraudulent case. Racism and racial discrimination, in any guise, including apartheid, are abhorrent to my country and my people. The basic tenets of Judaism are irreconcilable with any form of racial discrimination. The Jews are the classic victims of racial discrimination and over the centuries our martyrs have run into the tens of millions.
149.	It is equally specious to single out Israel for links with South Africa when most of the world maintains links with that country. According to the latest available statistics, the foreign trade of South Africa totaled over $12 billion in 1974. Of this huge sum Israel's share was less than two fifths of 1 per cent-infinitely smaller than the share of many Arab and some African countries. The armed forces of the Republic are large and equipped with modern weapons -tanks, artillery, aircraft, destroyers and submarines. It is not Israel that supplied them.
150.	In my address to the General Assembly last year  I stated that as far as Israel was concerned we had two criteria for judgment on the policy of detente which was given formal expression in the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. Those criteria are that detente must apply to the Middle East no less than to Europe and to other areas of the world, and that the humanitarian provisions of the Helsinki agreement must be scrupulously applied. On both counts detente has been a grievous disappointment to us.
151.	I declare that detente has not been felt in the Middle East. Moreover, I regret to record that there has been no improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Exit from the Soviet Union-a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Helsinki agreement-is still severely restricted, while those Jews who do insist on their rights are subject to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment, and in some cases to arrest and imprisonment. I once again call on the Government of the Soviet Union to permit those Jews who wish to leave in order to join their families in Israel to do so.
152.	The situation of the Jews of Syria remains tragic: a small community continues to be held as a hostage. Jews are victims of persecution and oppression, are circumscribed in their movements inside Syria, while travel abroad is permitted only under severe restrictions. Surely these 5,000 men, women and children cannot make all that difference to the Government of Syria. Why is it holding them?
153.	When I spoke in the General Assembly last year the war in Lebanon was but six months old. At that time some 5,000 people had already been killed and nearly 18,000 wounded. Twelve months have passed since then; the carnage goes on. By now over 40,000 men, women and children have lost their lives and over 100,000 have been wounded-and this out of a total population of less than 2.5 million. A rough equivalent would be a toll of killed and wounded totaling some 13 million in the United States, 15 million in the Soviet Union and 3 million in France. The ruin and devastation are almost beyond description; most of the flourishing towns and villages of Lebanon have become a bloody and merciless wasteland.
154.	For a year and a half a Member State of the United Nations has been bleeding to death before the eyes of the whole world. At the beginning it was claimed that this was a civil war, and thus outside the purview of the Security Council. No one produces this specious argument now, when massive armed intervention by regular and irregular foreign Arab troops is known and admitted-Syrians, Iraqis and Libyans, to mention only the larger contingents. But not a word from the Security Council, not a whisper.
155.	The silence of the world Organization in the face of this tragedy is an awful warning to all small States. It is clear that a country which relies on the United Nations for its security, a country which cannot defend itself by its own means, is lost.
156.	There is yet another conclusion to be drawn. For years now the world has been bombarded by a propaganda campaign peddling the notion of the replacement of Israel by a so-called secular democratic State where Muslims, Christians and Jews would live in blissful amity. But where is this beautiful mirage now? Destroyed in the fires of Lebanon, by the same gangs of terrorists who are the prime instigators of the blood-letting there in Lebanon.
157.	Israel is an immediate neighbor of Lebanon, and what goes on there concerns us closely. Our overriding desire is that peace and tranquility should be restored to Lebanon, for that is the essential condition for the reaffirmation of the national independence and the territorial integrity of that unhappy land. Moreover, we expect that the future constitutional structure of Lebanon will* be determined by the citizens of Lebanon in their respective communities, and by them alone; that foreign troops, both regular and irregular, will leave the country; and, above all, that Lebanon will not again become a base for attacks on Israel and its people.
158.	But the Lebanese conflict, although the most grave, is not the only current conflict in which countries of the Arab world are engaged. There are many others. A random listing makes, indeed, extraordinary reading.
159.	There is the bitter quarrel between Iraq and Syria. Then comes Iraq's designs on the territorial integrity of, Kuwait; Democratic Yemen's quarrel with Oman, with Yemen and with Saudi Arabia; Somalia's designs on Ethiopia; Egypt's conflict with Syria; Libya's clashes with
Egypt, with Sudan, with Tunisia, with Syria, with Chad and with practically every other independent State in the Arab world and in North Africa; and, finally, the feud between Algeria, Morocco and Mauritania in the Sahara desert.
160.	There is only one island of stability in this stormy sea, and that is the State of Israel.
161.	There is clearly a moral to be drawn here. The neighbors of Israel know that their border with Israel is the safest border they have. They know that if they preserve the peace on the borders with Israel then their own borders are secure. Moreover, their people know full well that when they are in distress they can turn to Israel for humanitarian assistance, as the villagers of South Lebanon are doing this day at the fence of goodwill.
162.	In my speech last year I drew attention to a problem of particular gravity for the prospects of peace as well as for the economic and social well-being of the countries of the Middle East. I refer to the seemingly limitless flow of weapons of war into the region, resulting in a frantic arms race. In the past three years the value of arms supplies delivered by both East and West to the Arab countries in the vicinity of Israel is estimated at $7.5 billion; a further approximately $22 billion worth is contracted for delivery from the end of 1976 onwards, making a total of nearly $30 billion invested in weaponry. This is an utterly staggering sum which is difficult for the human mind to take in. If, instead of being spent on means of destruction, most of this sum was invested in the economic and social development of the area, the Middle East would be transformed and restored to its ancient glory.
163.	However, as long as the Arab States continue to arm themselves with highly sophisticated modern weaponry on this vast scale, Israel is compelled to keep up, and will keep up. But we repeat emphatically that we are prepared now, even before peace is made, to negotiate with our neighbors for a balanced limitation of the inflow of arms into the area in such a manner that the burden will be lightened for all without adversely affecting the security and the defense capacity of any.
164.	It causes us no joy that the Middle East is ablaze with conflict, because the peace that we seek is its principal victim. Therefore, in order to keep up the momentum following on the successful conclusion of the 1974 separation of forces agreements with Egypt and Syria and the 1975 agreement with Egypt, we have tried to take additional steps in the direction of a just and lasting peace in the area.
165.	We have proposed that the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East be reconvened with its original membership. The proposal was torpedoed by the USSR, Syria and Egypt. When it was intimated to us that there was no chance at this time for an overall peace treaty and the normalization of relations, we responded favorably to a United States suggestion to negotiate agreements on the termination of the state of war. This proposal has remained without response or acknowledgment from the Arab side to this day. As far as we are concerned, this possibility still exists.
166.	Israel wants peace, seeks peace and is ready for peace at any time-a peace which will emerge from the region itself, which will break down the wall of hostility dividing the States of the region and which will be shaped by free negotiations between them. We believe that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) form the only agreed basis both for the nature of the peace and for the method of achieving it. For that reason we are ready to take part in a reconvened Geneva Peace Conference, with its original composition, at any time acceptable to all. At such a conference, or by any other means which the parties find satisfactory, we would hope to negotiate with each of our neighbors a final peace settlement based on a fair compromise which, on the one hand, will provide Israel with defensible borders, and, on the other, will satisfy genuine Arab interests, including, within the context of the settlement with our neighbor to the east, a just and constructive solution to the problem of Palestinian Arab identity. Only a peace which serves the interests of Israel and its neighbors will endure.
167.	Peace is the foremost objective of Israel, and its Government will not be deflected from the constant effort required to attain it.
Mr. President, it is my great pleasure to congratulate you on your election as President of this Assembly session. This has been a great year for you. You have already demonstrated your presidential capacity in five sessions of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, and at two of them this year. At the same time your country has been the host for a summit meeting of the non-aligned countries in Colombo.1 Your election as President not only ensures that this session will run with unusual punctuality and efficiency, but also reflects honor on Sri Lanka and on the Asian countries which showed their wisdom in selecting you for this high post.
31.	I offer my warm felicitations to our Secretary-General and his staff on their untiring efforts in the interests of all mankind.
32.	New Zealand, as a fellow member of the Common-wealth, gives a special welcome to Seychelles as the newest Member of the United Nations. In accordance with the principle of universality, New Zealand will support the admission of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam when it comes before this Assembly.
33.	The General Assembly is the great key forum for the discussion of world issues, and the attendance of so many distinguished political figures at this session proves this.
34.	Some might think that New Zealand is not well placed to be much more than an onlooker in such a discussion. We are tucked away at the south end of the world. We are small; we are isolated; we are rather out of the way. But I assure you that any such assumption would be wrong. In spite of our geographical position, we are very much a part of the world. We depend for our livelihood, as much as any other country in the world, on our overseas trade.
35.	When things go wrong with other parts of the world, particularly in the economic sphere, we feel the effects and we feel them heavily and badly. As a result of the recent international recession our economic fortunes have suffered a significant downturn. We are still struggling to put things right, and I am not being pessimistic when I say that we still have a long way to go. Times are difficult for New Zealand. Unemployment has increased, and belts have had to be tightened. All this has inevitably placed strains on our society.
36.	But although we are going through a lean time I have no apprehension about our future. This is because our society is fundamentally strong, and it is strong because it is fundamentally just.
37.	We are multiracial society. We are British, we are Maori, we are Polynesian, we are Chinese, we are Danish, Yugoslav, Indian, Dutch and of many other nationalities. Some might see this cultural diversity as a liability or as a source of friction. We do not. It is a strength. We believe that our society is more mature, more accommodating and richer because we have learned and are still learning to get along together. I will not pretend that stresses do not occasionally arise. The movement in recent years of large numbers of our Maori people to the cities and the immigration of other Polynesians from the Pacific Islands have created problems of adjustment that did not formerly exist. The change from a traditional community life in comparatively isolated rural or island areas to a somewhat frustrating and perplexing one in what may seem to many to be an uncaring city is never easy.
38.	I would claim, however, that the change is perhaps easier to make in New Zealand than in many other places throughout the world, and I believe that is because we have a stronger egalitarian tradition and because we believe that human rights are not the preserve of any one group. Divisions of class, status or cultural background are of less significance than they are perhaps anywhere else in the world. I know that is a bold statement to make, but I believe it to be true. To put it into our colloquial terms, we believe in giving the other chap & "fair go", and it does not matter whether the other chap is a Maori, a Samoan, an Indian, a European, or whatever. We all share the same rights and the same responsibilities.
39.	And this approach is well reflected throughout our history. Representatives might be interested to know that our indigenous people, the Maori, were granted the democratic right of universal suffrage -the "one man, one vote" that we hear so much of today-in 1867: over a hundred years ago. At that time the rest of the New Zealand community still had to have property qualifications in order to vote. The most reliable test of racial harmony is often claimed to lie in the rate of intermarriage between different groups. In New Zealand the rate of intermarriage is so high that it has been estimated that within a generation or two every New Zealander of British or European stock will have at least one close relative of Maori or Polynesian extraction.
40.	As New Zealanders, we have thus come to see clearly that our separate destiny as a nation lies in building upon the heritage of our two main cultures-that of the Polynesian and that of what we call the Pakeha, or European. What we are striving to do is to leave to our children and their children the inheritance of the best of what is to be found in the traditional values of our different cultures.
41.	This has necessarily meant coming to terms with New Zealand's geographical position. As I mentioned earlier, we are located in the far South Pacific, and so New Zealanders of all races have developed a sense of belonging to the Pacific. It is not for us an area that we look on from a long distance and with detachment, as it will be looked on by most people of the world. It is our region.
42.	Our acceptance of this identify has been accelerated by the emergence of new island nations in our neighborhood, and when I talk of "neighborhood" it is pretty vast: I am talking of an area of 2,000 to 4,000 miles wide. It has been fostered, too, by the experience we have had in administering our former Territories, the Cook Islands and Niue. The United Nations was closely associated with the process by which those Territories came to self-government, and New Zealand assisted and welcomed that association.
43.	We were pleased, earlier this year, that a Visiting Mission from the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was able to go to our remaining island Territory, which used to be called the Tokelau Islands, but is from now on to be known simply as Tokelau, to discuss its future. The Mission has since submitted its report [A/31/ 23/Rev.l, chap. XVII, annex]. We in New Zealand are giving most serious consideration to what the report has to say and, of course, particularly to its recommendations. Tokelau comprises an isolated, tiny and thinly settled group of islands. My Government will cp-operate fully with the United Nations in finding ways to meet the expressed wishes of the Tokelau people regarding their future.
44.	The process of political change is at work, not only in New Zealand's corner of the Pacific, but in other parts as well. The South Pacific has sometimes been called a quiet backwater. I doubt that that has ever really been true, and certainly in my long experience the South Pacific has always been a busy place; there is always something going on and some changes taking place.
45.	Yet I also believe it is true that the South Pacific is indeed entering upon a new era: new forms of political co-operation are evolving, notably the South Pacific Forum, in which the heads of government of the independent nations of the South Pacific meet at least once each year, with committees in between times. I had the very great privilege of presiding over the first Forum, which was held in New Zealand in 1971. There is a growing sense of collective interest evident in the work of that Forum. Perhaps the best example of this is the concerted approach its members have adopted towards those aspects of the negotiations on the law of the sea which have very great implications for all those who live in our region.
46.	New leaders have emerged and are emerging. They have new ideas and they are determined to give expression to the expectations of their people. This is a good thing, something to be encouraged. Because of the kinship link New Zealand has with the Pacific people, we are that much more aware of their aspirations for advancement and their aspirations for higher living standards. We are also aware- keenly aware-of the expectations that New Zealand and Australia inspire because we are of the relatively more affluent members of the Pacific family.
47.	My Government is committed to assisting the island countries of the Pacific, and this year a greater share than ever before of New Zealand's aid program is going into the South Pacific countries. A special effort is being made to promote employment opportunities in those countries. We will, however, continue to leave it to those countries themselves to decide their own priorities and the direction in which they wish to go in building towards self- sufficiency.
48.	We are doing all that we can to help. We look also to the United Nations and the specialized agencies to continue their good work in our region. The United Nations Development Program [UNDP], we know, faces a grave resources problem. It has, however, made a valuable contribution to the South Pacific in recent years, and this is an opportunity for me to reinforce the previous representations that the New Zealand Government has made, that the UNDP should maintain its support for the important key projects it has been involved in in the region.
49.	There has recently been a quickening of outside interest in this region. To the extent that it reflects a genuine concern to promote the well-being of the developing countries of the South Pacific, it will be welcome.
50.	Having a special interest in the South Pacific does not mean that we take a parochial view of world economic problems. The same egalitarian tradition which I mentioned earlier, the same concern for the basic human rights, leads us to attach great urgency to early progress in restructuring the world's economic and trading system along more equitable lines. We share Secretary-General Waldheim's own blunt assessment when he said: "A world economically divided could not and would not be politically stable."
51.	As a country heavily dependent on the export of a narrow range of agricultural commodities, New Zealand knows at first hand the difficulties and uncertainties faced by developing countries whose economic progress is dependent upon a stable and remunerative trade in commodities, mainly primary commodities. I have mentioned our own problems arising from the international recession. But we realize fully that many developing countries were hit even harder than we were, and that for them export earnings have shrunk to a level at which their development efforts have been crippled. We believe that improved commodity training arrangements are an essential ingredient of any new international economic order worthy of that name.
52.	Again, as a net importer of investment capital and technology, New Zealand has a special appreciation of the requirement for better and more equitable international arrangements in those two areas. My Government also believes that the daunting debt-servicing problems currently faced by the poorer developing countries demand immediate attention, and in the future the question of the terms of development assistance generally must receive continuing international consideration in a multilateral context.
53.	There has been some progress since the encouraging conclusion of last year's seventh special session of the General Assembly. The Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris and other important meetings, both within and outside the United Nations system, have provided an important element of continuity in the global consultations. The number and the intensity of these meetings reflects a growing recognition of the interrelated nature of our problems and the urgency with which we must tackle them.
54.	The fourth session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development [UNCTAD] succeeded in establishing a framework and a time seals for consideration of the key question of the international commodity trade. It cleared the way, at least, for a more detailed analysis of the specific issues involved. These are welcome developments, although less progress was made in other key areas. But in the new climate, consideration of these issues will not be allowed to lapse; the debate is, fortunately, now a continuing one.
55.	International efforts are focused on many different problems-food production, human settlements, the commodities trade, the transfer of science and technology, the flow of development assistance and investment capital, and the restructuring of the United Nations system itself to make it more responsive to the current needs of the world community. In all these efforts New Zealand is committed to full and constructive participation.
56.	One of this Organization's real achievements in its 30-year history has been in the elaboration of standards for basic human rights. We know, however, that despite those standards and despite all the efforts made by men of good will, people in many parts of the world are still being denied their basic human rights. We know, too, that nowhere is the denial as blatant as it is in the countries of southern Africa. The refusal of those who rule South Africa, Namibia and Rhodesia to accept the principle of human equality has caused acute tensions and has brought the situation in the area to a critical stage. Watching the developments of the last few months, we in New Zealand, like people I know in other countries, have had the feeling that we may be seeing the beginning of a maelstrom of violence.
57.	For Rhodesia, time is rapidly running out. Until recently the Smith regime seemed determined to make no concessions to the demand for early majority rule. It has seemed more and more likely that that objective would be achieved only by armed force, with much bloodshed. My Government is, therefore, very encouraged by the decision of Mr. Ian Smith and his colleagues, belated though it may be, to accept majority rule within two years. So the way is now open for negotiations on the detailed arrangements for the transfer of power, and we in New Zealand earnestly hope that, through British good offices, these can soon begin and that they will be successful.
58.	When the Security Council imposed mandatory sanctions on Rhodesia in 1968,  the Government of which I was then head immediately put them into effect in New Zealand. Since then, successive Governments have applied the sanctions consistently and rigorously. After Mozambique had announce d its decision to apply sanctions, and in view of the consequent loss to it, my Government agreed to contribute to the programs of assistance to that country launched by the Commonwealth Secretary-General and the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Although New Zealand is not directly involved, we are prepared to play our part in any international effort to end the bloodshed and to help die people of Rhodesia to achieve a just multiracial society.
59.	Namibia, too, seems dangerously close to the brink of conflict. We in New Zealand believe that South Africa was wrong to go on occupying Namibia after its Mandate was withdrawn, and we have said so consistently. South Africa was even more wrong to try to impose its own policy of apartheid on the people of Namibia. We welcome South Africa's recent acceptance of the goal of independence for Namibia. But independence is meaningless unless it is genuinely based on self-determination. And the refusal of the South African Government to deal with the South West Africa People's Organization [SWAPO] has created a justifiable and reasonable doubt in the minds of African and other countries whether the act of self-determination envisaged by that Government will be fully genuine.
60.	As Namibia was once a League of Nations Mandate, this Organization has a special responsibility towards it: its responsibility is to see that all the people of Namibia are given the opportunity to decide freely for themselves what the future of their country should be. It is essential, therefore, that the United Nations should be given the opportunity and the means to supervise free elections in Namibia and to approve any new constitution for that country.
61.	Much is at stake in Rhodesia and in Namibia, but in the longer term the greatest potential for disaster is in South Africa itself. I think this is obvious to all men. South Africa is not in any means the only country in the world where human rights are consistently violated, and we all know this. But it is the only country where racial discrimination is the basis of the whole social, economic and political system. Our own experience in New Zealand has taught us that racial harmony is essential to the well-being of a multiracial society. The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr: MuldOon, said in a speech about a month ago:
"The New Zealand Government's attitude to apartheid is very clear: we believe it is wrong and we want to see it ended. It should now be plain even to South Africans that apartheid will not work. Based as it is on racial discrimination, it is an unjust and inhuman system. It can be maintained only by the ruthless use of force, and it cannot be maintained that way indefinitely."
62.	The rioting that has been going on around South African cities for over three months now began as a spontaneous explosion of black anger. By ruthless repression, the South African authorities have managed to confine it largely to the black townships. They have not been able to stop it. The outside .world can see that they are in a blind alley. Only a fundamental change of direction can prevent an inevitable escalation of the hatred, violence and bloodshed.
63.	Setting up what are called "homelands", or "bantustans", for. the African people of South Africa will not solve the problem. The black and colored people of South Africa cannot accept being deprived of citizenship in their own country-the country of their birth and the country they have helped to develop. They must be accepted as citizens of South Africa, entitled to a fair share in South Africa's resources. We note that many countries including in particular Britain and the other members of the European Community, have made it clear that they are unable to extend recognition to the Transkei and other homelands as sovereign, independent States:
64.	New Zealand's position is the same. Indeed, I recall that in 1971 New Zealand voted for the resolution adopted by the Assembly condemning the establishment of the bantustans [resolution 2775 E (XXVI)]. Then, as now, a National Party Government was in office in New Zealand. In 1975 New Zealand also supported the Assembly resolution calling upon Governments not to recognize any of the bantustans [resolution 3411D (XXX)]. That action was taken by a Labor Government, but it was in accordance with the policy that the previous Government had initiated. There is a consistent line of policy in New Zealand on this question.
65.	We note with regret that, 31 years after the United Nations Charter was signed, threats to the peace continue to exist in many parts of the world: notably in the Korean peninsula and in the Middle East. Good sense has prevailed here, and we are not going to have another sterile confrontation over Korea at this session, but the fact remains that the border between North and South Korea remains in a state of continuous tension and that talks between the two Governments have reached an apparent stalemate. As a result, Korea remains divided and outside the United Nations.
66.	We feel deeply for the people of Lebanon in the tragic situation in which they find themselves, a situation not of their own choice or of their own making. We are equally concerned at the lack of progress towards a solution of the Cyprus problem, despite the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General and others. Again, it is the people of Cyprus who are the innocent victims. We can only join with others in saying that what is needed is simply the implementation of previous Assembly resolutions: the withdrawal of foreign troops, the repatriation of refugees and the resumption of negotiations between the two sides. New Zealand strongly supports this line of action.
67.	This has been an active year in the field of international law-making, although it has not been as productive as most of us would have wished.
68.	New Zealand attaches the greatest importance to the achievement of a new convention on the law of the sea. When you think of that vast area of ocean around us and around the Polynesian islands with which we are so closely associated, you will realize how keenly we are interested in this question. We have, therefore, shared the widespread sense of frustration at the lack of progress during the last session of the Conference on the Law of the Sea on the main issues which are delaying general agreement. We remain committed to the goal of a universally supported treaty on this vital subject. We believe that rapid progress towards this goal is now absolutely essential if the
Conference is not to lose the great chance it has to secure an equitable and stable regime for the world's oceans. In the absence of such progress, New Zealand, like many other States, will inevitably shorten its focus and concentrate on consultations and arrangements within its own region.
69.	I shall turn now to one aspect only of a subject which perhaps overrides all others in its global implications: the question of disarmament.
70.	The aspect that has especially worried New Zealanders is the question of nuclear weapons testing and proliferation. We know that to put an end to the testing of nuclear weapons is not, in itself, a disarmament measure, but we believe that it is an important confidence-building step, an essential preliminary to nuclear disarmament.
71.	It is a great relief to us in New Zealand that the testing of nuclear weapons in the atmosphere in our part of the world has stopped during the past 12 months. We regret that it continues elsewhere. As recently as yesterday, we have had news of substantial radioactive fall-out right here on our doorstep from a nuclear explosion many thousands of miles away. What the safety level for such fall-out is no one can be sure, but it is obviously desirable that any increase in existing levels should be avoided.
72.	However, that in itself is not enough. Only a comprehensive test-ban treaty, ending weapons testing in all environments and not only in the atmosphere, can be counted as a genuine first step on the road towards nuclear disarmament. One of the main stumbling-blocks to the conclusion of such a treaty has been the question of on-site inspection. We think it is very encouraging that, in a document recently circulated [see A/311232], the Soviet Union has now indicated willingness to consider a com-promise on this issue. The language of the Soviet note is, however, not altogether clear. It is important, we feel, that on-site inspection should not depend entirely on the consent of the State in question.
73.	Another stumbling-block in the way of a comprehensive test-ban agreement has been the unwillingness of certain nuclear Powers to take part in the negotiations. It is our hope that they will take heed cf the increasing concern of world public opinion about the ever increasing growth and proliferation of nuclear weapons and that they will adopt a more co-operative approach.
74.	In this connexion, I stress the need for the utmost control over the exportation of sensitive nuclear facilities and I am thinking particularly of processing plants. Things are bad and dangerous enough now, but they could get very much worse, and even over the short period. The suppliers of nuclear fuel and material have a responsibility not only to themselves but also to the rest of the world to ensure that their commercial activities do not facilitate nuclear weapons proliferation. Profits will be of little value in a nuclear holocaust.
75.	I have touched on several aspects of what I might call a general human rights theme: I have discussed human rights in New Zealand, economic rights in the South Pacific and the developing world generally; I have discussed human rights in southern Africa, and, in relation to disarmament, what I might call the human right to survive. I should like to conclude by referring to one further aspect of the human rights theme, and that concerns the question of international terrorism. I agree absolutely with the comment of the Secretary-General in the introduction to his annual report to the Assembly on the work of the Organization that the time has come for a new and determined approach by the international community to this growing and worrying problem [see A/31/l/Add. l, sect. V]. No one can deny that the increasing frequency and scope of acts of terrorism pose a serious threat to the integrity of the whole human society as we know it. My Government therefore welcomes the initiative taken by the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on the elaboration of a convention on the taking of hostages and we hope that the Assembly will be prepared to examine it in a positive spirit [A/31/242].
76.	Surely it is not too much to hope that, when this Assembly ends, its work may be marked down as a positive contribution towards strengthening economic, social and political rights, especially of all poor and oppressed peoples everywhere, and to the freeing of all mankind from the fear of nuclear destruction.
On behalf of the Soviet delegation I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to the important post of President of the thirty- first session of the United Nations General Assembly. I wish you all success in the performance of this honorable and responsible task.
146.	The United Nations operates uninterruptedly all year round and, like international politics, it knows no interludes. But the annual sessions of such a forum as the General Assembly are of special significance. They provide an opportunity-now to almost 150 States -to scan the political panorama of the world in all its diversity, to identify the main problems that await solution and, most important, to provide by joint efforts, new momentum to international co-operation.
147.	The very emergence of the United Nations as an international organization on the crest of the great victory over the forces of fascism and aggression was an expression of the will of the peoples of the world to prevent another war. In the name of those who perished and those who survived, its founding States declared their determination "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war".
148.	Now, as then, the peoples of the world have every right to demand of their political leaders, Governments and parliaments that efforts to strengthen peace be intensified and not slackened.
149.	We are very far from underestimating the United Nations. After all, the Soviet Union is one of its founders. The United Nations has given useful and significant support to the peoples of the world in their struggle for liberation from colonial oppression. It has also made a weighty contribution to getting negotiations under way and preparing agreements which have curbed the arms race in certain areas. In certain cases it has been helpful in extinguishing conflicts. All these things are true.
150.	Nevertheless, if the role of the United Nations is viewed in terms of the problems which still remain on the political agenda of the world there are at least two questions which arise.
151.	First, is the United Nations potential always fully exploited whenever tension grows or blood is shed in any given part of the world? No. The United Nations does not always measure up to the situation. This was true in the case of IndoChina. It is still true in the Middle East. It is true in Cyprus, and it is true in southern Africa.
152.	As a result, people's faith in the effectiveness of the United Nations and its ability to give the necessary support to the victims of aggression is undermined.
153.	When anyone succumbs to the temptation to use force to seize the lands of others or tramples upon the right of peoples to free development, then there arises the question of what has become of his signature on the Charter of the United Nations. No matter how you put it, one thing is clear: such a policy is alien to the interests of peace and to the noble goals in the name of which the new international Organization was brought into being. And this is precisely why all too often the Security Council finds itself paralyzed, while many United Nations resolutions remain mere ink and paper.
154.	The second question is this. Has the United Nations really addressed itself to the task of solving the most burning issue facing mankind today-the elimination of the threat of another world war? Unfortunately this question cannot be answered affirmatively either.
155.	Whenever the General Assembly meets, it discusses at its sessions some hundred items and adopts even more resolutions. At times the resolutions are so eloquent, and their verbal fabric so splendid, that they could be hung around this hall as slogans.
156.	But resolutions are resolutions, and at the same time there is the gigantic machinery of arms production, or, in other words, of material preparation for war, continuing to gather momentum. Figuratively speaking, the globe, or at any rate a sizable part of it, is criss-crossed with assembly lines continuously churning out ever deadlier weapons -land-based, airborne, underwater weapons and whatever others you care to name.
157.	And many political figures who have linked their careers with the arms race and who are building their policies on that basis are clamoring for the development of ever newer weapons of destruction and annihilation. Not satisfied with wingless missiles, they want winged missiles. The B-type bomber no longer suits them. They must have the B-l, or, better still, a C-type.
158.	It is indeed a fact that today the world spends 60 times more money to teach a soldier the ABCs of annihilation than to teach a child the science of creation. And, if one goes through the records of some parliaments, it would appear there is no greater evil than a reduction of military spending. As a result, record-breaking military budgets are being adopted. Those who work at the factory bench and in the fields or who are engaged in scientific and cultural activities are increasingly deprived of funds that could be used for improving nutrition, public health, education, housing and social security.
159.	Science and technology have made tremendous strides forward. Opportunities for raising the material and cultural standards of the people have increased immeasurably. But a huge proportion of the material and intellectual resources of the world are being devoured by the arms race. According to United Nations data, the world today spends on armaments about $300 billion a year, or more than a million dollars every two minutes. In the three hours of this very plenary meeting we are attending, another $90 million worth of means of destruction will have been added to the total.
160.	And what are we to say about the arguments -which have been elevated almost to the rank of theories -of those who preach, with criminal neglect of human life and the achievements of civilization, that it is better to build man's future on radio-active ashes?
161.	We shall not now go into an analysis of the causes of the arms race or their social nature, although of course we could certainly find a few things to say about this too. Now, here in this hall, where States with different social systems are represented, we should focus our attention on what concerns us all equally: the prevention of war and the consolidation of peace.
162.	The Soviet Union rejects the grim conclusion that putting an end to the arms race is beyond human ability. No one can prove that people must either constantly be at war or be preparing for mutual annihilation.
163.	For almost six decades now our country has been guided in its policies by ideas of a different kind, those of peace and friendship among nations. Lenin, the founder of the Soviet State, said, "An end to wars, peace among nations, an end to plundering and violence-that is our ideal...".
164.	The Soviet Union acts in the international arena in close unity and co-operation with its allies and friends, the fraternal socialist States. We are proud that the impact of the socialist countries on the course of world affairs is becoming ever more profound, and we are proud because that impact is used not only in the interests of those States but also for purposes of strengthening universal peace.
165.	Any objective observer can realize that the members of the Warsaw Pact, the countries of the socialist community, bring to international politics a feeling of respect for the independence and sovereignty of all nations and put forward concrete peace-loving initiatives and proposals and serve as a reliable bulwark for peoples fighting for national liberation and social progress.
166.	The Leninist ideas of peace found new, vivid expression in the decisions of the highest forum of our Party, the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, held last spring. Its program of further struggle for peace and international co-operation and for the freedom and independence of the peoples, set out in the report delivered by Leonid Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, is imbued with a sense of profound optimism and an unshakable belief in the possibility of making peace on earth enduring.
167.	As one of the major objectives of the Soviet Union's foreign policy, the Twenty-fifth Congress set the task of seeking to contain the arms race, and then to reverse the trend and begin disarmament. We have put forward numerous specific proposals. Some of them are long-term proposals; others, with goodwill on the part of our partners too, could be implemented in the near future.
168.	Now, what specifically do we have in mind?
169.	The first step would be the curbing of a further build-up of weapons of mass destruction, to be followed by their complete prohibition and elimination. The conscience of mankind demands that ultimately nuclear weapons be eliminated altogether.
170.	The Soviet Union has been, and remains, in favor of the removal of nuclear weapons from the arsenals of States, and of using nuclear energy solely for peaceful purposes. We believe that the nuclear Powers-and all other States could join them-should come to the negotiating table to examine comprehensively the problem of nuclear disarmament and to chart together ways leading to its solution. The Soviet Union is prepared to take part in such negotiations at any time.
171.	Independently of these negotiations, nuclear- weapons testing should be stopped everywhere and by all. This would put an end to the qualitative improvement of those weapons. That is the purpose of the proposal to conclude a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapons testing approved by the General Assembly at its last session [resolution 3466 (XXX)]. The start of negotiations on this question is being unjustifiably delayed. The problem here is not the absence of objective conditions -they have long existed-but the unwillingness of some nuclear Powers to begin negotiations.
172.	The question of underground nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes cannot be allowed to become a stumbling-block: the USSR and the United States have, after all, succeeded in agreeing on this matter, and have recently signed a relevant Treaty.1 2 We hope that this Treaty will soon be ratified by the United States. On our part, there will be no delay.
173.	The problem of verification has been artificially inflated for quite some time now. Advanced techniques for identifying seismic phenomena have eliminated this point of disagreement as well. If, nevertheless, there are some who still harbor doubts on this score, we are confident that a mutually acceptable approach can be found that would remove such doubts.
174.	In short, no room has been left for any plausible excuses which would prevent the completion of the task of prohibiting all nuclear weapons tests.
175.	It is a matter of growing concern that channels for the proliferation of nuclear weapons have not yet been fully blocked. One can only imagine how much greater the risk of nuclear war would become if new States, particularly those in conflict with each other, became involved in the process of developing and stockpiling nuclear weapons.
176.	It is well known that at present international commercial exchanges of nuclear materials are increasing. In some cases, however, it is not sufficiently certain that the possession of fissionable materials could not be used for dangerous purposes or that the means of developing nuclear weapons would not fall into the hands of irresponsible persons, adventurists, or simply madmen. This is not a question of trade, but of politics and security.
12 Treaty on Underground Nuclear Explosions for Peaceful Purposes, signed at Washington and Moscow on 28 May 1976 (see document A/31/125).
177.	Surely it follows that the world must be safely protected from all such risks. The way to achieve this is to strengthen the regime on non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. We should redouble our efforts to make the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXII), annex] truly universal and to secure the accession to it of all States, without exception.
178.	The Soviet Union proposes that all chemical means of warfare be completely prohibited and destroyed, as has been done in respect of bacteriological weapons. If all States are not prepared to take such a step, then, to begin with, agreement should be reached on banning and eliminating the most dangerous and lethal types of chemical weapons.
179.	It is not only the means of mass destruction already accumulated that pose a threat: potentially, weapons based on qualitatively new operating principles, in terms of methods of use, targets or effects, could become just as formidable. Today such weapons may exist only as blueprints, mock-ups or ideas, but experience shows that their appearance may not be too far away.
180.	At the last session of the General Assembly, the Soviet Union proposed the conclusion of an international agreement which would preclude the development and production of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction,  Some have asked how you can prohibit something that does not yet exist. However, since the very beginning of the discussion of this matter in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva, it has become evident that there is here a subject for serious discussion. It is vastly more difficult to agree on the elimination of those types of weapons which have already been supplied to armies. The Soviet Union believes that everything possible must be done to prevent the development of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction.
181.	Conventional types of weapons are not normally included among weapons of mass annihilation. But modern tanks, aircraft, cannon and even small arms have been perfected to such a degree that they have actually become instruments capable of wiping out great masses of people.
182.	Since the Second World War, the Soviet Union has repeatedly proposed that conventional types of arms and the strength of armed forces also be reduced. We believe it imperative to discuss these questions as well.
183.	As it always has, the Soviet Union favors the dismantling of all foreign military bases on alien territories. The existence of such bases is one of the main causes of the complications and tensions in the world. This problem is no less urgent today than it was yesterday.
184.	To open up ever new avenues towards the solution of the disarmament problem, efforts are required along many lines. In some cases, the desired result is brought closer by singling out as a subject for negotiation certain types of weapon-say, strategic nuclear missiles. In other cases, the consideration of some particular aspect of the curbing of the arms race in the context of a certain region of the globe is more promising. The Soviet Union is in favor of using either of these approaches, or of combining them when circumstances permit. That also determines the attitude of our country towards regional measures of military detente, including the possibility of creating zones of peace or nuclear-free zones.
185.	We consider it reasonable that a number of Asian and African States desire to turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. In this connexion, the essential point is that there should be no foreign military bases in the area which constitute the main element of a permanent military presence. As for the Soviet Union, it has never had and does not have any intention of building military bases in the Indian Ocean.
186.	In solving the problem of foreign military bases along these lines, the Soviet Union is prepared, together with other Powers, to seek ways of reducing on a reciprocal basis the military activities of non-coastal States in the Indian Ocean and the regions directly adjacent thereto. Our country has shown its readiness to contribute to the realization of the idea of turning the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace, but of course, this should not create any obstacles to freedom of navigation or scientific research in that Ocean. If due account is taken of our approach by the States concerned, the Soviet Union will be able to participate in consultations on matters relating to preparations for convening an international conference on the Indian Ocean.
187.	Among the various methods of securing the curtailment of the arms race there is another one which, as it were, combines the various possibilities, and that is the reduction of military budgets.
188.	Three years ago, the General Assembly approved our proposal that the military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council be reduced by 10 per cent while a part of the money thus saved could be used to provide assistance to developing countries [resolution 3254 (XXIX)]. Because of the position taken by some States, the practical solution of this problem has been blocked. Wishing to break the deadlock in this matter, we are prepared to look for mutually acceptable specific figures with which the reduction could be started. As a first step, a figure either greater or smaller than 10 per cent could be agreed upon as soon as for 1977, next year. But it is necessary to begin negotiations on this question.
189.	The opponents of reductions of military budgets are resorting to every possible means to frustrate any agreement about this. They are endeavoring to prove that inflated military budgets are necessary in the interests of peace, higher employment in industry and the reinforcement of negotiating positions, primarily in negotiations with the Soviet Union. All these arguments are illusory. Those who use them are well aware that they are turning the truth and standing it on its head. But, of course, they do not want to tell the truth. Those who base their policy not on deceiving people but on revealing to them the true causes of such an international phenomenon as an uncontrolled arms race cannot reconcile themselves to that, and they even feel it necessary to say so from this lofty rostrum of the United Nations.
190.	So far, the pace of the arms race has far outstripped the efforts of States to arrest it, and this gap is growing. It is time, and everything possible must be done not only to narrow this gap and even to eliminate it totally, but also to ensure that disarmament negotiations outstrip the arms race in terms of effectiveness, thereby facilitating its termination. The Soviet Union continues to believe that if the elimination of one type of weapon cannot be immediately agreed upon then, to begin with, its production should be substantially limited. But in any case, the important thing is to make a start.
191.	No one today will deny that the arms race has assumed unprecedented dimensions. This makes it imperative for all States, nuclear and non-nuclear, great and small, developed and developing, to combine their efforts to arrest it.
192.	That is why the Soviet Union has proposed, and continues to propose, that the problem of disarmament be considered in its entirety at the broadest and most authoritative forum-a world disarmament conference. An overwhelming majority of the States of the world have declared themselves in favor of convening such a conference. But the implementation of this proposal continues to meet with the objections of some big Powers.
193.	In this regard it has been suggested that it would be appropriate to hold a special session of the General Assembly to discuss disarmament questions. Well, this, too, is a suitable forum if it is viewed as an intermediate stage in the preparations for a world conference. But it must really be a special kind of session, not a routine one. We see its task as that of paving the way for a world conference and finally ensuring a real break-through in solving disarmament problems. Its work must reflect the grave responsibility of all States of the world, especially the great Powers.
194.	Such, fundamentally, is our approach to the problem of stopping the arms race and of disarmament. Such is the essence of the Soviet Union's memorandum on these questions which we are submitting for consideration at this session and circulating as an official document of the United Nations [A/31/232],
195.	Some of the provisions of the memorandum have already been proposed earlier by us, and others have been put forward for the first time. I should like to express the confidence that this important document will be viewed by States Members of the United Nations as reflecting the sincere efforts of the Soviet Union, of our people, to help banish the threat of a world war of annihilation.
196.	Neither in the years preceding the Second World War nor in the first few post-war decades did there exist the objective conditions for making progress towards ending the arms race and towards disarmament such as those that exist today. It will be recalled that it has recently proved possible to achieve international understandings which impose certain limits on the arms race in some areas. As far as one can judge, an important agreement on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental modification techniques seems to be within reach. A number of questions relating to disarmament are now being discussed among States.
197.	Pride of place belongs, for obvious reasons, to the continuing talks between the Soviet Union and the United States of America on strategic arms limitation. The importance of these talks far transcends the interests of just our two countries. We are ready actively to continue our efforts to translate the well-known Vladivostok understanding into the text of an agreement.
198.	There can hardly be anyone who would doubt that the fullest guarantees of peace will be provided by general and complete disarmament. Ever since Lenin's days, Soviet foreign policy has been aimed at achieving that ultimate goal.
199.	But along with efforts to solve that historic task, it is possible and necessary to seek by other means, too, a reduction of the risk of the outbreak of war. Now, what is of decisive importance today? Above all, a firm agreement between States not to use force in international relations.
200.	It could be argued that the principle of the renunciation of the use or threat of force is already embodied in the United Nations Charter. This is true. But it is also true that many States are seeking ways of putting this principle into practice. It is no accident that it was considered necessary to lay special emphasis on it in recent bilateral and multilateral international treaties and agreements.
201.	The principle of the non-use of force has been developed in detail in the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The need to abide strictly by this principle has on more than one occasion been stressed by non-aligned States, and particularly at their highest forums.
202.	There is another important consideration. When the Charter of the United Nations was being signed, nuclear weapons were virtually non-existent. Their emergence-and especially their growth into a huge complex of various kinds and types of weapon-is a qualitatively new factor. It radically changes our concepts of the consequences of armed conflict. Therefore, it was not without reason that the General Assembly of the United Nations in its special resolution adopted in 1972 linked renunciation of the use of force with the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. Thus, the question of how States should deal with each other without seriously endangering the security of the peoples of the world has not become a whit less urgent.
203.	There are certainly enough unresolved problems in today's world. They were bequeathed to us by the Second World War and the period of the "cold war", and they continue to arise now and again in the course of the current development of international relations.
204.	These knots of differences among States should be untied and outstanding problems should be resolved at the conference table, by peaceful means. The principle of renunciation of the use of force must become an iron law of international affairs. That is the purpose of the proposal made from the rostrum of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union concerning the concluding of a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations.
205.	We note with satisfaction that that proposal has met with a broad response and has aroused the interest of many States. At the same time, we are asked what the Soviet Union has in mind in terms of the specific contents of such a treaty.
206.	The answer to this question is to be found in the draft world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations which the Soviet Union is submitting to the General Assembly [A/311243].
207.	The essence of the proposed treaty lies in the idea that in their relations with each other, as well as in their international relations in general, all parties to it will strictly abide by the undertaking to refrain from the use or threat of force either against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
208.	They will accordingly refrain from the use of armed forces involving the employment of any types of weapon, including nuclear weapons, on land, at sea, in the air and in outer space and will not threaten to use such forces.
209.	They will have to reaffirm the undertaking to settle disputes among themselves solely by peaceful means in such a way as not to endanger international peace and security.
210.	There is, of course, a fundamental difference between the launching of hostilities for the purposes of aggression and the legitimate right to repel aggression or eliminate its consequences. Can the Arabs, for instance, resign themselves to the loss of their lands? And do the colonial peoples have no right to fight for their independence till final victory? They do indeed have an inalienable right to that.
211.	The substance of the matter is the prevention of aggression. In this case there will be no further need to use force to repel it. The source of the evil is aggression and not the desire to restore justice; that is the cause and not its effect. Underlying our draft treaty -and I want to lay special emphasis on this -is the definition of aggression worked out by the United Nations, and everyone voted in favor of that document [resolution 3314 (XXIX)].
212.	The treaty takes fully into account the system of bilateral and multilateral relations of States that has developed in the world. One of its articles provides that nothing in the treaty affects the rights and obligations of States under the United Nations Charter and treaties and agreements concluded by them earlier.
213.	It is envisaged that the treaty would be open for signature by any State of the world at any time. This means that, first, it would be of a general, universal nature. Secondly, for the signatory States the treaty would enter into force upon ratification. Consequently, there would be no need to wait for the accession to the treaty of a specific number of countries.
214.	According to our draft, the Secretary-General of the United Nations would be the depository of the treaty. The United Nations as a whole would be called upon to lend all its moral and political prestige in support of the treaty.
215.	The conclusion of the treaty we are proposing would be a major step bringing the world closer to the time when it will prove possible to eliminate entirely the threat of war and aggression. Supplementing and reinforcing the provisions concerning the non-use of force contained in various international instruments, the treaty would offer new and more reliable guarantees of security to all countries, big and small, and strengthen their confidence that their peaceful life would not be disrupted.
216.	The treaty would undoubtedly also expedite the implementation of effective disarmament measures. The draft clearly provides that the parties will make all the necessary efforts to that end.
217.	Whose rights and interests would be infringed by such a treaty? Who would fail to benefit from it? Every State that really wants peace and international co-operation would stand to gain from it. The conclusion of such a treaty would be of benefit to peace throughout the world.
218.	The Soviet Union hopes that the General Assembly will thoroughly consider the proposal to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations and declare itself in favor of it.
219.	These are the new and concrete initiatives designed to stop the arms race and exclude the use of force in relations among States which have been proposed by the Soviet Union in this important forum. We are convinced that the fundamental strengthening of the bulwark of universal peace depends to a decisive degree on progress precisely in those two directions. The political climate in the world and the processes of relaxation of international tension prevailing in it are conducive to an undertaking of the implementation of these initiatives in a practical and serious manner.
220.	The relaxation of tension and the attitude of States towards it are now in the searchlight of world politics. This alone shows that detente is not a myth or a catchword. Underlying it is a real change-over from confrontation and brinkmanship to peaceful and mutually beneficial co-operation among States and the investing of such co-operation with ever greater material content.
221.	Not a single State, not a single Government-if, of course, it really wishes to remain in touch with reality should hesitate in choosing its policy: either to promote the further reduction of tension and the elimination of the remnants of the cold war or to kindle conflict and friction. Every Government, every statesman should consider it an honor to be in the mainstream of the forces working for the further reduction of tension in the world.
222.	Statesmen who are directly responsible for the foreign policy of their countries should be imbued with the awareness that the course towards solving international problems, including the most urgent and complicated ones, through negotiations -and negotiations alone- equally serves the interests of all peoples and all States. And if that is so, then is it permissible to favor detente today and oppose it tomorrow? Is is permissible, while talking about one's desire to improve relations among States, particularly among the major Powers, at the same time in actual fact to follow in the wake of those who in major politics see no further than the buttons on their military tunics? To invoke in this regard some kind of considerations of domestic policy means to regard detente as the mere small change of political dealings, and not as a firm and noble guideline for ensuring peace,
223.	Some attempts have also been made to interpret detente as if it almost amounted to sanctioning interference in the domestic affairs of other States. How else can one describe the false solicitude of certain people for the rights of citizens in other countries? In actual fact these people are extolling those renegades who believe that the laws of their own country were not written for them to obey. Those who display such touching solicitude for them should open their eyes and take a good look at themselves and around them and see how matters stand in their own house in so far as real, not imaginary, human rights violations are concerned.
224.	We believe that the foreign policy of States in matters relating to peace should be determined and pursued consistently and in good faith. We welcome statements precisely in favor of such a policy from the rostrum of this world Organization. As for the Soviet Union, its position has been determined with utmost clarity by the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Expressing the will of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, of the entire Soviet people, Leonid Brezhnev has stated that our country would
"...do everything possible to deepen international detente and to embody it in concrete forms of mutually beneficial co-operation between States,"
That is our firm foreign policy line, one which the Soviet Union will steadfastly follow.
225.	Experience has shown that if States, no matter how different, take account of reality and exert their will for the same goal-the strengthening of peace- the results are impressive. Europe is a compelling example of that. The year that has passed since the conclusion of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe shows that the development of the situation there is, on the whole, marked by a realization of the understanding approved at Helsinki.
226.	There are, however, some who are not averse to grumbling. There are various things in the Final Act of the all-European Conference which are not to their liking. We also could point out quite a number of provisions which do not go as far as we would like. But what has been accepted by all the participants and solemnly sealed by the signatures of the leaders of States should be implemented-and implemented fully. That naturally applies also to the clauses relating to the inadmissibility of outside interference in the domestic affairs of States. That is how the Soviet Union acts and intends to act.
227.	Of course, this is not only a question of the Helsinki decisions. All the treaties and agreements concluded in recent years in the interests of a peaceful future for Europe should be scrupulously observed by all parties. I should like to emphasize particularly that attempts to undercut the Quadripartite Agreement on West Berlin, which has been serving the cause of improving the situation in the center of the European continent for five years now, run counter to these interests.
228.	In the light of the results of the all-European Conference new possibilities have opened up for expanding relations between States in Europe in the political, economic, scientific and technological fields, as well as in the sphere of culture, contacts, information and education. The Soviet Union has put forward concrete proposals for organizing multilateral co-operation in such important fields as energy production, transport and protection of the environment.
229.	The task of supplementing political detente with military detente is now coming to the fore in European affairs. What does that mean primarily? It means a successful conclusion of the Vienna talks on mutual reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe, where the concentration of armed forces and armaments is higher than in any other part of the world.
230.	The Soviet Union and other socialist countries taking part in the negotiations are seeking to make the discussions constructive. We have given figures with regard to the total strength of the armed forces of the Warsaw Treaty countries stationed in the zone of reductions, including land forces. It is now our partners' turn to respond. If no attempts are made to obtain unilateral military advantages, the negotiations in Vienna will also succeed.
231.	It is well known how important for the international situation is the state of Soviet-American relations. As a result of the agreements and understandings reached between the USSR and the United States of America in previous years, the necessary conditions have been created for continuing to build those relations on a constructive foundation.
232.	So far as concerns the Soviet Union, it is not guided in its policy by temporary considerations of the moment. The true interests of both countries and the interests of peace are served by only one course of action-that of acting in conformity, with a course jointly formulated in recent years, with the spirit and letter of the agreements that have been concluded. The Soviet Union expects that the United States will proceed precisely in that way. That will primarily determine further developments.
233.	Relations between the Soviet Union and France are developing in a favorable direction. This is something which has been reflected in the signing of many agreements, including the Declaration on the further development of friendship and co-operation, singed last October. The recent Soviet-French agreement to prevent the accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons  is along the same lines. In so far as concerns the Soviet Union, we will consistently follow the line we have taken in our relations with France.
234.	A great deal of what has been achieved in relations between the Soviet Union and the Federal Republic of Germany and, above all, the conclusion of the Moscow Treaty between the two States on 12 August 1970, has marked the end of a whole phase in the post-war history of Europe. A fundamentally important page was turned in the right direction. The Soviet Union believes that further development and deepening of co-operation with the Federal Republic of Germany-in the expectation, naturally, that the policy of that country will be determined by the interests of peace, including the interests of peaceful development and good neighborliness in Europe is desirable.
235.	The relations between the Soviet Union and practically all States which are known as "Western"-Great Britain or Denmark, Italy or Belgium, Canada or Sweden- are increasingly assuming the character of normal, mutually advantageous co-operation.
236.	The successes of the policy of detente by no means signify that it no longer has any opponents. Ill-assorted forces often presenting a common front against it are easily found in Europe and elsewhere-in fact, they reveal themselves every day.

231. The fruits of the policy of detente must be accessible to all peoples. It is well known, however, that the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus are still threatened. Tensions in the Middle East have not abated.
238.	There can be no doubt that, so long as the occupation by Israel of Arab lands continues, so long as the legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine are trampled upon, the Middle East will continue time and again to be in a state of fever.
239.	It is now common knowledge that thousands of people have been killed or crippled in Lebanon in recent months. The tragic events which have occurred in that country are the direct result of imperialist aggression against the Arabs. The events in Lebanon are a direct consequence of the lack of an overall settlement in the Middle East. The blow is being aimed primarily against the patriots of Lebanon and the valiant Arab people of Palestine, whose just struggle cannot but evoke our admiration.
240.	The Soviet Union believes that the crisis in Lebanon must be settled in a peaceful, democratic way by the Lebanese themselves, without any outside interference, on the basis of the preservation of the territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of Lebanon.
241.	The protracted nature of the tension in the Middle East gives us no grounds for concluding that the situation there is hopeless. A good basis for establishing peace in that area has been worked out through the efforts of many
States, including the Soviet Union. What it boils down to is: the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied in 1967; the satisfaction of the legitimate national demands of the Arab people of Palestine, including their inalienable right to create their own State; and the furnishing of international security guarantees for all States in the Middle East, including Israel.
242.	Is there anything here that could fail to be to anyone's liking, provided that there is a real intention to live in peace with one's neighbors?
243.	Unfortunately, the international machinery for producing the necessary agreements on the Middle East-the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East-is still inactive. The Soviet Union is in favor of a resumption of its work, and the sooner the better, for a consideration by it of all the major issues involved in a Middle East settlement—I repeat, all the major issues involved in such a settlement.
244.	It is becoming ever more urgent to spread detente to Asia. Conditions are ripening there for tire consolidation of peace through the joint efforts of the Asian States. This is demonstrated by a fact of vast historical significance- the end of the war in IndoChina and the formation of a new major peace-loving State, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Soviet Union is confident that the voice of an independent, united Vietnam will soon be heard from this rostrum too. We insist that the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam be admitted to the United Nations without delay.
245.	Friendly co-operation between the Soviet Union and India is an important stabilizing factor in the Asian continent. Mutual understanding and confidence between the two States were vividly manifested once again during the recent visit to the Soviet Union of Mrs. Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister of the Republic of India.
246.	Along with the trend towards an improvement of the situation in Asia, there are other facts. In that part of the world, too, circles are active which are by no means loath to create tension by stepping up military preparations, particularly in the area bordering on the southern frontiers of the Soviet Union. History knows how such efforts have ended and this should not be forgotten.
247.	The question of the withdrawal of foreign troops from South Korea should be finally resolved. We support the proposals of the Korean Democratic People's Republic for the peaceful reunification of Korea without outside interference. As we know, last year's session of the General Assembly adopted a resolution in this regard [resolution 3390 (XXX)] on the creation of favorable conditions for converting the armistice in Korea into a lasting peace and for expediting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. That resolution should be put into effect.
248.	The Soviet Union continues, as it has done in the past, to attach great importance to its relations with the People's Republic of China. The normalization of those relations would undoubtedly have a positive effect on the situation in Asia, and, indeed, have even wider international repercussions. Our position in this respect as regards the People's Republic of China has been made quite clear by the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and that position is fully valid today.
249.	The situation in the south of Africa is a subject requiring the most serious attention. The rulers of the Republic of South Africa and of Southern Rhodesia and all those who support and arm them are now demonstrating and would have us believe that they have resigned themselves to the inevitability of the process of national liberation and that they are trying to adapt themselves to it.
250.	But in actual fact everything possible is still being done to repress the just struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and of the indigenous people of the Republic of South Africa for their legitimate rights and for an end to the hateful policy of racism. Every possible method is being resorted to, from direct suppression and violence to attempts to divert the national liberation movement from genuine independence and freedom through political gimmickry and financial hand-outs.
251.	What is being sought from these people before the eyes of the whole world? A renunciation of their inalienable right to free and independent development, a development along the path of social progress. But we are confident that the inexorable course of events and the facts of life itself with its political realities will put everything in its proper perspective. Peoples have learned and have learned well to distinguish between truth and falsehood.
252.	Today, as always, the Soviet Union stands firmly by the side of the fighting peoples of southern Africa. We are in favor of the unconditional ending of the policy of apartheid and racism in South Africa, of the immediate withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia, of the unreserved transfer of all power to the people of Zimbabwe. No one will ever see the Soviet Union failing to oppose attempts to prolong colonial and racist oppression under whatever guise.
253.	It is worth recalling, particularly in this hall, that on 14 December 1960 thunderous applause greeted the adoption of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples [resolution 1514 (XV)]. Its adoption signified that historically the hour had struck for the complete elimination of colonial domination in the world.
254.	We have all witnessed the failure of the attempt to stifle with the help of arms the young independent State of the People's Republic of Angola. If there are still Governments which would impede the exercise of its legitimate right to participate in the work of the United Nations, they stand to gain nothing by that action; they only stand to lose. Angola will without any doubt take its lawful and proper place in this hall.
255.	We should like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Republic of Seychelles on its admission to the United Nations and to wish the people of that country success in the building of a new life.
256.	Thousands of miles separate the Soviet Union from Latin America, but our people have feelings of friendship towards its peoples and wish to have good relations with Latin American countries. So much greater, then, are our bitterness and indignation at tHe unabated violations of human rights and liberties in several parts of that continent, primarily in Chile, where these rights and freedoms are being flagrantly and criminally trampled under foot. Together with all progressive mankind we demand freedom for Luis Corvalan, arrested three years ago, and for other Chilean democrats.
257.	Recently, problems of the restructuring of international economic relations have been assuming increasing importance in world affairs. We support the just demands of the developing countries to do away with discrimination and artificial barriers in international trade, to eliminate all instances of inequality, the imposition of will and exploitation in international economic relations. On behalf of the Soviet Union, the Soviet delegation intends to make a special statement on these matters at this session of the General Assembly.
258.	Among topical issues of international affairs a prominent place now belongs to questions relating to the co-operation of States in the uses of the world's oceans. A search for ways of establishing such co-operation is, as we know, under way at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, the latest round of which came to an end just a few days ago, The Soviet Union believes that the issues facing that Conference should be resolved by its participants on a mutually acceptable basis. No one should try to impose on the Conference any arbitrary or one-sided decisions which have nothing in common with the interests of justice and the fruitful co-operation of States in such an important field as the use of the world's oceans.
259.	The present international situation is far from being monochrome. Along with the positive changes which have occurred in the world, which have been characteristic of recent times, certain phenomena of a different kind have been noted, namely, opposition to detente. This requires the vigilance and active efforts of all those who cherish the cause of peace. And yet the overall political background of the world today gives grounds for looking to the future with optimism,
260.	The States of the socialist community have thrown their prestige, their material and foreign policy resources onto the scales of the policy of defending peace. The newly independent countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America have resolutely favored the strengthening of international security. This has also been demonstrated by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned Countries in Colombo.
261.	A sound tendency is emerging in the policy of a number of capitalist States and gathering momentum, although not without snags. The essence of this trend is the recognition in practice of the principles of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems. Certain public circles, movements and political parties which consistently advocate peace among nations and social progress are being listened to more and more.
262. We are convinced that, in the light of present-day dynamics of the correlation of forces in the world, with detente making ever more confident headway, the United Nations should exploit all its possibilities as a reliable instrument for maintaining and strengthening peace. But it will be able to fully evince this quality only when all its Member States are firmly abiding by its Charter and observing it.
263.	The Soviet Union unswervingly strives to ensure that the questions discussed at sessions of the General Assembly are resolved in such a way as to be of benefit to the peace, co-operation, freedom and independence of the peoples of die world. And at this session too we are determined to co-operate constructively with all those who support these great humane goals which meet the aspirations of all peoples.
Let me first congratulate this body for electing Ambassador Amerasinghe of Sri Lanka to preside over this thirty-first session of the General Assembly. He is a diplomat of great, international stature who, among his many distinctions, has provided indispensable leadership to the crucial negotiations on the law of the sea.
144.	I would also like to pay a tribute to the Secretary- General for his tireless efforts on behalf of the world community. He successfully embodies the Charter's prin¬ciples of fairness, impartiality and dedication to the causes of global peace and human dignity.
145.	The United Nations was born of the conviction that peace is both indivisible and more than mere stability, that for peace to be lasting it must fulfill mankind's aspirations for justice, freedom, economic well-being, the rule of law and the promotion of human rights. But the history of this Organization has been, in considerable measure, the gradual awareness that humanity would not inevitably share a single approach to these goals.
146.	The United Nations has survived-and helped to manage-30 years of vast change in the international system. It has come through the bitterness of the cold war. It has played a vital role in the dismantling of colonial empires. It has helped to moderate conflicts, and is even now manning truce lines in critical parts of the world. It has carried out unprecedented efforts in such areas as public health, development assistance and technical co-operation.
147.	But the most important challenge for this Organization still lies ahead: to vindicate mankind's positive and nobler goals and help nations to achieve a new understanding of community.
148.	With modern communications, human endeavor has become a single experience for peoples in every part of the globe. We share the wonders of science and technology, the trials of industrialization and social change, and a constant awareness of the fate and the dreams of our fellow men.
149.	The world has shrunk, but the nations of the world have not come closer together. Paradoxically, nationalism has been on the rise at the precise time when the most serious issues we all face can only be resolved through a recognition of our interdependence.
150.	Fragmentation has affected even this body. Nations have taken decisions on a bloc or regional basis, or by rigid ideologies, before even listening to the debate in these halls; on many issues positions have been predetermined by prior conferences containing more than half the membership of the United Nations. The tendency is widespread to come here for battle, rather than negotiation. If these trends continue, the hope for world community will dissipate and the moral influence of this Organization will progressively diminish.
151.	This would be a tragedy. Members of this Organization are today engaged in a multiplicity of endeavors to find just solutions for complex and explosive problems. There is a fragile tranquility, but beneath the surface it is challenged by fundamental forces of change -technological, economic and social. More than ever, this is a time for statecraft and restraint, for persistence but also for daring in the pursuit of peace and justice. The doctrines of perpetual strife produce only bloodshed and bitterness; they unleash the forces of destruction and repression and plant the seeds of future conflict. Appeals to hatred-  whether on the basis of race or class or color or nationality or ideology-will in the end rebound against those who launch them and will not advance the cause of freedom and justice in the world. 
152.	Let us never forget that the United Nations benefits the smaller and Weaker nations most of all; for without the rule of law, disputes will be settled as they hive been all too frequently and painfully in history: by tests of strength. It is not the weak that will prevail in s world of chaos.
153.	The United States believes that this thirty-First session of the General Assembly must free itself of the ideological and confrontational tactics that marked some of its predecessors and dedicate itself to a program of common action.
154.	The United States comes to the General Assembly prepared to work co-operatively on programs of common action. We will offer concrete proposals. We will listen carefully to the ideas of others. We will resist pressure and we shall seek co-operation.
155.	Let me, in this spirit, discuss the three principal challenges we face: the problem of peace, the challenge of economic well-being, and the agenda of global interdependence.
156.	The age of the United Nations has also been an age of frequent conflict. We have been spared a third world war, but we cannot assume that this condition will prevail forever or without exertion. Our generation must build out of the multitude of nations a structure of relations that frees the energies of nations and peoples for the positive endeavors of mankind, without die fear or the threat of war.
157.	Central to American foreign policy are our sister democracies, the industrial nations of North America, Western Europe, the southern Pacific and Japan, and our traditional friends in the Western Hemisphere. We are bound to these nations by ties of history, civilization, culture, shared principles and generations of common endeavors.
158.	Our alliances, founded on the bed-rock of mutual security, now reach beyond the common defense to a new range of issues: the social challenges shared by the advanced technological societies; common approaches to easing tensions with our adversaries; and shaping positive relations with the developing world. The common efforts of the industrial democracies are not directed at exclusive ends, but as a bridge to a broader, more secure and co-operative international system and to increasing freedom and prosperity for all nations.
159.	The United States is proud of its historical friendships in the Western Hemisphere. In the modern era these friendships must be, and they are, based on equality and mutual benefit. We have a unique advantage in this Hemisphere: the great dialog between the developed and the developing nations can find its most creative solution in the Hemisphere where modern democracy was born, and where co-operation between developed and developing, large and small, is a long-standing tradition.
160.	Throughout history, ideology and power have tempted nations to seek unilateral advantage. But the inescapable lesson of the nuclear age is that the politics of tests of strength has become incompatible with the survival of humanity. Traditional power politics becomes irrational when war can destroy civilized life and when neither side can gain a decisive strategic advantage.
161.	Accordingly, the great nuclear Powers have particular responsibilities for restraint and vision. They are in a position to know the full extent of the catastrophe which could overwhelm mankind. They must take care not to fuel disputes if they conduct their rivalries by traditional methods; if they turn local conflicts into aspects of a global competition, sooner or later their conflicts will grow out of control.
162.	The United States believes that the future of mankind requires coexistence with the Soviet Union. Tired slogans cannot obscure the necessity for a more constructive relationship. We will insist that restraint be reciprocal, not just in bilateral relations, but around the globe. There can be no selective detente. We will maintain our defenses and our vigilance. But we know also that tough rhetoric is not strength and that we owe future generations more hopeful prospects than a delicate equilibrium of awesome forces.
163.	Peace requires a balance of strategic power. This the United States will maintain. But the United States is convinced that the goal of strategic balance is achievable more safely by agreement than through an arms race. The negotiations on the limitation of armaments are therefore at the heart of United States-Soviet relations.
164.	Unprecedented agreements limiting and controlling nuclear weapons have been reached. An historic effort has been made to place a ceiling on the strategic arsenals of both sides in accordance with the Vladivostok communique of 24 November 1974. And once this is achieved we are ready to seek immediately to lower the levels of strategic arms.
165.	The United States welcomes the recent progress that has been made in further curtailing nuclear-weapons testing and in establishing a regime for peaceful nuclear explosions for the first time. The two treaties now signed and awaiting ratification should be the basis for further progress in this field.
166.	Together with several of our European allies, we are continuing efforts to achieve a balanced reduction in the military forces facing each other in central Europe. In some respects this is the most complex negotiation on arms limitation yet undertaken. It is our hope that, through patient effort, reciprocal reductions will soon be achieved that enhance the security of all countries concerned.
167.	But coexistence and negotiations on the control of arms do not take place in a vacuum. We have been disturbed by the continuing accumulation of Soviet armaments and by recent instances of military intervention to tip the scales in local conflicts in distant continents. We have noted crude attempts to distort the purposes of peaceful diplomacy and to impede hopeful progress towards peaceful solutions to complex issues. These efforts only foster tensions; they cannot be reconciled with the policy of improving relations, and they will inevitably be
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
uneasy armistice, both sides must recognize that ideology and power politics today confront the realities of the nuclear age and that a striving for unilateral advantages will not be accepted.
168.	In recent years, the new relationship between the United States and the People's Republic of China has held great significance for global security.
169.	We came together out of necessity and a mutual belief that the world should remain free of military blackmail and the will to hegemony. We have set out a new path -in wide-ranging consultations, bilateral exchanges, the opening of offices in our respective capitals and an accelerating movement towards normalization. And we have derived reciprocal benefits- a clearer understanding of the aspirations of our peoples, better prospects for international equilibrium, reduced tensions in Asia and increased opportunities for parallel actions on global issues.
170.	These elements form the basis for a growing and lasting relationship founded on objective common interest. The United States is committed to strengthen the bonds between us and to proceed towards the normalization of our relations in strict conformity with the principles of the Shanghai communique of 27 February 1972. As this process moves forward, each side must display restraint and respect for the interests and convictions of the other. We will keep Chinese interests in mind on all international issues and will do our utmost to take account of them. But if the relationship is to prosper, there must be similar sensitivity to our views and concerns.
171.	On this basis, the progressive development of our relations with the world's most populous nation will be a key element of the foreign policy of the United States.
172.	The world today is witness to continuing regional crises. Any one of them could blossom into larger conflict. Each one commands our most diligent efforts of conciliation and co-operation. The United States has played, and is prepared to continue to play, an active role in the search for peace in many areas -southern Africa, the Middle East, Korea and Cyprus. Let me deal with each of these.
173.	Racial injustice and the grudging retreat of colonial power have conspired to make southern Africa an acid test of the world's hope for peace and justice under the Charter. A host of voices have been heard in this chamber warning that, if we failed quickly to find solutions to the crises of Namibia and Rhodesia, that part cf the globe could become a battleground with consequences for every part of the world.
174.	I have just been to Africa, at President Ford's request, to see what the United States could do to help the peoples of that continent achieve their aspirations to freedom and justice.
175.	An opportunity to pull back from the brink now exists. I believe that Africa has before it the prize for which it has struggled so long-the opportunity for Africans to shape a future of peace, justice, racial harmony and progress.
176.	The United Nations since its beginning has been concerned with the issue of Namibia. For 30 years that Territory has been a test of this institution's ability to make its decisions effective.
177.	In recent months, the United States has vigorously sought to help the parties concerned speed up the process towards Namibian independence. The United States favors the following elements: the independence of Namibia within a fixed, short time-limit; the calling of a constitutional conference at a neutral location under the aegis of the United Nations; and the participation in that conference of all authentic national forces, including specifically the South West Africa People's Organization Progress has been made in achieving all those goals. We will exert our efforts to remove the remaining obstacles and bring into being a conference which can then fashion, with goodwill and wisdom, a design for the new State of Namibia and its relationship with its neighbors. We pledge our continued solicitude for the independence of Namibia so that it may, in the end, be a proud achievement of this Organization and a symbol of international co-operation.
178.	Less than a week ago the Rhodesian authorities announced that they were prepared to meet with the nationalist leaders of Zimbabwe to form an interim Government to bring about majority rule within two years. That is in itself an historic break from the past. The African Presidents, in calling for immediate negotiations, have shown that, they are prepared to seize this opportunity. And the Government of the United Kingdom, in expressing its willingness to assemble a conference, has shown its high sense of responsibility and concern for the rapid and just independence of Rhodesia.
179.	Inevitably, after a decade of strife, suspicions run deep; many obstacles remain. Magnanimity is never easy, and less so after a generation of bitterness and racial conflict. But let us not lose sight of what has been achieved: a commitment to majority rule within two years; a commitment to form immediately a transitional Government with an African majority in the cabinet and an African prime minister; and a readiness to follow that with a constitutional conference to define the legal framework of an independent Zimbabwe.
180.	The United States, together with other countries, has made major efforts; and we will continue to do what we can to support the hopeful process that is now possible. But it is those in Africa who must shape the future. The people of Rhodesia and the neighboring States now face a supreme challenge. Their ability to work together and their capacity to unify will be tested in the months ahead as never before.
181.	There may be some countries which see a chance for advantage in fueling the flames of war and racial hatred; but they are not motivated by concern for the peoples of Africa, or for peace. And if they succeed they could doom opportunities that might never return.
182.	In South Africa itself, the pace of change accelerates. The system of apartheid-by whatever name-is a denial of our common humanity and a challenge to the conscience of
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjold Library
have shown wisdom in facilitating a peaceful solution in Rhodesia. The world community takes note of it and urges similar wisdom-while there is still time-to bring racial justice to South Africa.
183.	As for the United States, we have become convinced that our values and our interests are best served by an Africa seeking its own destiny, free of outside intervention. Therefore we will back no faction, whether in Rhodesia or elsewhere; we will not seek to impose solutions anywhere. The leadership and the future of an independent Zimbabwe, as for the rest of Africa, are for Africans to decide. The United States will abide by their decision. We call on all other non-African States to do likewise.
184.	The United States wants no special position or sphere of influence in Africa. We respect African unity. The rivalry and interference of non-African Powers would make a mockery of Africa's hard-won struggle for independence from foreign domination. It will inevitably be resisted.
185.	Every nation which has signed the Charter is pledged to allow the nations of Africa, whose peoples have suffered so much, to fulfill at long last their dreams of independence, peace, unity and human dignity in their own way and by their own decisions.
186.	The United Nations, since its birth, has been involved in the chronic conflict in the Middle East. Each successive war has brought greater perils, an increased danger of great-Power confrontation and more severe economic dislocations.
187.	At the request of the parties, the United States has been actively engaged in the search for peace in the Middle East. Since the 1973 war, statesmanship on all sides has produced unprecedented steps towards a resolution of that conflict. There have been three agreements that lessen the danger of war; and mutual commitments have been made to pursue the negotiating process with urgency until a final peace is achieved. As a result, we are closer to the goal of peace than at any time in a generation.
188.	The role of the United Nations has been crucial. The Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East met in 1973 under its aegis, and the implementation of subsequent agreements has been negotiated in its working groups. Security Council resolutions form the only agreed framework for negotiations. I want to compliment the Secretary- General and his colleagues in New York, Geneva and on the ground in the Middle East for their vigorous support of the peace process at critical moments.
189.	The United States remains committed to help the parties reach a settlement. The step-by-step negotiations of the past three years have now brought us to a point where comprehensive solutions seem possible. The decision before us now is how the next phase of negotiations should be launched.
190.	The United States is prepared to participate in an early resumption of the work of the Geneva Conference. We think a a preparatory conference must be useful for a discussion of the structure and agenda of future negotiations; but we are open to other suggestions.
191.	The groundwork that has been laid represents an historic opportunity. The United States will do all it can to assure that by the time this Assembly meets next year it will be possible to report significant progress towards a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
192.	Since the General Assembly last met, overwhelming tragedy has befallen the people of Lebanon. The United States strongly supports the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of that troubled country. We oppose partition. We hope that Lebanese affairs will soon be returned to the hands of the people of Lebanon. All Members of the United Nations, and all the conflicting parties in Lebanon, have an obligation to support the efforts of the new President of Lebanon to restore peace and to turn energies to rebuilding the nation. And the agencies of the United Nations system can play an important role in the reconstruction effort.
193.	The confrontation between North and South Korea remains a threat to international peace and stability. The vital interests of world Powers intersect in Korea: conflict there inevitably threatens wider war.
194.	We and many other United Nations Members welcome the fact that a contentious and sterile debate on Korea will be avoided this fall. Let this opportunity be used, then, to address the central problem of how the Korean people can determine their future and achieve their ultimate goal of peaceful reunification without a renewal of armed conflict.
195.	Our own views on the problem of Korea are well known. We have called for a resumption of a serious dialog between North and South Korea. We are prepared to have the United Nations Command dissoJved so long as the Armistice Agreement is either preserved or replaced by more durable arrangements. We are willing to improve relations with North Korea, provided that its allies are ready to take similar steps towards the Republic of Korea. We are ready to talk with North Korea about the peninsula's future, but we will not do so without the participation of the Republic of Korea.
196.	Last fall the United States proposed a conference including all the parties most directly concerned- North and South Korea, the United States, and the People's Republic of China to discuss ways of adapting the Armistice Agreement to new conditions and replacing it with more permanent arrangements.  On 22 July, I stated our readiness to meet immediately with those parties. I reaffirm that readiness here today.
197.	If such a conference proves impracticable right now, the United States would support a phased approach. Preliminary talks between North and South Korea, including discussions on the venue and scope of the conference, could start immediately. In that phase the United States and the People's Republic of China could participate as observers or in an advisory role, if the parties so desired. If such discussions yielded concrete results, the United States and China could join the talks formally. This, in turn, could set the stage for a wider conference in which other countries could associate themselves with arrangements that guarantee a durable peace on the peninsula.
198.	We hope that North Korea and other concerned parties will respond affirmatively to this proposed procedure or else offer an alternative suggestion.
199.	The world community is deeply concerned over the continuing stalemate on the Cyprus problem.
200.	Domestic pressures, nationalistic objectives, and international rivalries have combined to block the parties from taking even the most elementary steps towards a solution. On those few occasions when representatives of the two Cypriot communities have come together, they have fallen into inconclusive procedural disputes. The passage of time has served only to complicate domestic difficulties and to diminish the possibilities of constructive conciliation.
201.	All concerned need to focus on committing themselves to achieving the overriding objectives: assuring the well-being of the suffering Cypriot people and ensuring peace in the eastern Mediterranean.
202.	A settlement must come from the Cypriot communities themselves. It is they who must decide how their island's economy, society and government shall be reconstructed. It is they who must decide the ultimate relationship of the two communities.
203.	The United States is ready to assist in restoring momentum to the negotiating process. We believe that agreeing to a set of principles might help the parties to resume negotiations. We would suggest some concepts along the following lines. A settlement should preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The present dividing lines on Cyprus must be adjusted to reduce the area currently controlled by the Turkish side. The territorial arrangement should take into account the economic requirements and humanitarian concerns of the two Cypriot communities, including the plight of those who remain refugees. A constitutional arrangement should provide conditions under which the two Cypriot communities can live in freedom and have a large voice in their own affairs. Security arrangements should be agreed upon that would permit the withdrawal of foreign military forces other than those present under international agreement.
204.	I have discussed this approach with the Secretary- General and with several Western European colleagues. In the days ahead, the United States will consult along these lines with all interested parties. In the meantime, we urge the Secretary-General to continue his dedicated efforts.
205.	I shall now turn to the problems of economic development. The economic division of our planet between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, between the industrial and developing nations is a dominant issue of our time. Our mutual dependence for our prosperity is a reality, not a slogan. It should summon our best efforts to make common progress, to bring mankind's dreams of a better life to closer reality in our lifetime.
206.	There are many reasons why co-operation has not made greater strides. The industrial democracies have sometimes been more willing to pay lip service to the challenge of development than to match rhetoric with real resources. The countries with non-market economies are quite prepared to undertake verbal assaults, but their performance is in inverse ratio to their rhetoric. Their real contribution to development assistance has been minimal. Last year, for example, the non-market economies provided only about 4 per cent of the public aid flowing to the developing nations. The developing nations are understandably frustrated and impatient with poverty, illiteracy and disease. But often they have made demands for change that are as confrontational as they are unrealistic. They sometimes speak of new economic orders as if growth were a quick fix requiring only that the world's wealth be properly redistributed through tests of strength instead of a process of self-help extending over decades. Ultimately, such tactics lose more than they gain, for they undermine the popular support in the industrial democracies which is imperative to provide the resources and market access -available nowhere else- to sustain development.
207.	I believe that the objectives of the developing nations and the objectives of the industrial nations are complementary. Indeed they must be, for neither side can achieve its aims at the expense of the other. They can be realized only through co-operation.
208.	We took a major step forward together a year ago at the seventh special session of this Assembly, and we have since followed through on many fronts. We have taken steps to protect the economic security of developing nations against cyclical financial disaster. The newly expanded compensatory finance facility of the International Monetary Fund has disbursed over $2 billion to developing nations in this year alone. Replenishments of the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank will provide additional resources for development. World-wide food aid has been expanded. With a United States contribution of $200 million, we have brought the International Fund for Agricultural Development close to operation.
209.	The United States has continued this process by putting forward a number of new proposals at the fourth session of UNCTAD in May 1976. We committed ourselves to improvements in the quality of aid. We agreed to a serious effort to improve markets of 18 basic commodities. These measures, undertaken since we met here just a year ago, assist, not with rhetoric and promises, but in practical and concrete ways, the peoples of the world that are struggling to throw off the chains of poverty.
210.	Much remains to be done. First, the application of science and technology is at the very heart of the development process. The United States, conscious of its pioneering role in technology, has put forward three basic principles, which we shall support with funds aid talent: to train individuals who can identify, select and manage the future technology of the developing world; to build both national and international institutions to create indigenous technology; and to spur the private sector to make its maximum contribution to the development and transfer of technological progress. 
211.	To achieve these goals, we are today extending an invitation to the world conference on science and technology for development, now scheduled for 1979, to meet in this country. In preparation for that meeting, we have asked members of the industrial, academic and professional scientific communities throughout the United States to meet in Washington in November. They will review the important initiatives this country can take to expand the technological base for development and they will strive to develop new approaches.
212.	Secondly, the ministerial meeting of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation in Paris should be given new impetus. We are making several new proposals. We will seek to help nations facing severe debt burdens. We will advance new ideas for expanded co-operation in energy.
213.	Thirdly, the industrial democracies have been far too willing to wait for the demands of the developing countries rather than to advance their own proposals. Now, however, the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development have, at the suggestion of the United States, agreed to examine long-range development planning and to develop a more coherent and comprehensive approach to global growth and economic justice.
214.	Fourthly, natural disasters each year take thousands of lives and cost billions of dollars. It strikes most those who can afford it least-the poorest peoples of the world. The United Nations has a unique capacity to address these global concerns and thus improve man's odds against nature. We urge this body to take the lead in strengthening international co-operation to prevent and alleviate natural calamity.
215.	Our dream is that all the children of the world can live with hope and widening opportunity. No nation can accomplish this alone; no group of nations can achieve it through confrontation. But together there is a chance for major progress-and in our generation.
216.	It is an irony of our time that an age of ideological and nationalistic rivalry has spawned as well a host of challenges that no nation can possibly solve by itself: the proliferation of nuclear weapons technology; the problems posed by the law of the sea; and the horrible new tool of tenor that cJiims innocent victims on every continent.
217.	The growing danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons raises stark questions about man's ability to ensure his very existence. We have lived through three perilous decades hi which the catastrophe of nuclear war has been avoided, despite ? strategic rivalry between a relatively few nations.
218.	But now a wholly new situation impends. Many nations have the potential to build nuclear weapons. If this potential were to materialize, threats to use nuclear weapons, fed by mutually reinforcing misconceptions, could become a recurrent feature of local conflicts in every' quarter of the globe. And there will be growing dangers of accidents, blackmail and nuclear terrorism.
219.	Unless current trends are altered rapidly, the likelihood of nuclear devastation could grow steadily in the years ahead. We must look to the roots of the problem. Since the 1973 energy crisis and drastic rise in oil prices, both developed and developing nations have seen in nuclear energy a means both of lowering the cost of electricity and of reducing reliance upon imported petroleum. In an age of growing nationalism some see the acquisition and expansion of nuclear power as symbols of enhanced national prestige, and, let us be frank, as a means to provide themselves a future option to acquire nuclear weapons.
220.	A nation that acquires the potential for a nuclear weapons capability must accept the consequences of its action. It is bound to trigger offsetting actions by its neighbors and stimulate broader proliferation, thereby accelerating a process that ultimately will undermine its own security. And it is disingenuous to label as "peaceful" nuclear devices which obviously are capable of massive military destruction.
221.	Time is of the essence. In no area of international concern does the future of this planet depend more directly upon what this generation can do or fails to do. We must move on the following three broad fronts.
222.	First, international safeguards must be strengthened and strictly enforced. The supply and use of nuclear materials associated with civilian nuclear energy programs must be carefully safeguarded so that they will not be diverted. The physical security of nuclear materials must be increased. The International Atomic Energy Agency must receive the full support of all nations in making its safeguards effective. Any violator of these safeguards must face immediate and drastic penalties.
223.	Secondly, adherence to safeguards, while of prime importance, is no guarantee against future proliferation. We must continue our efforts to forge international restraints against the acquisition or transfer of reprocessing facilities and of enrichment facilities which produce highly enriched uranium.
224.	Thirdly, we must recognize that one of the principal incentives for seeking sensitive reprocessing and enrichment technology is the fear that essential non-sensitive materials will not be made available on a reliable basis. Nations that show their sense of international responsibility by accepting effective restraints have a right to expect a reliable. economical supply of peaceful nuclear reactors and associated non-sensitive fuel. The United States, as a principal supplier of these items, is prepared to be responsive in this regard.
225.	In the near future President Ford will announce a comprehensive American program for international action on non-proliferation that reconciles global aspirations for assured nuclear supply with global requirements for nuclear control. In that way we hope that the 9.tom can be seen once again as a boon, and not as a menace, to mankind.
226.	Another issue of vast global consequence is the law of the sea. The negotiations which have just recessed in New York represent one of the most important, complex
and ambitious diplomatic undertakings in history.

227.	We have traveled an extraordinary distance in these negotiations in recent years, thanks in no small part to the skill and dedication of the distinguished President of this Assembly. Agreement exists on key concepts: a 12-mile territorial sea; free passage over and through straits; a 200-mile economic zone; and important pollution controls. In many fields we have replaced ideological debates with serious efforts to find concrete solutions. And there is growing consensus that the outstanding problems must be solved at the next session.
228.	But there is hardly room for complacency. Important issues remain which, if not settled, could cause us to forfeit all our hard-won progress. The Conference has yet to agree on the balance between coastal-State and international rights in the economic zone; on the freedom of marine scientific research; on arrangements for dispute settlement; and, most crucially, on the regime for exploitation of the deep sea-beds.
229.	The United States has made major proposals to resolve the deep sea-bed issue. We have agreed that the sea-beds are the common heritage of all mankind We have proposed a dual system for the exploitation of sea-bed minerals by which half of the mining sites would be reserved for the International Authority and half could be developed by individual nations and their nationals on the basis of technical capacity. We have offered to find financing and to transfer the technology needed to make international mining a practical reality. And in light of the many uncertainties that lie ahead, we have proposed that there be a review-for example after 25 years-to determine whether the provisions on sea-bed mining are working equitably.
230.	In response, some nations have escalated their demands and the stridency with which they advocate them.
231.	I must say candidly that there are limits beyond which no American administration can, or will, go. If attempts are made to compel concessions which exceed those limits, unilateralism will become inevitable. Countries which have no technological capacity for mining the sea-beds in the foreseeable future should not seek to impose a doctrine of total internationalization on nations which alone have this capacity and which have voluntarily offered to share it. The United States has an interest in the progressive development of international law, stable order and global co-operation. We are prepared to make significant sacrifices for this- but these sacrifices cannot go beyond equitable bounds.
23*2. Let us therefore put aside delaying tactics and pressures and take the path of co-operation. If we have the vision to conclude a treaty considered fair and just by mankind, our labors will have profound meaning not only for the regimen of the oceans but for all efforts to build a peaceful, co-operative and prosperous international community. The United States will spend the interval between sessions of the Conference reviewing its positions and will approach other nations well in advance of the next session at the political level to establish the best possible conditions for success.
233.	A generation that dreams of world peace and economic progress is plagued by a new, brutal and indiscriminate form of violence: international terrorism. In the year since I last addressed this body there have been 11 hijackings, 19 kidnappings, 42 armed attacks and 112 bombings perpetrated by international terrorists. Over 70 people have lost their lives and over 200 have been injured.
234.	It is time this Organization said to the world that the vicious murder and abuse of innocents cannot be excused by the invocation of lofty motives. Criminal acts against humanity, whatever the professed objective, cannot be excused by any civilized nation.
235.	Hie threat of terrorism should be dealt with through the co-operative efforts of all countries. More stringent steps must be taken now to deny skyjackers and terrorists a safe haven. Additional measures are required to protect passengers in both transit and terminal areas, as well as in flight.
236.	The United States will support new initiatives which will ensure the safety of the innocent. The proposal of the Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany against the taking of hostages [7th meeting, para.,113] deserves the most serious and sympathetic consideration of this Assembly.
237.	The United States will do everything within its power to work co-operatively in the United Nations and in other international bodies to put an end to terrorism. But we have an obligation to protect the lives of our citizens as they travel at home or abroad, and we intend to meet that obligation. If multilateral efforts are blocked, then the United States will be forced to act through its own legislative processes and in conjunction with others willing to join us.
238.	Terrorism is an international problem. It is inconceivable that an organization of the world's nations would fail to take effective action against it.
239.	The final measure of all we do together, of course, is man himself. Our common efforts to define, preserve and enhance respect for the rights of man thus represent an ultimate test of international co-operation.
240.	We Americans, in the year of our bicentennial, are conscious -and proud of our own traditions. Our founders wrote 200 years ago of the equality and inalienable rights of all men. Since then the ideals of liberty and democracy have become the universal and indestructible goals of mankind. But the plain truth -of tragic proportions-is that human rights are in jeopardy over most of the globe. Arbitrary arrest, denial of fundamental procedural rights, slave labor, the stifling of freedom of religion, racial injustice, political repression, the use of torture, and restraints on communications and expression these abuses are far too prevalent.
241.	The performance of the United Nations system in protecting human rights has fallen far short of what was envisaged when the Organization was founded. The principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are clear debates of this body and in other forums have been marred by hypocrisy, double standards and discrimination. Flagrant and consistent deprivation of human rights is no less grave in one country or one social system than in another. Nor is it more acceptable when practiced upon members of the same race than when inflicted by one race upon another.
242.	The international community has a unique role to play. The application of the standards of the Universal Declaration should be entrusted to fair and capable international bodies. But at the same time let us ensure that those bodies do not become platforms from which nations which are the worst transgressors pass judgment on the alleged shortcomings of others.
243.	Let us together pursue practical approaches: to build on the foundations already laid at previous sessions of the General Assembly and in the Commission on Human Rights to lessen the abominable practice of officially sanctioned torture; to promote acceptance of procedures for protecting the rights of people subject to detention, such as access to courts, counsel and families,-and their prompt release or fair and public trial; to improve the working procedures of international bodies concerned with human rights, so that they may function fairly and effectively; to strengthen the capability of the United Nations to meet the tragic problems of the ever growing number of refugees whose human rights have been stripped away by conflict in almost every continent. The United States pledges its firm support to these efforts.

244.	The challenge to statesmanship in this generation is to advance from the management of crises to the building of a stable and just international order, an order resting not on power but on restraint of power, not on the strength of arms but on the strength of the human spirit.
245.	Global forces of change now shape our future. Order will come in one of two ways: through its imposition by the strong and the ruthless or by the wise and far-sighted use of international institutions through which we enlarge the sphere of Common interests and enhance the sense of community.
246.	It is easy and tempting to press relentlessly for national advantage. It is infinitely more difficult to act in recognition of the rights of others.
247.	Throughout history the greatness of men and nations has been measured by their actions in times of acute peril. Today there is no single crisis to conquer. There is, Instead, a persisting challenge of staggering complexity: the need to create a universal community based on co-operation, peace and justice.
248.	If we falter, future generations will pay for our failure. If we succeed we shall have been worthy of the hopes of mankind.
249.	I am confident that we can succeed.
250.	And it is here, in the Assembly of nations, that we should begin.
