94.	 Mr. President, I would like to begin my speech by congratulating you, Mr. Lazar Mojsov, on your election as President of the current session of the General Assembly. I would also like to take this opportunity to extend warm congratulations to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has made a major contribution to the anti-imperialist cause of the people of the world, and to the Republic of Djibouti, which has won independence after waging a protracted struggle, on their admission to membership in the United Nations, and sincerely to wish them new successes along their road of advance.
95.	The delegation of the People's Republic of China has come to attend this session of the General Assembly shortly after the successful Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China. Our country is now at an important juncture in history, when we are carrying forward the revolutionary cause pioneered by our predecessors and forging ahead into the future. Here I would like first of all to speak on developments in China.
96.	The year 1976 was no ordinary one for China. We lost our great leader and teacher Chairman Mao Tsedung and his long-tested, close comrades-in-arms, our respected and beloved Premier Chou En-lai and Chairman Chu Teh of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. Their passing away was a loss beyond measure to our Party and country, and our entire people was plunged in immense grief. In the same year, our country was hit by earthquakes and other severe natural calamities. Just when our people were faced with these grave difficulties, the counterrevolutionary  gang of four  of Wang Hungwen, Chang Chun-chiao, Chiang Ching and Yao Wen-yuan frenziedly stepped up their conspiratorial activities in a vain attempt to usurp supreme leadership in our Party and State. For a time dark clouds hung heavily over China. The Chinese people were worried about the fate of our Party and country, about whether we could continue to advance along the course charted by Chairman Mao. Our friends abroad also felt anxiety for us. A handful of enemies at home and abroad, however, gloated over our difficulties and hoped that our country would henceforth be thrown into a state of chaos and division and that Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies would no longer be followed. When Chairman Mao was still with us, he had been aware of die gang of four  problem. He waged repeated struggles against those persons and personally chose Chairman Hua Kuo-feng to be his successor so as to forestall their usurpation of Party and state power. After he passed away and at the critical moment when the  gang of four  attempted to seize the chance to take action, the Party Central Committee headed by Chairman Hua followed Chairman Mao's behest, acted on his directives and decisions and smashed this cabal at one blow, thus saving our country from a blood-bath and a major retrogression. The long-steeled Communist Party and people of China stood the rigorous test and won a great victory. The Chinese people rejoiced, and our foreign friends were happy for our
S3K6.
97.	At present, the situation in China is excellent We again have a wise leader in Chairman Hua Kuo-feng Our Party is more united, more unified and stronger than ever. People s democracy in China is being given full play. Our people s enthusiasm for socialism has never been so high the dictatorship of the proletariat is more firmly consolidated The mass movement to expose and criticize the
gang of four has speeded up the rehabilitation and expansion of industrial and agricultural production. A new leap forward is taking shape in the national economy
98.	The Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China was a great milestone in the history of our Party, and it was a congress of great, historic significance and far-reaching influence. The Congress stressed that the banner of Chairman Mao is the banner of victory of the Chinese people's revolution. The Chinese people are determined to rally closely around the Party Central Committee headed by Chairman Hua, forever hold aloft the great banner of Chairman Mao, adhere to his theory of continuing the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat, and steadfastly implement his revolutionary line in domestic and external work. We are determined to work hard for the realization of the strategic decision of grasping the key link of class struggle and bringing about great order across the land, turn China into a powerful modern socialist country by the end of the century and make a greater contribution to humanity. We are confident of surmounting all difficulties and obstacles on our road of advance. Our cause is just. Our line is correct. Our goal must be attained. Our goal can unquestionably be attained.
99.	We are happy to see that the international situation is also excellent. All the basic contradictions in the world are sharpening, and the factors for revolution continue to grow. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution-this has become the irresistible historical trend. The international united front against hegemonism, against the super-Power policies of aggression and war, is broadening.
100.	Over the past year, the revolutionary struggle of the international proletariat, the liberation struggles of the oppressed people and nations and the revolutionary mass movements in many countries have continued to surge forward. The Korean people's struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their country has won more popular support. The people of Democratic Kampuchea, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the Lao People's Democratic Republic, after winning great victories in their war against United States aggression and for national salvation, are actively consolidating their victorious gains and working hard for their countries' reconstruction. The people of the South-East Asian and South Asian countries, upholding independence and sovereignty, have repeatedly frustrated super-Power schemes of interference, control and expansion. The  Asian collective security system  so energetically hawked by a super-Power has been rejected or opposed by virtually all Asian countries. The Arab and Palestinian people's struggle against Israeli Zionism and super-Power hegemonism is deepening. The people in southern Africa have risen in a new upsurge of the struggle against colonialism and racism. The people of Panama, with the support of the people in other Latin American countries, have achieved important results in their struggle for the recovery of the Panama canal. The people of the countries of Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania have won a number of new victories in their struggle to win or safeguard national independence and defend state sovereignty. The numerous developing countries have carried on an unremitting struggle against the super-Powers in order to establish a new international economic order and defend their national economic rights and interests and their maritime rights. The third-world countries and people, who support and encourage one another and fight in unity and co-operation, have played an increasingly remarkable role as the main force in the struggle against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. Faced with the growing superpower menace, the countries of the second world in Western Europe and other regions have shown a stronger tendency towards unity against hegemonism. The mass movement of the Japanese people for the recovery of the four northern islands is sweeping across the land. The two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, which stand opposed to the people of the world, are beset with difficulties and crises at home and abroad. They find the going tougher and tougher. Social-imperialism, in particular, has suffered heavy blows one after another as its aggressive and expansionist features are further revealed. The international situation as a whole continues to develop in a direction favourable to the people of all countries and unfavourable to the super-Powers.
101.	The situation in the Middle East is a question of concern to the entire world. During the past year, the Arab and Palestinian' people have more closely combined their struggle against Zionism with the struggle against superpower hegemonism. Social-imperialism's despicable practice of betrayal and control, under the camouflage of support and aid has been opposed by a growing number of Arab countries and peoples.
102.	The Egyptian Government and people have resolutely resisted social-imperialism's political blackmail and economic pressure and safeguarded their state sovereignty and national dignity. The eighth meeting of the Kings and Presidents of the Arab League, held at Cairo on 25 and 26 October 1976, reached agreement on ending the civil war in Lebanon and strengthening Arab unity, thus frustrating another attempt of the super-Powers to sow discord and split the Arab ranks. While each super-Power tries to out-clamour the other for an over-all settlement of the Middle East question, both of them are in fact still attempting to maintain the unsettled state of  no war, no peace  in the Middle East. They are afraid of the emergence of a strong and united Arab world, of a stable and prosperous Middle East. Driven by the needs of their respective global strategies, they both seek to control the Middle East. Using different ways and tactics, both of them are supporting and abetting the Israeli Zionists and bringing all kinds of pressure to bear on the Arab countries and the Palestinian people. That is why the Israeli Zionists are so obdurate and so insolent. The situation in the Middle East will remain tense and complicated, pregnant with the danger of new military conflicts. But no one can shake the resolve of the Arab and Palestinian people to recover their sacred territories and regain their national rights. Supported by the people of the whole world, the just struggle of the Arab and Palestinian people will be crowned with final victory.
102. The developments in Africa are particularly encouraging. New victories have been won steadily by the great African people in their struggle against imperialism, colonialism, racism and hegemonism. The Government and people of the Sudan foiled the subversive plots engineered by social-imperialism and expelled its military experts, dealing a heavy blow to its ambition of aggression and expansion. The people of Zaire, who are united as one against the common enemy and are supported by fraternal African peoples, crushed the invasion of mercenary troops instigated by social-imperialism and safeguarded the independence and territorial integrity of their country. This victory, which greatly raised the morale of the African people and deflated the arrogance of the aggressors, sets an example of mutual support and joint resistance of African peoples against super-Power aggression. In southern Africa, the people of Zimbabwe and Namibia have persisted in armed struggle against racism and for national liberation under arduous and complex conditions. The people of Azania have fought resolutely against apartheid despite brutal repression, and the mass movement there keeps surging forward. People across the African continent voice strong solidarity for their brothers in southern Africa, whose heroic struggle also enjoys support from the people the world over. The reactionary Vorster and Smith regimes are besieged on all sides and completely isolated.
103.	In their protracted struggle, the African countries and people have come to appreciate more and more the importance of unity against the enemy. Although there exist differences of one kind or another between African countries, yet confronted with the enemy they have sought common ground on major issues, while putting aside their minor differences, and have directed the main thrust of their attack against imperialism, colonialism and racism, and super-Power hegemonism in particular. This has been and will continue to be an important guarantee for the victories of the African people. The first Afro-Arab summit conference and the fourteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity stressed mutual aid and co-operation and the need to oppose foreign interference. These Conferences were a significant testimony to the strength and unity of the 61 African and Arab countries with their more than 400 million people in lighting the common enemy. They were a positive contribution to the struggle of the African and Arab people and of the entire third world against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism.
104.	The struggle of the African people will yet be protracted and arduous. Colonialism and racism are still putting up a last-ditch struggle. What is more serious is that both super-Powers have intensified their interference in African affairs. Owing to the importance of Africa's strategic location and its rich natural resources, each of them regards the control of this continent as an important part of its global strategy of gaining sway in Europe and dominating the world. Super-Power rivalry in Africa is becoming fiercer. One super-Power seeks to preserve and expand its vested interests and influence in Africa. It obdurately supports the forces of colonialism and racism in southern Africa and tries to undermine the liberation struggles of the people there. The other super-Power, flaunting the banner of opposing imperialism and colonialism and supporting the national liberation movement to fool people, has stepped up its infiltration and expansion in Africa. It is exploiting some differences between African countries and between liberation organizations and utilizing some problems left over from the days of colonial rule to sow discord, incite trouble and fish in troubled waters. Against those African countries which dare to resist and oppose its hegemonic behaviour, this super-Power has resorted to brazen and unscrupulous subversion and interference and gone so far as to organize and send mercenary troops for outright military invasion, which poses a grave threat to the security and independence of these countries. Many African countries are worried lest what happened in Angola and Zaire yesterday may befall themselves tomorrow. Facts eloquently show that the rivalry between the super-Powers is the main source of unrest and turbulence in Africa, and that the super-Power which styles itself a  natural ally  of the African people has become their most sinister and ferocious enemy. The African countries and people are indeed faced with the trying task of rebuffing the tiger at the back door while repelling the wolf at the front gate . However, a great change has taken place in Africa. The great African people have stood up; they will never tolerate any foreign force of aggression lording it over them again. It is our conviction that the African people, persisting in unity and struggle against the common enemy, will frustrate all super-Power schemes and demolish the last bastions of colonialism and racism in Africa, thereby winning complete independence and liberation for the whole of Africa.
105.	A question the people of the world are interested in and think about today is whether the world situation is more tense or more relaxed, whether the danger of war is greater or less. A super-Power claims that the danger of war has been  considerably reduced . This is sheer deceptive talk. The stark reality is that the situation in the world has not relaxed, and that the factors for war are visibly growing. In their scramble for hegemony, both superpowers are intensifying their arms expansion and war preparations. Their rivalry extends to every corner of the world. They are carrying out aggression and expansion far and wide, each cutting the ground from under the other's feet and striving to weaken and gain advantage over the other. Because of its political, economic and strategic importance, Europe is strategically the focus of rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers and the arena where they are locked in acute military confrontation. The two antagonistic military blocs keep increasing their troops and armaments and redeploying their forces and frequently conducting large-scale military exercises. The war machine of each super-Power has expanded to unprecedented proportions. The super-Powers are the source of a new world war. This is an ironclad fact which no one can cover up.
106.	It must be pointed out in particular that social- imperialism presents the greater danger. Judging from the current over-all picture of the rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers, the United States is on the defensive, while the Soviet Union is on the offensive. Social- imperialism is exerting its utmost to carry out all-round arms expansion. It surpassed the United States in conventional armed forces long ago and is striving for over-all supremacy in nuclear weapons as well. It has expanded its navy on a massive scale, and its fleets are active on all seas. It wants to grab the whole of Europe, Asia and Africa. It not only maintains a posture of readiness to break through at the centre in Europe, but strives to create a situation in which it can outflank Europe from the north and the south. It is accelerating its plunder of strategic resources and control of strategic areas in Africa and the Middle East and seeks to seize the Persian Gulf in the east, block the strategic routes of the Atlantic Ocean in the west and thrust round the Cape of Good Hope in the south. The ambitions of the new tsars far exceed those of the old tsars.
107.	There are profound political and economic reasons why social-imperialism has become the most dangerous source of war. Being a latecomer among the imperialist Powers, it is more aggressive and adventurous. Owing to its relatively inadequate economic strength, it cannot but rely to a greater extent on military strength and threats of war in pursuing expansion. Its highly concentrated State- monopoly capitalist economy and its political regime of Fascist dictatorship make it easier to militarize its national economy and state apparatus. Besides, it flaunts the banner of  socialism , which can deceive people to a certain extent, and this also makes it more dangerous.
108.	Lenin said:  An essential feature of imperialism is the rivalry between several great Powers in the striving for hegemony. 
109.	Chairman Mao said:
 The United States wants to protect its interests in the world and the Soviet Union wants to expand; this can in no way be changed. In the era in which classes exist, war is an interval between one peace and another. War is a continuation of politics, that is to say, a continuation of peace. Peace itself is politics. 
The continuation of fierce contention between the two super-Powers is bound to lead to a world war some day. This is independent of man's will.
110.	More and more people have recognized that the factors for war are visibly growing and that social- imperialism is the most dangerous source of war. They advocate the strengthening of unity, of defence capabilities and of preparedness against war. But it must not be overlooked that there is still a strong trend towards appeasement in the West. Some people hope that .temporary ease can be gained by making compromises and concessions. They imagine that they can restrain social- imperialism by signing agreements and expanding economic exchanges with it and by giving it loans. Some even seek to divert this peril towards the east in order to preserve themselves at the expense of others. Historical experience tells us that all aggressors bully the soft and fear the tough and always reach out for a yard after taking an inch. Like rearing a tiger to one's ultimate detriment, a policy of appeasement will simply encourage aggression and hasten the outbreak of war. To follow in Neville Chamberlain's footsteps means courting self-destruction. We must not forget the tragic lesson of Munich.
111.	It is understandable that people are interested in the question of disarmament when the super-Powers are stepping up their rivalry and their arms expansion and war preparations and when the danger of a world war is growing. But the super-Powers are playing up disarmament as something miraculous. In particular, the super-Power that most vociferously preaches  peace  dishes up some sort of disarmament proposal every year and describes disarmament virtually as a panacea which will dispel the danger of war, ensure a lasting peace and rid the world of poverty. This is sheer deception. Since the super-Powers are bent on aggression and expansion and are scrambling for world hegemony, they are bound to expand their armaments and go to war. They will never lay down their knives, nor beat their swords into ploughshares. The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva has been going on for 16 years, yet neither super-Power has reduced its armaments by a single gun. The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks have been going on for 8 years, yet strategic arms have kept growing in number. The negotiations on mutual and balanced reduction of forces in Central Europe has entered its fourth year, yet the armaments deployed by the super-Powers in central Europe have continued to increase, and there are endless wrangling and differences even over the exact number of troops maintained by the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty in this region. It is very clear that the super-Powers are prating about disarmament and peace only to cover up their arms expansion and war preparations. They are just using people's desire for peace to lull the people with false hopes so that it may be easier for them to launch a war some day and realize their wild ambition of conquering the world.
112. Our attitude with regard to a world war is,  First, we are against it; second, we are not afraid of it . The people of the world want peace, and the Chinese people also want a peaceful international environment in which they may better build up their country. It is the super-Powers and not the Chinese people and the people of the world who want war. Some people say that in repeatedly stressing the danger of a world war, China is raising a false alarm and that it is warlike and wants to provoke a world war. This is vile slander. All we have done is to call a spade a spade so that the people will be on the alert and oppose the unleashing of a new world war by the super-Powers. And when we say we are not afraid of war, it means still less that we like it, but because to be afraid gets us nowhere. The super-Powers are bent on fighting a war. What is the use of being afraid? Actually, the super-Powers are not so terrifying. They look strong like real tigers. But, as Chairman Mao pointed out:
 ... imperialism and all reactionaries, looked at in essence, from a long-term point of view, from a strategic point of view, must be seen for what they are—paper tigers.   s
Social-imperialism has wild ambitions. But it finds little political support, and its economy is lop-sided. There is a sharpening contradiction between its ruling clique and the broad masses as well as mounting discontent among the oppressed minority nationalities at home. Its  community , which is a colonial set-up, is very unstable and shows a growing centrifugal tendency. Pursuing aggression and expansion everywhere, social-imperialism has set itself against the people of all countries, and this in itself dooms it to defeat. So long as the people of all countries unite and form themselves into a mighty army against hegemonism, heighten their vigilance, get prepared and persevere in struggle, they may be able to put off the war; and in case it does break out, they will find themselves in a favourable
position to abolish unjust war by means of a just war against aggression and win genuine peace. We are revolutionary optimists. We are convinced that the human race will abolish war and not be destroyed by it.
113. Developments on the international scene have proved that Chairman Mao's thesis differentiating the three worlds, which he set forth in 1974, conforms to the political realities of the contemporary world and is in the fundamental interests of the people the world over. Back in 1926 he stressed,
 Who are our enemies? Who are our friends? This is a question of the first importance for the revolution. 
Chairman Mao advanced his thesis differentiating the three worlds after he had observed and studied for years the development and changes of the basic contradictions and the division and realignment of the political forces in the world since the 1960s, as well as the political and economic position of each country internationally. The great significance of this thesis lies in the fact that it provides the people of the world with a powerful ideological instrument with which to identify the main revolutionary forces, the chief enemies, and the middle forces that can be won over and united within the international struggle of today. It thus enables the people of all countries to mobilize better all positive factors, unite with all the forces that can be united and isolate the main common enemy to the maximum and deal it the heaviest blows. At present, the steady reinforcement of the unity and co-operation of the third world, the growing tendency in the second world to unity against hegemonism and the broadening of the international united front against super-Power hegemonism, in which the third world is the main force-all this testifies to the validity of Chairman Mao's thesis. Obviously, the broader the international united front against hegemonism and the more isolated the super-Powers, the more that situation will favour the struggle of the oppressed people and nations for liberation and of the people of all countries, particularly the third-world countries, to win or safeguard national independence, defend State sovereignty and develop their national economy. On the other hand, every victory in the revolutionary struggle of the people of all countries helps to weaken the super-Powers, thwart their aggressive and expansionist ambitions, upset their war plans and deployments, and put off the outbreak of a new world war.
114. Chairman Mao's theory of the three worlds is diametrically opposed to the super-Powers' views on international relations. One super-Power spreads the view that there is only one world, a so-called  interdependent  world. But in fact the different parts of the world are mutually contradictory as well as interrelated. The  interdependence  this super-Power emphasizes has nothing in common with the international co-operation on an equal footing demanded by the many small and medium-sized countries. This super-Power wants to obliterate the actual contradiction between exploiter and exploited, between oppressor and oppressed and between aggressor and victim of aggression. It attempts thereby to preserve the outdated world order and wants all countries to be  dependent  on it. The other super-Power ignores the fact that the socialist camp ceased to exist and the imperialist camp disintegrated long ago, and asserts that the two camps still exist. Evidently, it wants even more to obliterate its acute contradiction with the people of the world, and with the people of the third-world countries, in particular. By continuing to use the signboard  the socialist camp , it attempts to disguise its true nature of social-imperialism, enforce the doctrines of  limited sovereignty  and  international dictatorship  in its  community  so as to preserve its neo-colonial set-up, and at the same time to hoodwink the people and to push its policies of aggression and expansion in the whole world. There is an essential similarity between the two views advanced by the two super-Powers. Both want to prevent us the people of the world from distinguishing between our enemies, our friends and ourselves, so as to strengthen their positions in the rivalry for world hegemony and to undermine the struggle of the world people against hegemonism.
115.	Chairman Mao's strategic concept differentiating the three worlds explodes the fallacies spread by the superpowers and gives a correct orientation to the contemporary international struggle. This brilliant concept will demonstrate greater vitality with the passage of time.
116.	The revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs which were formulated by the Chinese people's great leader and teacher Chairman Mao Tsetung and creatively implemented by our esteemed and beloved Premier Chou En-lai have been and will continue to be the guideline for China's external work. At the Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China, Chairman Hua Kuo-feng solemnly declared that we will hold high the great banner of Chairman Mao, adhere to proletarian internationalism and continue to carry out Chairman Mao's revolutionary line in foreign affairs. We will strengthen our unity with the other socialist countries and with the proletariat and the oppressed people and nations throughout the world, strengthen our unity with the other third-world countries and ally with all countries subjected to the aggression, interference or threats of super-Power hegemonism so as to form the broadest possible united front against the hegemonism of the two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States. We will establish and develop relations with other countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. We will strengthen our unity with all other genuine Marxist-Leninist parties and organizations and carry through to the end the struggle against modern revisionism with the Soviet revisionist renegade clique as its centre.
117.	We have always held that all countries, big and small, should be equal. We are resolutely against big nations bullying small ones and strong nations oppressing weak ones. The affairs of a country should be managed by its own people; the affairs of a region should be managed by the countries in that region; the affairs of the whole world should be managed jointly by all countries.
118.	China is a socialist country. China and the other third-world countries share a common experience and face common fighting tasks. China belongs to the third world. We stand firmly together with the other developing countries and people in Asia, Africa, Latin America and other regions. We firmly support these countries in their struggle to combat imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism and to win or safeguard national independence, defend State sovereignty and develop their national economy. The non-aligned movement, an important force, has developed steadily and become stronger, and together with the other third-world countries, it is playing a role of growing importance in international affairs. We firmly support the non-aligned countries in pursuing their non- aligned policy of independence, peace and neutrality and support them in opposing all foreign aggression and interference.
119.	We firmly support the Korean people in their just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their country. The United Nations Command must be dissolved. The armed forces of the United States and their equipment must be withdrawn immediately and totally from South Korea. The Chung Hee Park clique in South Korea must stop all its provocations which create tensions. The Korean question should be resolved by the Korean people themselves free from any outside interference. Any act to delay and obstruct the reunification of Korea in the hope of perpetuating the division of Korea and creating  two Koreas  runs counter to the aspirations of the entire Korean people and will not be tolerated. The resolution for promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session should be implemented in earnest.
120.	We firmly support the Arab and Palestinian people in their just struggle to recover their lost territories and regain their national rights. We are firmly opposed to the rivalry for hegemony between the two super-Powers in the Middle East and to Israel's policy of aggression. The provocative action of the present administration of Israel in establishing settlements on the West Bank of the Jordan River with a view to permanently occupying Arab territories must be strongly condemned. We reaffirm that we will have no dealings whatsoever with the Israeli Zionists.
121.	We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania in their just struggle against white racism and for national independence and liberation. We reaffirm that we will have no dealings whatsoever with the South African and Rhodesian racist regimes.
122.	We firmly support the Latin American countries in their struggle to strengthen unity and co-operation and combat super-Power hegemonism. We firmly support the Panamanian people in their valiant and protracted struggle for the recovery of the Panama Canal.
123.	We firmly support the third-world countries and people in their struggle against imperialist or social- imperialist exploitation and plunder, for the establishment of a new international economic order and in defence of their national economic rights and interests. The correct principles in the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order and the Programme of Action adopted at the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly must be carried out. We support the series of reasonable proposals advanced by the developing countries, such as the establishment of an integrated programme for commodities and its common fund, the demand for a moratorium on and the reduction or cancellation of debt burdens, etc.
124.	We support the second-world countries and people in their struggle to oppose super-Power control, intimidation and bullying and to defend their security and national independence. We support their efforts to improve relations with third-world countries on the basis of equality. We appreciate the efforts of the Western European countries for unity against hegemonism. We firmly support the Japanese people in their struggle for the recovery of the four northern islands.
125.	We are for genuine disarmament and against sham disarmament. We have consistently stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. As the first step, all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that they will not be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time or in any circumstances, and in particular will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries and nuclear-free zones, and that they must dismantle all their nuclear bases on the territories of other countries and withdraw from abroad all their nuclear armed forces and nuclear weapons. We support the demands of the countries and people in the regions of the Indian Ocean, the  Mediterranean and the Red Sea and in South-East Asia, South Asia and Latin America for the establishment of peace zones, security zones and nuclear-free zones. We are strongly opposed to the super-Powers' policies of nuclear blackmail and nuclear monopoly and to their disarmament fraud.
126.	The Shanghai communiqué of 27 February 1972 is the basis for the relations between China and the United States at present. According to the spirit of the communiqué, if relations between the two countries are to be normalized, the United States must sever its so-called diplomatic relations with the Chiang clique, withdraw all its armed forces and military installations from Taiwan and the Taiwan Strait area and abrogate its so-called  mutual defence treaty  with the Chiang clique. Taiwan is China's sacred territory. The Chinese people are determined to liberate Taiwan and accomplish the great undertaking of unifying our motherland. When and how to liberate Taiwan is entirely China's internal affair, which brooks no foreign interference whatsoever. The above is the unalterable stand of the Chinese Government.
127.	Our controversy with the Soviet leading clique on matters of principle will go on for a long time. We will persevere in our tit-for-tat struggle against its hegemonism. At the same time, we have always held that China and the Soviet Union should maintain normal State relations on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. It is none other than the Soviet leading clique that has worsened the State relations between China and the Soviet Union. If the Soviet leaders really want to improve the State relations between the two countries, they should prove this by deeds.
128.	We will always bear in mind Chairman Mao's teaching,  Dig tunnels deep, store grain everywhere, and never seek hegemony , and be ready at all times to wipe out any enemy that dares to invade China. Our policy is:  We will not attack unless we are attacked; if we are attacked, we will certainly counterattack. 
129.	We will always bear in mind Chairman Mao's teaching that in our external work we should  get rid of great-power chauvinism resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely  We will never seek hegemony or be superpower. We will always stand by the oppressed people and nations throughout the world. On behalf of the Chinese Government, Vice-Premier Teng Hsiao-ping solemnly declared from this rostrum in April 1974:
 If one day China should change its [political] colour and turn into a super-Power, if it too, should play the tyrant in the world, and everywhere subject others to its bullying, aggression and exploitation, then the people of the world should identify it as social imperialism, expose it, oppose it and work together with the Chinese people to overthrow it. 
Here, we the Chinese delegation, would like to reaffirm this stand.
130.	The world is advancing amidst turmoil; the people are awakening in the course of struggle. We are now in a new historical period-a period of struggle against superpower hegemonism. The struggle will be hard and the road tortuous, but the future is bright.  The people, and the people alone, are the motive force in the making of world history. The people of the world have been tempered in great storms of struggle. They have gained experience, strengthened their unity and grown stronger. It is not the one or two super-Powers but the people of the world that decide the destiny of mankind. Victory unquestionably belongs to the people of the world.
 ﻿91.	 Mr. President, I should like first on behalf of the Federal Government to congratulate you on your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and at the same time I should like to express our pleasure that you, an outstanding political personality and diplomat, representing one of the leading countries of the non-aligned movement, are presiding over this Assembly.
92.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany I welcome in our midst the two new Members, the Republic of Djibouti and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. This is an important step towards bringing our Organization nearer to the goal of universality.
93.	We have assembled here to try and bring the world-a world divided by conflicting ideologies, separated by a gulf between poor, and rich nations, torn by various conflicts- further along the long road to our objective: a world of peace, of economic and social progress, a world in which the dignity of man is respected. In fulfilling this task, central importance attaches to the United Nations, the only universal organization.
94.	Our age is one of far-reaching change. New thinking and new action are required. Only a generation ago the course of the world was determined by a few big Powers. Since then a hundred new States have emerged and have entered world politics with their own ideas and their own claims. For the first time in history the nations of the world are aware of their dependence on one another worldwide.
95.	There is a growing recognition of the fact that through co-operation we must transform our period of transition into an era of joint progress, in order to prevent it from becoming, through confrontation; an era of joint decline The world is looking for a just order of co-operation. In the past the system between States was often understood as a relationship of supremacy and subordination, politically, militarily and economically. This policy of supremacy no longer has a future. True, the idea of safeguarding one's own interests through power politics is by no means extinct. But it is confronted by the strongest force of this era: the will of nations for self-determination and independence.
96.	That will is strong particularly in the nations of Africa, Asia and Latin America. It has led to the dissolution of the huge colonial empires, and it will doom to failure any endeavour to establish new dependencies. This also applies to any attempt to establish supremacy by ideological means through ideological colonialism.
97.	Under the conditions prevailing in today's world, a country's interests can be safeguarded on a durable basis only through a policy of co-operation and fair reconciliation of interests. The world order of the future can only be an order based on equality.
98.	The Federal Republic of Germany has from the very outset built its foreign policy on respect for the self-determination and equal rights of all nations. We want self- determination for the indivisible German nation. We are helping to build the European Community, a Community in which all members have equal status and equal rights.
99.	We are also helping to shape the North Atlantic Alliance, an alliance which is a union of equal member States.
100.	With our policy of detente we are seeking co-operation with our Eastern neighbours on the basis of equal rights and mutual benefit.
101.	We seek equal and balanced partnership with the nations of Africa, Asia and Latin America, and we fully support them in their claim to independence and the right to develop as they see fit.
102.	In a nutshell, we want a world devoid of supremacy. We do not want to establish spheres of influence; we do not want to export ideologies. Rather we want a world in which all nations will determine their own way of life politically, economically and culturally and in which they will cooperate as partners, as equals.
103.	The movement of the non-aligned has become a major force in the quest for such a world of independence and equality of nations. Regional groupings as well, based on equality, can also make an essential contribution in Asia, in Africa and in Latin America.
104.	Our aim is a world of partnership. This means we must achieve the following goals. First, in order to safeguard peace, we must bring about constructive co-operation between Western and Eastern industrialized countries, beyond all ideological differences. Secondly, we must stop the arms race, which threatens peace and wastes resources. Thirdly, we must settle the smouldering conflicts in many regions of the world by peaceful means. Fourthly, we must constantly reduce the gap between rich and poor nations. We must overcome hunger and need and misery everywhere in the world. Fifthly, we must make respect for the rights and the dignity of man the foundation of justice and stability in the world.
105.	In a world of nuclear weapons, the policy of safeguarding peace determines the destiny of mankind. Safeguarding peace is the common goal of all democratic forces in my country. Safeguarding peace is more than avoiding war. Through the renunciation of force and the peaceful settlement of conflicts we must build a world of partnership. The member countries of' the European Community have embarked upon that path. Twice in this century they have been embroiled in war. Today, the Europe of the nine countries has become a force for peace in the world. In the North Atlantic Alliance the democracies of Europe and North America have united to secure peace. The European Community and the North Atlantic Alliance, in turn, provided the firm foundations from which it became possible to launch the process of East-West detente.
106.	The Federal Republic of Germany has made a substantial contribution to make detente in Europe possible. By means of the treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague, it has opened the way to normal relations with its Eastern neighbours. Within that context, relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union will also in future be of fundamental importance for detente in Europe. We want to develop these relations further.
107.	The treaty with the German Democratic Republic on the basis of relations has laid a foundation on which the two German States can live together. Part and parcel of that policy pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany is its declared aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination. We are certain that, here again, history will show that a nation's will for unity will assert itself. Nobody can elude the logic of history by using ideology as a subterfuge.
108.	The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has carried forward and developed among the 35 participating countries the process of detente that had been initiated bilaterally. The Final Act of Helsinki is a clear rejection of concepts of supremacy. Relations in the whole of Europe are to be based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all States.
109.	My Polish colleague, the previous speaker, was right in pointing out that the Federal Republic of Germany and the Polish People's Republic have made progress along the road to normalization. The meeting of Federal Chancellor Helmut Schmidt with the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers' Party, Mr. Gierek, in Helsinki has given an important impetus to this development.
110.	At the forthcoming follow-up Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to be held in Belgrade a sober balance-sheet will have to be drawn up as to whether and to what extent the general principles and the specific declarations of intent on economic and humanitarian matters in the Final Act have been put into practice, and what still has to be done.
111.	The Federal Government will do its best to ensure that the follow-up Conference will give fresh impetus to detente. The Belgrade Conference must become not the end of the road, but rather a point along the road in the long-term process of detente. There must be no relapse into cold war. That would render further progress impossible and jeopardize what has been achieved so far.
112.	Detente in Europe starts from the existing realities. Among those realities are the ties between West Berlin and the Federal Republic of Germany. We shall do everything to secure the viability of West Berlin. West Berlin must fully participate in the process of detente and its progress. In this context the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin of 3 September 1971 is of decisive importance. It must be strictly observed and fully implemented. Berlin is both a symbol and a yardstick of the will for detente and co-operation between East and West.
113.	We know that ideological differences will continue to exist between East and West. We are ready for a competition of ideas and achievements. However, detente means that neither side should attempt to impose its system on the other.
114.	Beyond their ideological rivalry, East and West have a common interest in safeguarding world peace, in developing mutually beneficial co-operation, and in resolving the problems of the developing countries. The latter need the contributions of the Western and the Eastern industrialized countries in order to master their problems. The developing countries need least of all a transfer of the East-West conflict to their regions.
115.	President Carter, in his recent speech in Charleston, defined the goal as follows:
 Our goal is not to encourage dissension or to re-divide the world into two opposing ideological camps, but to expand the realm of independent, economically self- reliant nations. 
116.	A world of partnership can thrive only in a climate of international trust. Such trust presupposes that nations and individuals can live free from fear. They have a right to be secure from the threat or use of force, be it force in the form of political or economic subjugation or be it force of weapons of whatever kind.
117.	In 1976 the Western defence alliance demanded that no country build up a higher level of armaments than was required for its defence.
118.	The Federal Republic of Germany has from its beginning taken the position that force cannot be a means to settle problems. That is why it actively advocates balanced and controlled disarmament on a world-wide scale. There must be an end to the arms race.
119.	We take seriously the task which we assumed when we became a member of the Geneva Conference of the Committee on Disarmament of the United Nations. From the beginning, we endorsed the initiative to convene a special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on disarmament. Even before the non-proliferation Treaty came into being we had renounced nuclear weapons. We consider the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons to be an essential prerequisite for safeguarding peace. As a party to the non-proliferation Treaty, we appeal once more to all States which are still standing aside to accede to the Treaty.
120.	The arms race is an enormous waste of resources in a world which ought to concentrate its efforts on the elimination of hunger and distress. Expenditure on armaments amounting to roughly $330 billion in 1976 is a challenge to the common sense and moral conviction of all States.
121.	The forthcoming special session of the General Assembly on disarmament must clearly show how we can live up to this challenge. It must not bog down in generalities.
122.	Besides world-wide endeavours for disarmament, regional efforts are required, especially where the size of the existing military potential makes such action particularly urgent. It is for that reason that the Federal Republic of Germany is actively participating in the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions. Our aims are clear and straightforward: first, we want parity of forces in Central Europe—neither side should have more forces than the other; and, secondly, we want such parity at a lower level. If those aims were to materialize, this would be a step towards greater stability. It could give fresh and strong impetus to the process of detente.
123.	In all efforts for disarmament and arms control- world wide and regional—we are conscious of the importance attaching to the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks between the United States and the Soviet Union. We welcome the efforts made in those negotiations. The progress achieved in the course of those negotiations will have a favourable effect on detente in general and on other endeavours for disarmament and arms control.
124.	Developing a world based on partnership presupposes that we settle conflicts by peaceful means. Three conflicts have been on the General Assembly's agenda for a good number of years—those in the Middle East, Cyprus and southern Africa.
125.	In the Middle East, a region neighbouring on and closely linked with the members of the European Community, we were relieved to witness the termination of the civil war in the greater part of Lebanon. But there is no peace yet. We appeal to all who are involved in the constant outbursts of fighting in southern Lebanon to lay down their arms at last. This is essential not only for Lebanon itself but also for stability and peace in the whole region.
126.	A settlement of the Middle East conflict is of vital importance also to Europe and the world as a whole. Together with its partners in the European Community the Federal Republic of Germany reaffirmed the principles for a solution in the statement on the Middle East made by the European Council in London on 29 June 1977. A just and lasting peace settlement must, starting from Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), give effect to the following principles: it must implement the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force; it must respect the right of all States in the region—and that means the right of Israel as well—to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries; it must end the territorial occupation which Israel has maintained since 1967; it must take into account the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. In the view of the Federal Republic of Germany, those legitimate rights of the Palestinian people include its rights to self-determination and to give effective expression to its national identity. A solution must therefore take into account the need for a homeland for the Palestinian people.
127.	The States members of the European Community have urgently appealed to all parties involved to begin peace negotiations as soon as possible. The Palestinians must participate in those negotiations. The road to negotiations must not be blocked by the unilateral creation of faits accomplis. That is why the Federal Government, in this forum too, comes out against the establishment of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories.
128.	The Federal Republic of Germany has friendly relations with all States in that region and uses them in its efforts to help to bring about a peaceful settlement. Advantage must be taken of the promising signs which emerged at the beginning of the year. This requires all concerned to show respect for the inalienable rights of the other side. I urgently appeal to all parties to the conflict to be aware of their responsibility for maintaining world peace and to make possible a peace settlement through realism and a spirit of compromise.
129.	Stagnation will also have to be overcome at last in the search for a solution of the Cyprus conflict. Any settlement must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The aim of giving the independent Republic of Cyprus a bicommunal and federative structure must and can be attained only through direct negotiations between the two ethnic groups. The Federal Republic of Germany supports the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to bring those negotiations to a successful conclusion under his auspices.
130.	In recent years African problems have moved more and more into the forefront of international politics. The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is unequivocal. We support the independence of the African States; we support racial equality; we are against colonialism, against any kind of racial discrimination and against any attempt to establish, by pursuing power politics from outside, new dependencies in Africa. Having in mind the continuing suppression of the black majorities in southern Africa, President Nyerere once said:
 Man is so constituted that he will not rest until he feels that he has freedom and the human dignity which goes with it. Otherwise, he will sooner or later fight for his own freedom within his society and for the freedom of his society from outside domination. 
131.	The Federal Republic of Germany therefore presses for a peaceful solution of the problems in southern Africa before it is too late—a peaceful change designed to lead all races into a common future of independence and of coexistence based on equality. It is for the community of States which, at the Conferences of Maputo and Lagos, so impressively demonstrated their determination, to eliminate the vestiges of colonialism and racial discrimination in southern Africa. The Federal Republic of Germany shares the objectives of all those who, in liberation movements and elsewhere, champion the cause of self- determination and human rights by peaceful means.
132.	As regards Rhodesia, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany supports all international efforts—in particular the Anglo-American initiative—to replace the illegal minority regime and to bring about a speedy and peaceful transfer of power to the black majority.
133.	As regards the problem of Namibia, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is actively involved in the initiative of the five Western members of the Security Council designed to prepare the way for Namibia's independence on the basis of Security Council resolution 385 (1976). The citizens of Namibia are to determine their future in general and free elections in which SWAPO is to participate. In this the United Nations has to play an important role. We expect the United Nations to appoint a special representative for the transition of Namibia to independence, and to contribute during the transitional period to the protection of Namibia's internal security and territorial integrity by providing peace-keeping forces. After achieving political independence, Namibia will be faced with the huge task of building up its own economy. In doing so it will need the help of its friends. The Federal Republic of Germany considers this to be an important task.
134.	With all the emphasis at its command the Federal Republic of Germany calls for the ending of racial discrimination in the Republic of South Africa. We call for an end to the policy of apartheid, and the policy of  bantustanization  and for the establishment of social, economic and political equality for all sections of the population. That includes the safeguarding of the rights of the minorities.
135.	The States members of the European Community have drawn up a code of conduct for European firms in South Africa  designed to give effect to the principle of equal treatment for black and white workers. That is an important step towards the establishment of the economic and social equality of races, wherever we have an opportunity to do so.
136.	The Federal Government has reacted with concern to indications that South Africa may plan a nuclear weapons test. We take it that the Government of South Africa will keep to the declarations it has made in the meantime. However, we appeal to it once more to accede to the non-proliferation Treaty in order to dispel any doubt concerning its position.
137.	The time for peaceful reform through a constructive dialogue between the races is running out. Further delay, further hesitation, would be bound to result in a racial war which could bring chaos to the whole of southern Africa. We express our sympathy and sorrow for all those who have already become the victims of racial conflict. South Africa can find peace only if it implements human rights for all races.
138.	Besides the Middle East, Cyprus, and southern Africa, there are further sources of serious conflict. At present we all think of the fighting and bloodshed in the Horn of Africa. We must make every effort to settle all these other conflicts peacefully, too.
139.	A world of peace and partnership is inconceivable if we do not overcome the gap which divides today's world more deeply than any ideological differences—the gap between rich and poor. The challenge for us is to create a new international economic order which will make it possible for all men in all countries to lead a life free from hunger or need. There is also the question of implementing human rights in the social and economic fields.
140.	We cannot achieve this new order by discarding existing and proven structures. Such structures must, rather, be steadily developed and in a flexible way adjusted to ever new requirements and conditions. We must preserve the effectiveness of the steering mechanism of the market economy and at the same time ensure for the developing countries both equal participation in world economy and a more than proportionate rate of growth.
141.	The search for a new order must be based on the recognition that neither side-neither developing nor industrialized countries—can reach their economic goal alone. The developing countries can step to, their own progress only in a climate of world-wide economic growth. Commodity prices of greater stability, rising exports of finished goods from the developing countries, a larger transfer of resources—all this presupposes that the industrialized countries will return to stable growth. In turn, the industrialized countries also need the impetus of accelerated development to regain stable growth.
142.	The international economic order must therefore serve the twofold aim of providing more than proportionate growth rates in the developing countries and stable growth in the industrialized countries. It must be an order based on equality and mutual commitment, in which each group of countries assumes responsibility for the realization of both aims in the awareness that only thus will it be able to attain its own goal.
143.	What, specifically, needs to be done? First, all countries must stimulate the growth of the world economy by common effort, without refuelling inflation. There must be no backslide into recession. Following an agreed strategy, the Western industrialized countries should exert every effort to promote continuous non-inflationary growth.
144.	Let me point out for the Federal Republic of Germany that the considerable increase in our imports during the past few years has given a strong impetus to the international economy. At the same time, we have also exported stability in terms of our relatively high, stable prices. We will make further determined efforts to stimulate economic activity in our own country.
145.	Secondly, we must keep the markets of the industrialized countries open and provide them with further finished goods from the developing countries.
146.	The exchange of industrial goods is the most dynamic sector of world trade. It has always offered the best chance for an increase in the export earnings of the developing countries, and will continue to do so.
147.	Only a steady increase in exports of finished goods from the developing countries will make it possible for us to overcome the traditional pattern of exchange in which commodities are supplied mainly by the developing countries. In other words, that is the only way in which we can create a structure of equal rights and opportunities.
148.	A steady change in the structure of world trade is also in the interests of the industrialized countries. Free trade and world-wide structural reform, instead of economic controls and protectionism, are indispensable elements of progress.
149.	The Federal Government cautions against the growing trend towards protectionism, which it considers to be a serious danger for international economic co-operation, in particular the co-operation between industrialized and developing countries.
150.	In all organizations to which it belongs, the Federal Republic of Germany therefore speaks out explicitly in favour of free world trade and of unimpeded and growing access to markets. We continue to be staunch supporters of free world trader even though this implies difficult processes of adjustment for some sectors of our own economy.
151.	Even during the recession of 1975, we increased our imports of industrial goods from developing countries by 24 per cent and in 1976 by as much as 32 per cent. That trend has continued during the current year.
152.	The Federal Republic of Germany ranks first in the world in per capita imports of semi-manufacturers and finished goods from the developing countries. It has also accumulated a foreign trade deficit in its dealings with the developing countries which do not export oil and has thus substantially stimulated their economic growth during the past few years.
153.	Thirdly, we must attain more stable commodity prices. The heavy price fluctuations typical of many commodities are harmful to both sides, raw material exporters as well as raw material consumers. In many developing countries such fluctuations prevent a systematic implementation of development plans, while at the same time they cause an increase in cyclical fluctuations in the industrialized countries, thereby leading to slower growth.
154.	In concert with its partners in the European Community, and in close consultation with the other Western industrialized countries, the Federal Government actively participates in UNCTAD negotiations on the Integrated Programme for Commodities. It advocates the conclusion of commodity agreements where suitable. It also supports the establishment of a common fund as a key instrument in attaining the agreed objectives of the Integrated Programme.
155.	Apart from price stabilization, the Federal Government also advocates measures for the stabilization of export earnings. Such measures are of particular importance for the poorest among the developing countries.
156.	We must promote the transfer of technology to the developing countries. Technology must be accessible to all countries without discrimination. This applies equally to the peaceful use of atomic energy.
157.	The Federal Republic of Germany is trying to co-operate, on the basis of partnership, in strengthening the capacity of the developing countries to absorb technology. It promotes private investment in developing countries as an important vehicle for the transfer of technology. We must step up the transfer of resources to the developing countries.
158.	In 1976 the net capital influx from official and private sources into the non-oil-exporting developing countries reached a total of almost $71 billion, which is double the amount of 1973. This large increase has helped considerably to ease the impact of world recession on the developing countries.
159.	During the past few years the Western industrialized countries have reached the target of a total capital transfer of 1 per cent of their national product; the Federal Republic of Germany has exceeded this target with a capital transfer of 1.18 per cent in 1975 and of 1.19 per cent in 1976.
160.	It must now be our first priority to increase official assistance. The developing countries and especially the poorest among them are increasingly in need of non-repayable grants and credits on concessional terms. Despite budgetary constraints, the Federal Government has therefore raised, by more than 20 per cent its appropriation for development assistance for the 1978 budget. This rate of growth is twice that of the total budget.
161.	The Federal Government takes an active part also in the endeavours to solve the problem of indebtedness of the developing countries. This problem affects some of them in particular. We therefore intend to provide, as before, assistance on a case-by-case basis.
162.	Overcoming hunger and need in the developing countries is the great task of our times, and it can be fulfilled only if all countries which are in a position to do so contribute their share to this. At the Downing Street Summit Conference, held in London on 7 and 8 May, the seven major industrialized countries of the West therefore called upon the industrialized socialist countries to contribute to the necessary increase in the transfer of resources to the developing countries. In 1976 development assistance from member States of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance amounted to less than 25 per cent of the assistance provided by the Federal Republic alone.
163.	Access to markets of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance presents a similar picture. Only 4 per cent of the exports from developing countries go to industrialized socialist countries as against close to 75 per cent to member States of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
164.	The industrialized socialist countries have long been integrated in world economy. They should therefore accept responsibility for a stable and developing world economy. This is also in their own interest.
165.	A substantial contribution to the development process can also be made by foreign private investment in providing capital, technology, modern management methods and channels to world markets. This potential can only be used, however, if industrialized and developing countries jointly commit themselves to creating a climate of mutual confidence which will encourage a smooth and continuous flow of foreign investment.
166.	This does not only imply legal security for investors. It also means that the companies established with foreign participation are ready to act in harmony with development plans and to refrain from trying to exert any political influence. In this respect, too, the Federal Republic, of Germany is committed to the principle of the sovereignty and independence of all countries.
167.	In order to feed a growing world population and to supply an expanding world economy with raw materials, it is imperative that the production of food-stuffs and raw materials should grow at a sufficient and steady pace. The bulk of grain and raw material production is currently concentrated in industrialized countries. On a long-term basis, however, we shall not be able to meet the growing demand unless the developing countries themselves can steadily increase their own production. This is another significant field of co-operation.
168.	One of the greatest challenges for us is the energy issue. In the remaining years of this century, the world must manage to switch from oil to new forms of energy. During the transitional period the oil-producing countries bear a special responsibility. The industrialized countries, for their part, must be prepared to exercise the necessary degree of self-discipline without which the task of restricting fuel consumption and of developing alternative sources of energy can never be accomplished.
169.	Of key importance for the future of the world economy is the successful conclusion of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The exploitation of the mineral resources of the high seas and the sea-bed has become the critical issue of the negotiations. We must establish an international sea-bed regime and we must do so quickly in view of the long lead-time for investments in deep sea mining. This regime must permit rational exploitation of raw materials and meet the interests of all countries-raw material consumers and raw material producers alike. It must not be monopolistic in character and must, give all interested States unqualified access to the mineral resources of the high seas.
170.	Development policy must focus on man. Its first priority must therefore be to satisfy basic needs of all men. Not only must growth be accelerated; it must also be appropriately structured. It must focus on such areas where the poor live and seek a living.
171.	The assumption that somehow growth also reaches the poor has proved false. Poverty must be fought directly, and we must provide the poor with the ability and the means of working productively.
172.	I have singled out a few areas in which we must make real and rapid progress in our search for a new international economic order based on joint responsibility. The Federal Government will strive with all its vigour to achieve such progress.
173.	We hope that our efforts will gain additional momentum from the recently established Independent Commission on International Development Issues. We are pleased that a personality of such international renown and broad political experience as Willy Brandt has agreed to head the Commission.
174.	A world of partnership must also be a world of respect for human rights and their implementation. In our endeavours to make the world a more human place we must put a halt with all our vigour to the ever multiplying forms of violence. The taking of hostages has become an urgent problem for all mankind.
175.	During the last session of the General Assembly the Federal Government therefore proposed an international convention against the taking of hostages.'1 Early deliberations in the Committee which has been requested to prepare the text of a draft convention have confirmed the will for objective co-operation in accomplishing this task.
176.	We must continue the work we have begun with all our vigour. I request the General Assembly to extend the Committee's mandate in accordance with its recommendations. We must also make progress in the solution of the complex problem of terrorism. Terrorism in its national and international forms has become a grave danger for all who want to live in peace and freedom. We must jointly fight this danger.
177.	During the past year the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights have entered into force. These Covenants are inseparably linked. Freedom from want is no less significant a human right than freedom from fear.
178.	It is now a question of applying human rights world-wide. Here again the United Nations must continue to act as a champion. World-wide independent bodies are required. 1 reaffirm what I said last year concerning the tasks of an international court for human rights.
179.	Let us always remember that the concept of human rights is the irresistible force of the modern world to which the future belongs. The implementation of human rights alone will be the yardstick by which progress in the world is measured.
 ﻿154.	 Mr. President, there are many reasons why my delegation welcomes your accession to the office of President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly. Allow me first of all to greet you as a former colleague, since you were the Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia when I was head of France's Permanent Mission in New York. Your strength of character and sound political instincts, your acknowledged competence and the esteem in which you are held make me certain that you will conduct our work here with unchallenged authority.
155.	Yugoslavia has created a special place for itself on the international scene: as a founder and leading member of the group of non-aligned countries, an active member of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, as well as of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation, and the initiator of the special session on disarmament to be held next year. Your country clearly perceives the problems of the day, whether in the context of East-West relations or the North-South dialogue. France is especially pleased with the fresh opportunity our two Heads of State will soon have to strengthen still further the ties of friendship and co-operation which link our countries.
156.	I am equally pleased with the brilliant re-election of our Secretary-General, whose outstanding qualifications have been rightly endorsed by that renewed expression of our confidence.
157.	The current world situation is neither good nor reassuring. With the exception of the positive outcome of the lengthy Panama Canal negotiations, none of the major disputes under consideration in our Organization has made genuine progress towards a settlement. Human rights continue to be violated in several countries, including countries which were once proud of their liberal and humanistic traditions. It is high time that the texts formally adopted in this area guide the conduct of Governments.
158.	Moreover, the difficulties that our economies have been experiencing in recent years may well lead too many nations to look inwardly in the vain hope of evading the rule that governs today's world-the rule of interdependence.
159.	In the face of these persisting tensions, threats and uncertainties, it is more necessary than ever to turn away from fatalistic philosophies. For France, detente arid dialogue cannot be mere slogans.
160.	France initiated the policy of detente in Europe convinced of the merits of that policy, and we will not give it up. We will pursue it without yielding an inch on the most basic points, which are our country's security and independence, and respect for human rights. We will follow it without falling prey to doubts, even understandable ones, which could undermine the foundations of detente.
161.	These are the principles of the joint declaration signed on 22 June of this year at Rambouillet by the President of the French Republic, Mr. Valery Giscard d'Estaing, and the President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, during his state visit to France. These are also the principles that will determine our attitude at the forthcoming Belgrade conference.
162.	With regard to the North-South dialogue which France initiated in the form of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, we believe that the results of this unprecedented meeting are far from negative. Differences did of course appear in the reactions it elicited. This is only natural at the preliminary stages of so vast an undertaking. The final report  drawn up by the experts, however, shows that the Conference made real progress over previous talks in several areas; this was true in the area of raw materials, for one, where the principle of establishing a common fund represents an important step; and also on the subject of the transfer of resources, thanks to new financial commitments by the industrialized nations; and in the area of African development, especially in the context of the 10-year programme to develop transport and telecommunications which will have the backing of the developed countries. Useful talks were held on other important issues such as indebtedness, export earnings, investment and energy.
163.	It is now up to us to continue our efforts according to procedures on which we agree. The new world economic order cannot simply be decreed; we will have to build it step by step. By the same token, the dialogue between North and South, which is so important for the world, must be a continuing process that takes into account the interests of everyone, and therefore implies a commitment by one and all.
164.	At this point I will reiterate that it is up to the socialist countries to make their contribution to this ambitious undertaking. The difference between our philosophies and systems should not veil the interdependence which has become the law of our planet.
165.	We are all experiencing this interdependence with growing awareness in the area of our planet's natural resources, especially energy resources. Those who have these resources have the right to a fair price for them, without, however, exposing the world economy to disorders of which they, too, would be victims. It is the imperative duty of those who live in affluence to eliminate waste. The future of our entire community requires us to manage our energy resources in common, whether they are oil, other fossil fuels, new energy sources—which have yet to be fully explored-or nuclear energy, which we must put to the service of a peaceful future.
166.	Growing energy needs and a desire to diversify energy-supply sources have forced many countries to turn to nuclear means. The price we pay for this must not be proliferation of nuclear weapons, which would put humanity in mortal danger, it is in this light that we should view the international co-operation which has already been started by my country, for one, and which is aimed at reconciling the requirements of non-proliferation with the need to use more nuclear energy.
167.	The negotiations under way on the law of the sea will be a decisive test of whether we are capable of using our scientific know-how and adapting our laws to a higher level of organization. We are not simply dealing with exploitation, however more rational and equitable it may be; we are also concerned with preserving all the sources of life at the international as well as national levels.
168.	Such major undertakings cannot be completed while States and peoples live in the shadow of threats and domination, injustice and disunity.
169.	That is why France, drawing on its experience, is continuing its co-operation with the Soviet Union and the countries of the East at the European level; that is also why France is still determined, despite the crisis, to achieve with its partners in the Community the ambitious goals of European construction. The nine members of the Community are asserting their collective identity more and more in international bodies by expressing common views on many subjects, as they did during the Conference on
International Economic Co-operation. By the same token, the day before yesterday  the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs, current President of the Community, explained the position of the nine countries on many items on the agenda. France is convinced that political co-operation among the members of the Community makes a significant contribution to our work.
170.	But the determination Europe has shown in overcoming its old quarrels, making detente prevail and embarking on the path of co-operation is far from being expressed in other areas of the world.
171.	The situation in the Middle East unfortunately illustrates this point. All of us, and France above all, welcomed the return to peace in Lebanon with the deepest satisfaction. President Sarkis is to be commended for his steadfast efforts to restore authority and see that the unity, integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon are restored. France, which had been set on rendering assistance to a people dear to it, believes that now more than ever the existence of an independent, united, free and prosperous Lebanon is indispensable for the equilibrium of the region. The very disturbing situation in the south of the country shows none the less that the security and stability of Lebanon depend heavily on the course of the conflict in the Middle East.
172.	We are unfortunately still far from a settlement. The desire for peace that I had noted during my visits to the region several months ago have so far not been enough to commit the parties to the path of negotiation. The entrenchment of positions may compromise the efforts under way, and thus gravely affect the stability of the States and the very future of the peoples of the Middle East. And yet the principles which must shape any settlement are not only known but are now accepted by the international community.
173.	The first principle is the evacuation by Israel of the territories occupied in 1967. Peace cannot, in fact, be founded on conquest, on the occupation of territories, or on a fait accompli.
174.	The recognition of the rights of the Palestinians to a homeland is the second fundamental principle. To refuse to grant a people which is displaced or living under an occupation regime the right to a homeland where it can fully express its national identity would be to ignore the fact that nothing lasting can be founded on irredentism. which would doom to failure all attempts at a settlement.
175.	The presence of the Palestine Liberation Organization in our meeting halls, together with our conviction that it is essential for the Palestinians to be associated with the negotiations which will decide their fate, underscores the degree to which this crucial aspect of the conflict is now recognized. It is time that the Palestinian people were granted the opportunity to live in a system and under conditions of their own choosing; it is time this opportunity was included in the terms for a global solution.
176.	I also want to repeat that recognition of the existence of all the States in the region, including Israel, within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries, is another mandatory requirement of any settlement. After so many cruel wars, a genuine peace, implying normal relations, has to be found for this region so that the resources and talents of all sides can finally be employed to promote development and prosperity.
177.	It is important, however, that no one should jeopardize the desired outcome by making gestures that lead nowhere and belie the will to negotiate which has been otherwise clearly displayed. Several measures recently taken by Israel in the occupied territories have given us cause for grave concern. Actions such as these do more than violate international law and the resolutions of the United Nations: they create a climate unconducive to negotiations to a time when the other States have expressed their readiness to seek peace agreements.
178.	At the eastern end of the Mediterranean another de facto situation persists. Efforts to find a settlement to the problem of Cyprus continue to meet with suspicion and resentment. The death of President Makarios - and I should like to pay a tribute here to the memory of that patriot and statesman-should not delay our quest for the goal to which we are still committed: namely, to bring about a reconciliation between the Greek and Turkish communities, and to preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. We hope that the Secretary-General will continue the mission entrusted to him by the Security Council two years ago, and that the bases for a comprehensive settlement will be actively explored with his assistance and that of his Special Representative without pre-conditions and without regard for the de facto situation.
179.	It is hard to imagine what other reasonable approach might be substituted for the current efforts: the present method of giving the communities themselves responsibility for drawing up the terms of a settlement corresponds to the particular nature of a dispute that could only be aggravated still further if it were extended. While the solution sought by the negotiators will have to take into account the strong individuality of the parties concerned, it will also have to contain a satisfactory answer to the important problem of the refugees and provide for a reasonable territorial settlement through significant adjustments in the present line of separation.
180.	Africa, to which France is linked by so many ties, has been the special focus of my Government's concerns this year. Our position rests on the following principles. First, it is for the African countries themselves to resolve their differences and accordingly reject any interference that would make Africa an arena for external rivalry. Secondly, the solidarity that exists between France and Africa is practiced with full respect for the sovereignty of all States. Thirdly, the security and stability of the continent, the best guarantee of its development, will not be assured so long as the questions of southern Africa remain unsolved, be it Namibia, Rhodesia or the odious system of apartheid.
181.	In the case of Namibia, first of all, my country, which is taking an active part in the efforts currently being pursued by the five Powers that are members of the Security Council, believes that free elections should be held under United Nations auspices, with the participation of all the political organizations in the Territory, including the South West Africa People's Organization.
182.	As far as Rhodesia is concerned, by stubbornly refusing to allow the black population of Zimbabwe to exercise its political rights, the rebel Government in Salisbury is bringing a growing threat to bear on the entire region and is undermining the security of Mozambique and Zambia. France supports the action taken by the United Kingdom and the United States in conjunction with the countries and liberation movements concerned.
183.	Since the South African regime is based on the unacceptable system of apartheid, the risk of worsening tension which may disintegrate into racial war continues to grow. These grave perils were reason enough for the Conferences in Maputo  and Lagos,  at which apartheid was unanimously condemned.
184.	If decisive progress is not achieved in solving these questions and if the necessary changes are not made, South Africa may well become increasingly isolated in our community, with the consequences that would inevitably result from this. In addition to the voluntary ban on arms sales which our countries, including France, have successively imposed, a code of conduct for companies with subsidiaries, branches or representation in South Africa was recently adopted by the nine countries of the European Community.
185.	South Africa was allegedly planning a nuclear explosion. The South African Prime Minister made a statement in which he said that his Government did not plan to acquire nuclear weapons. I have taken note of this. As I said last month, if that were not the case, it could jeopardize all the current peace efforts, and we would be obliged to react.
186.	At this point I should like once again to dispose of a ridiculous allegation to the effect that a very common type of electronuclear plant, which has not even been built yet, has supposedly served or could have served in the manufacture of atomic weapons by the Pretoria regime. France and several other industrialized countries are building and exporting dozens of reactors for the peaceful production of nuclear energy which is needed throughout the world. As far as South Africa is concerned, the strictest controls are stipulated and precautions have been increased. The problems of proliferation with which we must concern ourselves are too serious to be left to malice and stupidity.
187.	In addition to these persistent sources of tension, armed conflict has flared up among African countries themselves elsewhere on the continent. It is at the conference table, in the framework of its own institutions and through the efforts of its own mediators that Africa traditionally settles its problems. We hope that this will continue to be the case. Disunity in Africa on the procedures to be followed and appeals for massive outside help, whether for troops or weapons, would soon make the Africans pawns in	struggles. The motto  Africa for the Africans  implies respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the right of these States to security in the framework of their own political options and the rejection of all outside interference.
188.	This principle has guided and still guides France in its relations with all the African countries. The process of decolonization, which we began on that continent nearly 20 years ago, was recently completed when Djibouti acceded to independence following a referendum and elections that the Organization for African Unity, the United Nations and the League of Arab States witnessed as being democratic. My country, which has already established ties of co-operation with the new State, hopes that it will avoid becoming embroiled in the ambitions and confrontations swirling dangerously around it. It is with very great pleasure that I welcome here the presence of the delegation from Djibouti, which is making its debut in the international community.
189.	France feels and shows solidarity for countries it has been closely associated with through history, and we are fully prepared to demonstrate the same solidarity in the Comoros- Misunderstandings are still evident in the interpretation of certain decisions regarding the island of Mayotte. The inhabitants of that island have opted by vote in favour of a future different from that of their neighbors. The status of the island does, however, leave them the possibility of stating their position about their future on another occasion. France will not stand in the way of any course of action, provided it is followed with mutual regard for the rights of the parties.
190.	France respects the sovereignty of each African State and has joined in the development effort of the countries of the continent, but we strongly decry the tragic fate of two French nationals killed on 1 May in Zouerate and six others kidnapped while carrying out peaceful work to benefit the economic progress of Mauritania. The taking of hostages directly contravenes international conventions; and it is to be condemned even more because so far, despite the efforts of our Secretary-General and the International Red Cross, it has been impossible for us to obtain the precise information needed to reassure fully their families. We cannot allow men and women dedicated to peaceful work to be brought into conflicts unrelated to them. I formally request the international organizations and Governments that are in contact with those who kidnapped our compatriots to assist us in obtaining their release.
191.	In endeavoring to explain France's position on the major sources of tension today, I have been obliged to omit references to situations in other areas of the world which have been less in need of our Assembly's attention. I should like, nevertheless, to repeat here my delegation's best wishes to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has finally joined our Organization. The sponsorship France gave this country shows how important we believed it was to obtain its contribution to our work.
192.	 In spite of our commitment to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, we cannot remain silent in the face of the news reaching us from Kampuchea. In the name of the friendship France feels for the Khmer people, I express the hope that this State
Member of our Organization will respect the fundamental rights of the human being as set forth in our Charter.
193.	I could not conclude these brief remarks about the Asian continent without praising the very good relations my country enjoys with the People's Republic of China, a country that holds a unique place in world affairs commensurate with its historic and human dimensions.
194.	I should now like to take up a subject that has traditionally been one of the central themes of the discussions and work of our Assembly. My Government has always believed that the arms reduction effort is vital for peace in the world, for the development of States and the prosperity of peoples. It intends to make a positive contribution to the preparation of the special session to be devoted to this subject in May 1978: first of all because for 20 years my country has constantly spoken out in favour of general, complete and controlled disarmament, and we intend to continue to work in this direction; secondly, because our defence has been organized on the basis of our profoundly peaceful policy with the sole aim of preserving our independence and guaranteeing our security; and lastly because France is located in a region of the world where, despite a manifest spirit of detente, means of destruction continue to grow and to be perfected.
195.	We cannot resign ourselves to the apparently inevitable build-up of nuclear and conventional weapons, and we cannot fail to deplore the senseless squandering of resources that could be put to better use for development. In 1976 $350 billion was spent on arms.
196.	We cannot remain indifferent to the intense competition among certain Powers, resulting in a perpetual increase in their overcapacity for mutual destruction.
197.	Lastly, we cannot observe without concern the constant perfecting of technologies and of the most sophisticated means of destruction and death.
198.	The effort to reduce arsenals is therefore one of the priorities of our era, and we must not be satisfied with mere appearances.
199.	Of course for years there have been attempts to prohibit or limit certain types of weapons. Banning means of destruction that have not yet been produced, or agreeing to phase out gradually weapons of apparently dubious or  marginal military importance, stems from praiseworthy intentions. But because measures such as these are still partial, they can only give an illusion of disarmament and do not make any substantial contribution to the reduction of weapons or to the greater safety of the international community.
200.	By the same token, the efforts of the two superpowers to ensure a balance in their strategic relationship, however desirable these efforts may be, should not in and of themselves be confused with the over-all disarmament effort.
201.	As anyone can see, the problem of verifying commitments is fundamental in the quest for arms reduction and greater safety.
202.	For there to be disarmament, there must be a genuine reduction of arsenals. The major Powers should take a part in this common effort consistent with the part they have played in the last 30 years in overarming the planet.
203.	For there to be disarmament, not only nuclear weapons but also conventional weapons must be included.
204.	Disarmament must be genuine, that is, it must produce a significant reduction in the level of weapons, both quantitatively and qualitatively, and must begin first with those countries whose arsenals pose the gravest threat in our world and are out of all proportion either with those of other Powers or with what is needed for world strategic balance.
205.	It must be general and complete; that is, it must not allow for discrimination in favour of any one State, geographic area or type of weapon.
206.	It must be gradual and balanced; that is, it must be carried out under the same safety conditions for all parties and must help reduce factors of instability.
207.	It must also comprise effective measures of control and verification. It is essential in this respect for the United Nations to be able to take a real part in this task, without which no progress can be made. In fact, there can be no disarmament without trust, and no trust without control, and no control unless it is independent, that is to say, international.
208.	How should these necessarily very general principles be applied?
209.	We will obviously have to discuss this in detail at the special session of the Assembly in May 1978. It is difficult to separate questions of procedure from questions of substance. We will therefore of necessity have to ascertain which forums are best suited to deal with the matter of disarmament. It-is not the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. All of us here are familiar with the limitations on the work that can be accomplished there. The reasons for this are well known. I will not go over them again.
210.	When the time comes, France will present its proposals on all these questions with a view to the discussions of the special session of the Assembly. As the President of the French Republic said on 24 August, the overarmament of the world  requires urgent and resolute action . The United Nations community in its entirety must come to grips with this problem.
211.	I said a moment ago that the world situation was neither good nor reassuring. There was probably little need to give examples; how many of us can say that we feel safe from the scourges of economic crisis, hunger and war? In this difficult world, no one is spared.
212.	It is also up to us to see that man is the ultimate beneficiary of all our action and that human rights are better respected. France, which has given asylum to nearly 100,000 political refugees, was one of the first nations to believe in the need to proclaim human rights. We are soon to ratify the covenants solemnly adopted on this subject by the international community. We cannot help being disturbed at seeing so many Governments retreat behind emergency legislation, establish unequal systems, or practise oppression of entire peoples. No injustice will bring us any closer to the goals of our Charter, which will remain a dead letter unless all our Members agree to move forward within the law.
213.	Interdependence is a fact in our international society, but it can also be the bas>s for great undertakings which, if mankind stands together, will lead us to greater freedom, dignity and well-being.
214.	This, must be the ambition of each of our Governments, for we know full well that our collective institutions, the principles to which we have all adhered by being here, and the noble goals which we set for our meetings and conferences, ultimately depend on the determination of sovereign States.
214. The lessons of history and loyalty to its principles have led France, while exercising its independence, to propose two important concepts for our times: detente and dialogue. One describes the relations which should be fostered between the East and the West; the other suggests fruitful negotiations between the industrialized North and the developing South. Both fall within the framework of the collective effort that brings us together and corresponds to the legitimate expectations of our peoples. France will bring to this effort all the wealth of its creativity and determination.

﻿97.	First, Mr. President, I should like to offer you my congratulations on your election. The United Kingdom delegation looks forward to working under a President so experienced in the work of the United Nations.
98.	I should like also to extend a welcome to the two new Members of this Assembly, Djibouti and Viet Nam.
99.	The constant struggle to close the gap between aspiration and performance in the United Nations was described 22 years ago by the then Secretary-General as making the difference between civilization and chaos. Today, this gap between aspiration and performance remains and the danger of chaos is ever present.
100.	The United Nations has from its inception championed all the most fundamental human rights: the right to live without hunger or disease, in peace, free from conflict and the fear of nuclear or any other kind of war.
101.	Appalling and well-documented events naturally focus great attention world wide on the abuse or absence of political, civil and legal rights; and on violations and degradations of the integrity of the person, though the sense of outrage over Chile and Uganda, to take but two examples, has not yet been matched by effective international action. But the global challenge of chronic poverty, malnutrition and disease ensures that we cannot escape our responsibility for economic and social rights.
102.	Between 1952 and 1972 the gross product of the advanced industrialized nations increased by $1.82 trillion. The aggregate product of the under-developed world in 1972 was less than a third of this increase. This statistic is shocking enough. The reality behind it is even more so. It is generally agreed that more than 400 million people have an insufficient protein supply. About 70 million of them are immediately threatened by starvation. In some of the very poorest countries there is a 50 per cent infant mortality rate, and the development of people's brains is literally stunted by protein and calorie insufficiencies. Most of the world's poor only have access to unsafe water. They are, therefore, chronically vulnerable to schistosomiasis, and to filariasis, the leading cause of blindness. In some areas of conflict the disruption of basic social and medical services poses a challenge to world health. We risk a recrudescence of smallpox in the Horn of Africa and a re-emergence of the tsetse fly in east and southern Africa.
103.	The human needs of the developing world are an inescapable challenge to us all and a central element in any foreign policy based on human rights.
104.	To establish a fairer and more rational international economic order, both developed and developing nations must work together as equal partners. The dialogue, if it is to be successful, must be seen as a long-term sequence of negotiations on specific issues. The Governments of the industrialized democracies are at present under tremendous domestic political pressures to reduce rapidly high rates of unemployment. We need a greater frankness and realism in the dialogue. The present world recession has hit both developed and developing nations. The developing nations will easily become cynical and despairing if the developed world's actions run counter to its rhetoric. Those of us who represent the industrialized democracies are not entitled to use our economic difficulties as an excuse for abdicating from the dialogue. We must all try to ensure that we develop a long-term strategy which is credible and corrects the effects of some of the short-term decisions which we may feel compelled to take. If we continue into the future the present allocation of resources, we will only perpetuate the existing imbalance between the developed and the developing world.
105.	One of the benefits we all derived from the work we did together at the Conference on International Economic Co-operation was a realization of the crucial role that collaboration with regard to energy must play for all sectors of the world economy. It is for this reason that I warmly welcome the Secretary-General's recent proposals for some institutional development within the United Nations framework for the discussion of energy. Its exact form will have to be discussed further—whether an institute, as the Secretary-General has suggested, a new agency, or some other body.
106.	The United Nations is rightly devoting a high priority—nearly 40 per cent of its net regular budget-to economic and social activities. Britain, in addition to its own European Community aid programmes, contributed in 1976 some $85 million to the United Nations work in the economic and social field.
107.	In my judgment, despite the immense problems which still face us, in the crucial areas of poverty, hunger and disease, the United Nations has shown itself to be an effective and practical instrument. The institutions of the United Nations have also made a major technical contribution towards a more orderly international environment in, for instance, the fields of labour relations, posts and telecommunications, shipping and civil aviation.
108.	But in reducing conflict in the world, in achieving peace and in restraining the armaments race, the United Nations cannot claim that its performance has anywhere near matched its aspirations. It is worth examining the distribution of the total financial effort of the United Nations.
109.	The United Nations here in New York, together with the all-important autonomous agencies, spent last financial year some $2,200 million. Of the total United Nations financial commitment, only 8 per cent went on what can be summarized briefly as political, diplomatic and peacekeeping activities. If words uttered and words written were anything to go by, those activities would occupy a far higher position in our order of priorities than any other United Nations activity. Why do we write and speak so much about this area and yet spend relatively so little on it, for the consequences of conflict are grievous for millions?
110.	It is a regrettable fact of life that in institutional terms the maintenance of world security is the most neglected activity within the United Nations. Health, hunger and poverty are issues on which Member nations are prepared to concede an institutional competence and role for the United Nations. But, with few exceptions, security is seen as the preserve of national Governments. We are prepared to see our doctors, agriculturists, sociologists and economists working together and pooling their expertise within a United Nations institutional framework. But we are reluctant to see our generals and our admirals and our strategic thinkers working within such a framework on behalf of world security.
111.	We are all familiar with our own national security problems. But there is all too little understanding of each other's security problems, fears and objectives. We are, as an international body, unable to foresee areas of dispute and to act in time to prevent open conflicts from breaking out. We are unable to act speedily to damp down a dispute in its early stages. The United Nations, if it is involved in a conflict, is usually involved late, and with reluctance.
112.	The United Nations is the only forum in which the whole international community is represented. It has the right and they duty to be involved in disputes which threaten peace and stability whether on a regional or on a global scale. But to date it has lacked the necessary authority and commitment, which can only be given to it by Member States for a truly effective security role.
113.	In the United Nations we are reluctant to make even modest commitments to international security arrangements. But it is also true that the amount of resources devoted to peace-keeping matters is only a fraction of those employed in the United Nations as a whole, and that the role of the United Nations in peace keeping has in the past received far less attention than its deserves both in speeches from this rostrum and in various committees of our Organization. These facts alone highlight the low priority we give to this area of our Organization's activity.
114.	Now, the over-all record of the United Nations in the field of world security is one which we should be prepared to analyse critically, particularly now that the cold-war era and confrontation diplomacy are over and when the super-Powers themselves now exchange detailed information on the most sensitive security issue of all, namely, strategic nuclear weapons. What is needed is for the United Nations to stimulate a specialized and constructive dialogue between Governments on every aspect of world security in a way which would improve the ability of the international community to respond quickly and effectively in situations where action by the United Nations is required. If such a dialogue had been in operation today, we would have been far better able to examine some of the detailed security problems which now confront us all in Africa.
115.	The present limitations, as well as the value of the United Nations in its peace-keeping role, are clearly demonstrated by the situation in the Middle East and Cyprus where the United Nations has made a massive, sustained, but all too frequently unappreciated, effort over the years to keep the peace.
116.	In the Middle East, the world still faces the most serious of all potential conflicts. The recent resurgence of fighting in southern Lebanon is a sad reminder both of the urgency of finding a solution to the Middle East conflict as a whole and of the difficulties which the Lebanese Government faces in restoring peace and security in that country. One might have thought that here was an obvious situation in which the United Nations could and should have played a more prominent role. For a number of reasons, which we understand, this has not so far been the case. Nevertheless, the assistance of the United Nations remains a possibility, should the present effort of those in the region fail to yield the success for which we all hope. The United Nations has been involved diplomatically in the whole question of the Middle East since 1947. Its involvement in security arrangements through UNEF and UNDOF has cost more than $269 million. In the current financial year it will cost $98 million.
117.	The United Nations presence in the Middle East has been at times controversial. But in my view there would have been even greater conflict without it.
118.	In the debate about occupied territory, security issues are of central importance and of deep and genuine concern. Hitherto nations have tended to equate security solely with the possession of territories. This is no longer the only relevant security factor. Sophisticated electronic devices can now give a military security which nations had hitherto believed could only come from the physical occupation of territory. The monitoring techniques already in place in Sinai have made possible a measure of disengagement and lessened mistrust between Israel and Egypt. Confidence-building measures, in the shape of demilitarized zones, zones of limited forces, surveillance and early warning systems, and microwave links, could all be an essential component in any final settlement. The United Nations has a role to play, either by supervising and operating these devices or, even more importantly, by promoting an informed public debate on the underlying technical security issues. Now, Mr. Simonet, speaking for the nine member countries of the European Community, has set out our views on the main ingredients of a negotiated settlement, and I do not intend to recapitulate those here this afternoon.
119.	The danger of United Nations peace-keeping involvement, initially to hold the ring, is that it can become an excuse for political inactivity or a substitute for serious negotiation. In Cyprus, as in the Middle East, the United Nations peace-keeping forces have reduced hostilities and provided time in which serious negotiations could and, in my view, should have taken place. The meetings between the late Archbishop Makarios and Mr. Denktaf, which led to the resumption of the intercommunal talks, appeared to offer the prospect of some progress. The mission undertaken by Mr. Clark Clifford to Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in February and March has also played an important part. But so far the current intercommunal talks have shown sadly little progress, and the situation has, if anything, deteriorated in recent months. The United Nations, in the person of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has acted with tremendous skill between the parties. But the present United Nations commitment in Cyprus cannot be taken for granted. In the last 13 years the existence of UNFICYP has cost Member States, by way of voluntary contributions, some $200 million. Furthermore, UNFICYP is now seriously in deficit to the tune of some $50 million. The United Kingdom has contributed $45 million in men and in logistical support. This year our contingent, numbering 800 men, is the single largest contribution. The United Nations does not enjoy infinite resources, as the Secretary-General's recent appeal for further contributions to UNFICYP made plain.
120.	The United Nations cannot therefore in either Cyprus or the Middle East be used indefinitely as a cover for a stalemate in negotiations. It cannot continue to be seen as a refuge of last resort—a permanent crutch for remaining in a state of  no peace, no war . What the United Nations can do is both to establish the political framework within which negotiations between the parties can take place and, through harnessing the initiatives of its Member States and acting as a catalyst for their ideas, to help to provide the impetus needed to break out of the present stalemate.
121.	I turn to southern Africa.
122.	It has become increasingly clear that only negotiated settlements which are internationally acceptable and which have the full support of the United Nations will end the violence and achieve stable government by majority rule. This is the hope for a future Zimbabwe and Namibia. In considering how Britain could best exercise its responsibilities in Rhodesia the British Government faced up to the fact that Britain alone could not ensure a peaceful transfer to a majority rule. We also recognized that, though the Commonwealth and the Organization of African Unity [OAUJ had a legitimate and major interest in the future of Zimbabwe, neither organization had an institutional framework which could help to provide the stable climate and international recognition for free elections.
123.	It was equally clear that, while Britain has legal responsibilities—which we do not seek, and have never sought, to evade—some additional catalyst to make the transition from war to peace, from illegality to legality, was necessary for an internationally acceptable settlement.
124.	The United Nations is already deeply involved in the problem of Rhodesia through the various sanctions resolutions. So United Nations involvement is not a new issue of principle for the Security Council. It is probably a realistic constraint on the power of initiative of the United Nations that progress in the Security Council is not responsible unless there is a clearly perceived support from the countries of the region in question for the course of action proposed.
125.	We believe that the draft resolution which my Government will submit very shortly in the Security Council has such support. The draft resolution will provide for the appointment by the Secretary-General of a representative to enter into discussions with the British Resident Commissioner designate and with all the parties, with a view to establishing in detail the respective roles of all the forces in Southern Rhodesia during the transition to majority rule. The draft resolution will, we believe, provide the necessary basis for the cease-fire negotiations referred to in the documents which were presented to the Security Council on 1 and 8 September. No final settlement can be agreed or brought to the Council until these essential preliminary negotiations are completed.
126.	Now, it is a truism that the Organization is only what its Members make of it. It is precisely because the British Government is acutely aware of the paradox of the United Nations role—on the one hand, indispensable in the search for peace, and on the other, limited in what it can achieve on its own initiative-that we have framed proposals for Rhodesia which acknowledge the vital importance of a United Nations role in guaranteeing an impartial and orderly framework for negotiations, arid in helping to supervise fair and free elections.
127.	Our proposals also reflect the blunt truth that peace on the ground is unobtainable unless there is first agreement between the parties who are conducting the fighting. The lesson of United Nations involvement in the Congo and in Cyprus is that a peace-keeping force has little chance of doing its job if, around it, rival armed forces are building up their strength and are determined to use it. This is why the five front-line States and OAU have an important role in helping to achieve an independent Zimbabwe. They have supported the liberation forces in their struggle for freedom, but they have always maintained that it is for the people of Zimbabwe to determine who is to be the future president and who should form the government on independence.
128.	Over Namibia the five Western members of the Security Council, including my own country, took an initiative. Negotiations are still in progress, so it is hard to be specific, but we are all under no illusions that, without the support of the United Nations, no settlement can be achieved there which will command the support of the international community, end the violence and allow for a majority-rule government to be freely elected.
129.	Now, southern Africa, over the next few months and years, will be the focus of growing tensions. There is at the moment a controlled anger among the majority of the population. The risk that this anger will develop into urban violence is considerable. Those of us here in the United Nations who uphold the essentially peaceful values of a pluralist democracy will come under growing challenge to support violent change. But if we cannot become the advocates of violence and at the same time stay true to our beliefs, our responsibility to the world is to show, beyond any shadow of doubt, that change can be brought about by peaceful means, whether we are talking of Rhodesia, Namibia or South Africa. If we turn our backs on the path of peace—a path of peace—a path which still lies open—then once again the barrel of the gun will be seen to wield more power and influence than reason. Peaceful persuasion and pressures can still achieve results. Violence is the last resort. To advocate it alone is to threaten the whole system of values on which the United Nations rests, and which we are all pledged to sustain.
130.	These considerations apply with particular force to the situation in South Africa. South Africa will not be allowed to avoid its responsibilities. It sustains and supports the illegal regime in Rhodesia; it has allowed United Nations sanctions to be systematically undermined since 1967. Within South Africa, apartheid is abhorrent to us all.
South Africa faces a choice between a democratic and orderly evolution and an inevitable descent into bloodshed and violence. The choice which South Africa makes may present a challenge to all of us, as Members of the United Nations. Rhodesia is not just an issue for Britain or for the United States, whose support has been so important to my country; it is not just an issue for the freedom fighters, the nationalist leaders, the front-line Presidents, OAU: it is an issue for us all.
131.	Over southern Africa the world community and individual Member States may have some awesome and difficult choices in the next few months. These issues cannot be treated with anything other than the utmost seriousness. Certainly, if the negotiations over Rhodesia produced a settlement which the Security Council could endorse, the world would not allow South Africa to continue, in the face of such a settlement, to sustain an obdurate illegal regime in Rhodesia, were it to refuse to give up power.
132.	As a world community we are, over South Africa, attempting to change human behaviour, to turn a State away from institutionalized racialism. It will not be achieved overnight, but it must be achieved, Without a serious programme of reform inside South Africa the oppressed majority will have no hope. The tough code of conduct recently adopted by the European Community for its companies operating in South Africa demonstrates, by attacking racialism at the place of work, one form of positive action which I hope others will also adopt. It is but one of the pressures for continuing change which it is vital we espouse if peaceful change is to  be successful.
133.	Anxiety over the proliferation of nuclear weapons also lurks in the background. It is in the interests of us all that South Africa should sign the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [see resolution 2373(XXII)l and agree to international inspection of all its nuclear installations. A State which feels itself under attack may, regardless of logic or long-term interest, seek to acquire nuclear weapons as an act of desperation. Desperation is the crucible of violence.
134.	My Government, traditionally active in seeking disarmament and promoting the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, is engaged in various negotiations. I am particularly glad that the United States, the Soviet Union and my country are now actively negotiating about a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. This achievement has eluded the world for too long. A comprehensive nuclear test-ban would have a profound effect in limiting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The development of a specialized dialogue between the Soviet Union and the United States on strategic nuclear weapons and the signing of the first agreement concluded as a result of the Strategic Arms limitation Talks [SALT] was a major step. We all hope that the present negotiations will be successful. It would have been inconceivable, even 10 years ago, that military and scientific personnel from these two countries would share such detailed and highly-classified information about their own national security. We need now to widen and build on this important dialogue.
135.	World security involves more than conflict situations. It is intimately associated with the search for practical and realizable measures of disarmament. All Member States aspire to the objective of total disarmament, but the relentless increase in most Member States' armament budgets shows how far performance falls short of aspiration.
136.	In the more general field of disarmament, we welcome next year's special session of the General Assembly. It will directly engage the international community and the United Nations in what must be a world effort to promote disarmament and check nuclear proliferation. While certain important disarmament negotiations, such as SALT, are necessarily the subject of a bilateral or restricted dialogue, it is vital that the international community and the United Nations in particular should not be excluded from the disarmament effort. It would perhaps have been easier to secure more accessions by now to the non-proliferation Treaty had the international community as a whole, as opposed to a small group of major nuclear Powers, been more closely involved in drawing up its provisions at the start. It means, however, that if the United Nations is to be involved meaningfully it must move from just passing resolutions to the intricacies and the detail of complex scientific negotiations. It will need to develop and expertise that can work in the interests of all the Member States.
137.	The search for peace, the promotion of human rights and individual freedom, the elimination of poverty and want in all its forms—these are formidable but inescapable challenges. To meet them our performance will have to move closer to our aspirations. To succeed in this endeavour we must make, in the recent words of the Secretary- General,  a conscious effort to develop more positive attitudes to the work of the United Nations both among ourselves and in the outside world. In Britain, support for the United Nations is a corner-stone of our foreign policy. We for our part are resolute in our determination to help make the United Nations a more effective instrument for world peace and co-operation.
 

﻿183.	India recently accomplished a historic non-violent revolution. In a magnificent assertion of the indomitable human spirit, our people reaffirmed in March last their firm faith in a free and open society. Calculated efforts by forces of darkness and tyranny to destroy democracy were decisively defeated. The March revolution was clearly of far-reaching significance for our 600 million people. We are happy that its significance has been equally appreciated by freedom-loving people all over the world.
184.	Our people boldly upheld the basic principles, values and aspirations on which the United Nations was founded more than three decades ago, and regained their hard-won freedom and fundamental human rights. I have, therefore, great pleasure in bringing to the United Nations the greetings of our people and of reiterating, on their behalf, at this thirty-second session of the General Assembly, India's abiding faith in the United Nations as an instrument for maintaining global peace and security and for promoting orderly progress through co-operation among nations based on justice and equality.
185.	Our new Janata Government has been in office for barely six months. Nevertheless, much has already been achieved during this time. Basic human rights have been restored. The pall of fear that hung menacingly over our people has been lifted. Constitutional measures are being devised to ensure that democracy and fundamental freedoms can never be smothered again. But we are not going to rest content with this only. As solemnly affirmed by our Parliament on 22 July 1977, our people are determined to bring about by peaceful and legitimate methods  a socio-economic revolution, illuminated by democratic standards, vivified by socialist ideals and firmly founded on moral and spiritual values .
186.	I am a newcomer to the United Nations, but India is not, having been associated actively with the Organization from its very inception. For me, it is a great privilege to address this Assembly. Indeed, as one who has been a  parliamentarian in my own country for two decades and more, I feel a special sense of exhilaration in attending this assembly of nations for the first time.
187.	What has added to my pleasure is to have in the Chair, Mr. President, the representative of a country which, together with India, was one of the founders of the non-aligned movement, and with which we have firm bonds of friendship. I extend to you, Mr. President, the cordial felicitations of my Government and myself on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-second General Assembly. Your election is as much a tribute to your personal eminence and wide diplomatic experience as to Yugoslavia and the role it has been playing in strengthening the forces of peace and stability. We assure you of our fullest co-operation in the discharge of your responsibilities.
188.	I also take this opportunity to pay a warm tribute to the outgoing President, Ambassador Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe, the representative of our close neighbour, Sri Lanka, for steering the thirty-first session with great tact and ability.
189.	May I also join the other delegations in paying my sincere tribute to our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who brings to his heavy responsibilities wisdom, patience and a deep commitment to the United Nations and its role in the promotion of international understanding and global well-being.
190.	I should, moreover, like to compliment Mr. Waldheim for his thought-provoking report to the Assembly in which he has candidly drawn attention to the challenging tasks that lie ahead. The United Nations, he has pointed out,  presents unrivalled opportunities  and  is still to some extent, an Organization in search of its identity and its true role .
191.	The Janata Government stands firmly for peace, non-alignment and friendship with all countries. These policies have always represented India's national consensus and tradition. Non-alignment is a projection of national sovereignty in international relations. Its essence is not neutrality but freedom, which is the natural consequence of the struggle for the liberation of our nation from colonial rule and the liberation of the human spirit from subjugation and oppression. We believe in the true independence of nation-States and their freedom to pursue policies in their best national interests, and to judge every issue on its merit.
192.	The new Government took the earliest opportunity, on assuming office, to declare its resolve not only to continue non-alignment but in fact to restore to the policy its original positive thrust. It is a matter of some satisfaction that our stress on genuine non-alignment and our decision to pursue the policy with vigour and dynamism has been understood and appreciated in its proper perspective.
193.	The vision of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakum is an old one. We in India have all along believed in the concept of the world as one family. After many trials and tribulations there are prospects of realizing the dream in the shape of the United Nations which has reached near universality in its membership representing 4,000 million people of diverse races, colours and creeds. However, the United Nations should not function merely as a conclave of governmental delegations. We must see how this assembly of nations can be transformed into a parliament of man, representing the collective conscience and will of humanity.
194.	The United Nations Charter was a pledge not just by nations or for nations. It was a declaration on behalf of the peoples of the world to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war and, what is more, to build a new world order in true freedom,
195.	My thoughts are not in terms of the might and majesty of nations. Much more important to me are the dignity and demands of the common man. Our successes and failures should be judged ultimately by one yardstick alone: whether we are working towards social justice and dignity for all peoples, indeed for every man, woman and child. For its success the United Nations must become the effective voice of all humanity and a dynamic forum for collective action and co-operation based on interdependence between nations.
196.	Our own history and political experience have taught us that the real sanction, indeed the ultimate power, rests in the will and response of the people, not in governments. Thirty years ago under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi our people courageously fought the might of a great imperial Power and ended its domination over India without resort to arms. Earlier this year our people successfully frustrated attempts by a self-seeking regime to deprive them of their fundamental freedoms.
197.	What came to pass took many friends abroad by surprise. But to me the great political courage shown by the people came from our ethos and tradition. The individual in India has always been given the pivotal place in our religious and philosophic tradition. Our scriptures and epics have all along made one central point: the cosmos and creation hinge on the individual and his fulfilment.
198.	We have accepted all along that divinity may have many forms. Everyone in India is therefore free to pursue his own path to salvation, irrespective of birth or belief. At the same time, however, our seers, in an unbroken line from ancient Vedic times to the present, have taught us compassion and tolerance towards our fellow man. Gandhi summed up the essence of this teaching in a favourite word: Antyodaya, which means  unto this last . This word, which he used time and again in his messages, signifies the concern which any society should have for the well-being of the poorest, the lowliest and the lost.
199.	I am, therefore,, convinced that our national as well as international politics must be constantly permeated with the thought of man, his happiness and well-being, and his essential unity with fellow beings. I am not thinking of man in the abstract, in whose name tyranny has been perpetrated down the ages. What I have in mind is man of flesh and blood. Our central concern must be his joys and sorrows, his hopes and aspirations.
200.	We stand for peace—a warm, living peace—which is the bedrock of all our efforts. Peace, however, is not just the absence of war. The tenuous fabric of world peace could be torn asunder any time. Peace can be secured only by collective effort to end the exploitation and domination of one people over another and by eliminating glaring inequalities and imbalances between nations, and in the rights and opportunities for the world's peoples.
201.	Each nation-State has, no doubt, to preserve and promote its national interests. But no country can live in isolation within the four corners of its frontiers. We have to recognize the inevitability of global interdependence for promoting human welfare and happiness in every part of the world. And interdependence  demands that we should all look beyond our national horizons and display a spirit of accommodation and sacrifice in order to share with the rest of mankind the fruits of progress and prosperity.
202.	The world has come a long way since India launched its national liberation movement against colonialism and imperialism. As an Asian country, we watched with anguish the enormity of the suffering and sacrifice of the brave Vietnamese people in their long struggle for national liberation. Their ultimate success is a shining tribute to the might and power of the human spirit and its indomitable resistance to subjugation.
203.	We are happy that the United Nations has rightly and properly mounted an international operation to provide assistance for the reconstruction of Viet Nam and for the rehabilitation of its people, as task in which my country is extending its full co-operation.
204.	It is with a feeling of great joy that we welcome the entry of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam into the United Nations. We also extend a cordial welcome to a new African State, the Republic of Djibouti. The entry of these two countries into the United Nations has taken this Organization one step closer to its goal of universality. We have friendly ties with both countries and look forward to working with them in closest co-operation.
205.	We mourn the passing of Archbishop Makarios, the President of Cyprus, and pay our homage to his memory. The late Archbishop was a world statesman and one of the founding fathers of the non-aligned movement. He was the chief architect of the independence of Cyprus and its struggle to preserve its identity.
206.	The agenda before the Assembly is one covering a multitude of problems of current concern to the world. May I spotlight only a few specific issues which are of great importance and urgency and must take priority in our collective deliberations.
207.	Foremost among these problems is the momentous and agonizing struggle for human rights and freedom in southern Africa. India has always been opposed to unnecessary bloodshed and violence in national affairs and interstate relations. It stands for non-violence and for resolving conflicts along the path of peace and negotiations. Even during the dark period of foreign subjugation, India adhered to certain basic principles:  steadfast opposition to colonial oppression and total rejection of any form of racialism and suppression of human rights. India's dedication to these principles is even deeper today.
324
208.	The challenge in Africa is clear: whether a people have the inalienable right to live in dignity and freedom or whether a racist minority can be allowed to perpetuate injustice and oppression over the vast majority. There is no question that all forms of racialism must be eradicated, root and branch. Apartheid must go. Its continuance is a blot on humanity and a grave reflection on the United Nations.
209.	India would like to see the problem of Zimbabwe resolved at the earliest possible moment through peaceful means. It has thus welcomed the positive elements in the recent Anglo-United States initiative taken towards the establishment of genuine majority rule within a time-bound framework. We hope that the Security Council resolution adopted recently on the subject, resolution 415 (1977), will lead to a ceasefire and eventually to a solution of the problem.
210.	Much will depend upon the willingness of the illegal Ian Smith regime to see reason and give up its arrogance and intransigence. Until the Smith regime is ousted from power and freedom is restored to the long-suffering people, we cannot expect the freedom fighters to lay down their arms. In the meantime, India reaffirms its support for, and solidarity with, the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe, who are valiantly fighting for the liberation of their country against heavy odds. If world opinion continues to be wilfully defied by Ian Smith in a desperate bid to cling to power, the United Nations will have to exercise all its authority to widen its mandatory sanctions against the illegal minority regime and its South African supporter. That alone would hasten its collapse and help to restore to the people of Zimbabwe their inalienable right to determine their own destiny.
211.	The authority, credibility and prestige of the United Nations face an equally stubborn challenge in Namibia, which has the status of an international Territory. If remains to be seen whether the efforts of the Western Powers can bring about the withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia so that the resolutions of the United Nations may be implemented. We condemn South Africa for its decision to integrate Walvis Bay, a part of Namibia, with the Cape Province. We also condemn South Africa for its reported plans to use a part of Namibian territory for nuclear testing.
212.	We stand by the South West Africa People's Organization and urge all nations to recognize its representative character. We cannot expect the people of Namibia not to resort to armed struggle if that is the only means left to them to achieve their goal of independence. However, the issue cannot be left to be resolved only by the efforts and struggle of that Organization. The United Nations has a collective and direct responsibility. It has by no means exhausted its capacity to discipline the South African regime into total withdrawal from Namibia.
213.	While in southern Africa we face colonialism and racialism at its worst, in west Asia there remains an even more explosive threat to international peace. Here, too, some basic principles are involved, First, no one can be permitted to enjoy the fruits of aggression. Secondly, no people can be denied their inalienable right to their homeland. Thirdly, all border disputes should be resolved by negotiation and not by force.
214.	There can thus be no recognition of the territories illegally occupied by Israel through the use of force and aggression, and they must be vacated. At the same time the Arab people of Palestine who have been forcibly evicted from their hearths and homes must be enabled to exercise their inalienable right to return to their land. All peoples and States in the region have the right to live in peace and harmony with their neighbours. That is an essential prerequisite for a durable solution to the problems of the region.
215.	The United Nations must also reject and repudiate the recent efforts by Israel to alter further the demographic character of the territories occupied through new settlements on the West Bank and in Gaza. Unless resolved satisfactorily and in good time, the problem would have disastrous repercussions far beyond the region. There is clearly urgent need to reconvene the Geneva Conference, with the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization in it.
216.	The situation in Cyprus remains unresolved. We still hope that bicommunal talks may be resumed and a solution will be found which is consistent with the territorial integrity, sovereignty and non-aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus.
217.	Economic issues are an increasingly vital dimension of international relations. The concept of a new international economic order based on equality and justice has already been accepted by the world community. We must now move forward to its early realization so that men and women everywhere may look forward to more just and equitable opportunities and rewards for their labours.
218.	I mentioned earlier the challenge and paradox of how to balance national responsibilities with the imperatives of unavoidable international co-operation. After over 30 years with the United Nations we recognize, better than before, that no nation or group of nations can become islands of prosperity in an ocean of poverty. The discussions on international economic relations have been going on for more than two decades. Even the modest targets set for the current Second United Nations Development Decade have been either disregarded or diluted. The transfer of resources and technology has never been sufficient to correct the accentuated disparities.
219.	All these problems were vividly explained and projected in the Conference on International Economic Cooperation, which ended in Paris this year. In the 18 months of long deliberations some progress WAS made, but results were deeply disappointing. A special fund is to be set up and some commitment to fulfil the allocation of overseas development aid has been reaffirmed. But the major problems of transfer of resources-and technology and relief from the burden of debt remain. The common fund within the Integrated Programme for Commodities has been agreed to in principle but remains to be realized in practice.
220.	Arguments and theories are being put forward which do not show sufficient appreciation of the grave crisis confronting the developing countries. Perhaps that is due to the preoccupation of the developed nations with their own problems and difficulties. In many cases, what is being given by one hand is being taken away by the other.
221.	It is claimed that modern science and technology have- the means of removing poverty and spreading the benefits of progress to the v/hole world. The fact, however, remains that the non-availability of the right type of technology for the developing countries is only accentuating the disparities between the rich and the poor. International commerce has undoubtedly multiplied in the post-war decades. But the advantage from its manifold increase has contributed mainly to the material progress and higher standards of living in the developed world.
222.	The problems of the easing of trade barriers for the developing countries and protection of remunerative prices for their exports remain more or less where they were following the energy crisis. The problem of oil-importing developing countries is so serious that they can look forward to nothing but mounting debts for survival.
223.	We recognize that developed nations have their own internal social and economic problems. But they need to lift their perspectives and policies beyond immediate and narrow national concerns. One could ask, Would it not be economically sound to facilitate a significant flow of financial and technological capabilities from the developed to the developing world as an enlightened answer to structural problem? for their own economies? An increase in the purchasing power of 3,000 million people inhabiting the developing countries could well provide an answer to the problems of unemployment and economic dislocation in the affluent world.
224.	India has participated with vigour and sincerity in all the deliberations of the world community, not in a sprit of confrontation, but in the recognition that the world economic malaise requires a new sense of international interdependence.
225.	In this regard I venture to suggest an approach which was suggested many decades ago by Mahatma Gandhi. He was indeed a universal man. Only two days ago we celebrated the one hundred and eighth anniversary of his birth. He had a clear perception of the world economic order based on certain principles which, in my opinion, may be summed up as follows.
226.	First, all peoples have a right to the satisfaction of their primary needs, irrespective of the state of their economies, their levels of productivity, or their geographic location.
227.	Secondly, interdependence between nations must be without exploitation. Since there can be no genuine interdependence among unequals, action must be taken to correct this inequality.
228.	Thirdly, the developing countries must pursue paths of individual and collective self-reliance as part of their over-all strategy to secure the transfer or resources and technology from the developed world.
229.	Fourthly, despite their division into nation-States, the people of the world constitute one family. An integrated world economic order demands movement across frontiers, not only of goods, capital resources and technology, as at present, but even more so of people themselves.
230.	Fifthly, economic strategy should be directed towards the growth of employment rather than the growth of gross national product alone.
231.	Sixthly, there should be a world-wide movement against the extravagance of consumption, which tends to dehumanize and alienate man from his fellow-beings.
232.	Seventhly, the developing countries, no less than the developed world, must reduce the gap between their elite and their masses. An equitable world economic order can only be based on an equitable economic system within each nation.
233.	As the second most populous country in the world, the dimensions of our problems are immense. Our achievements are noteworthy, but challenging tasks lie ahead. As a country which has recently recommitted itself to the democratic path and the principle of rule by consent our tasks tend to become more complex.
234.	We have no magic wand or instant solutions to the myriad problems inherited from the near and the distant past. But we have reason to be optimistic and confident. In three decades of independence, the traditional genius of our people has enabled them to show their capacity to grasp the new opportunities offered by science and technology and to bend these modern tools of innovation and advancement to serve our own national needs.
235.	While recognizing the advantages of international co-operation, we have sought to depend largely on our own effort for national progress and economic self-reliance. Our new Government is in the process of setting itself new priorities and removing the distortions that have crept into our policies and planning. On the  economic front, we want to move away from the  growthmanship  and blind imitation of industrialized States towards integrated planning in which man is at the centre.
236.	We propose to concentrate more on the development of our rural areas, where an overwhelming proportion of our people live and will always belong. We do not seek affluence based on elitist consumption. Man must be judged by what he is, and not by what he has. We want to provide our jobless people with purposeful employment and fulfil the basic needs of the underprivileged masses. We seek to arrest, if not to reverse, the process of urbanization, which has become one of the biggest social and economic problems of the developing world—a subject on which Gandhi sounded a note of caution many decades ago.
237.	Even as India struggles for a better tomorrow, it has demonstrated its willingness to share the benefits of its economic and technological experience with other developing countries. Our professional and academic institutions have been providing training and instruction to thousands of students from other developing countries in diverse fields of social and economic development. We stand for increasing co-operation with other developing countries to mutual advantage, without in any way seeking exclusive advantage, either economic or political.
238.	India seeks friendship with all and dominance over none. The Janata Government has actively sought to build bridges of friendship, understanding and co-operation with all countries. Attention has been paid, first and foremost, to strengthening ties with our immediate neighbours. This is the message I sought to carry to Nepal, Burma and Afghanistan in my recent visits. We look forward to consolidating the process of normalization of relations with Pakistan, not only to ensure durable peace, but to promote beneficial bilateral co-operation.
239.	Four days ago, on 30 September, the representatives of India and Bangladesh initialed the text of an agreement on the Gang waters issue. It is a comprehensive understanding covering the short-term problem, and lays the foundation for a long-term solution to meet the optimum requirements of both countries.
240.	This problem has bedevilled the relations between us and our neighbour for 25 years. The agreement vindicates our faith that so complex a problem, affecting the economy and lives of millions of people of two neighbouring nations, could only be resolved in a spirit of shared sacrifice and mutual accommodation through sincerely motivated bilateral negotiations.
241.	Many political changes have taken place in the last year in South Asia. Even so, it is a tribute to the people that this area is today freer of tension than it has been for decades. If, indeed, South Asia can find a recipe for peace and co-operation, all of us with similar burdens can then devote greater attention to development and to constructive endeavour. In fact, it is in this context that we make the special plea that the area around us-the region enveloping the Indian Ocean-should be made free of great-Power rivalry and bases which can be used for aggressive actions. In the wider context, India welcomes the continuing search for detente—detente not only in Europe but everywhere—so that the benefits flowing from it can be enjoyed by all.
242.	Year after yea: scores of resolutions have been adopted at the United Nations calling for general and complete disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament. The arms race, with the resulting arsenals of fearsome weapons, has reached such an alarming stage that the world is poised on the horns of a strange dilemma. We are told that nuclear weapons are necessary as a deterrent against war and that it is only the assurance of their use that constitutes the core of deterrence. ,we do not accept that thesis.
243.	We believe that nuclear weapons are dangerous whether they are in the possession of one country, some countries or many countries. We are not only against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, we are against nuclear weapons themselves. India has been consistently opposed to the acquisition and development of nuclear weapons. Indeed, India was the first country to plead at the United Nations more than 20 years ago for a ban on the testing of all nuclear weapons. The great Powers were not in a mood to listen to us at that time. When they were ready for it, they signed the partial test-ban Treaty. That was 14 years ago. The world rejoiced and believed that a comprehensive test-ban treaty was close at hand, but we are still waiting. More nuclear-weapons tests have been conducted since the partial test ban than prior to it. Weapon tests underground are being conducted even now. There has been no progress in nuclear disarmament.
244.	We are not a nuclear-weapon Power and have no intention of being one. The new Government has reiterated this position in unambiguous terms. Our Prime Minister, Mr. Moraiji Desai, has said that India would not go in for nuclear weapons even if all the other countries in the world did so. We did not sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons because it was a discriminatory and unequal Treaty. Nothing has happened since that Treaty was formulated nearly 10 years ago to change our view.
245.	India embarked upon a programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy nearly 25 years ago. We continue to be committed to it. We fully share the view that non- proliferation of nuclear weapons should not be confused with non-dissemination of nuclear technology. We shall oppose, as before, any moves or measures that would stand in the way of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. We shall also oppose moves or measures that are discriminatory in nature. At the same time we are prepared to co-operate whole-heartedly with other countries in discussing ways and means of putting an end to the danger of nuclear weapons.
246.	It is both urgent and necessary for the political mind to free itself of military logic and for the political will to assert the force of reason and reverse the nuclear arms race in the direction of nuclear disarmament. We trust that the discussions in the special session on disarmament to be held next year will identify the priorities in nuclear disarmament and help the formulation of a time-bound programme of realistic and concrete measures for disarmament without further delay.
247.	Already the establishment of the new international economic order is being delayed because of diversion of scarce resources to the futile arms race. World military expenditure is estimated to be more than $300 billion annually at current prices. Of this amount 90 per cent is accounted for by developed countries, which is equivalent to 20 times the official development assistance now given by them to developing countries. Even 5 per cent of the total expenditure incurred by the developed countries could vastly help the efforts of the developing countries to achieve many of their modest economic goals. Disarmament is thus vital not only to ensure peace and security but to promote speedy economic and social progress.
248.	A great deal undoubtedly remains to be done. We often complain of the lack of will or progress. However, there is no occasion for cynicism and despair. Despite our many disappointments the family of the United Nations has an impressive record of achievement. I would commend the work of the ILO, WHO, UNESCO, FAO, UNCTAD and many other bodies within the United Nations system. Given the required funds these bodies could do a lot more to alleviate human suffering and promote well-being. A case in point is the WHO efforts to eradicate malaria, which is again raising its ugly head: Its programme to eradicate this scourge from the globe is estimated to cost about $450 million—half of what is spent daily for military purposes- yet the programme is dragging for lack of funds.
249.	India is convinced of the necessity of supporting, strengthening and developing the United Nations as a universal Organization, not only for preserving peace among nation States and promoting respect for human rights, but also for fostering economic co-operation and harmonizing the actions of States. This is clearly a vital task facing the international community.
250.	In the final analysis, I return to my basic theme. The greatest task before us, which envelops all the issues confronting mankind, concerns the welfare of man, regardless of race, colour, creed or nationality. All our problems, the questions of war and peace, economic malaise and rapidly diminishing natural resources, must lead us to one conclusion: in our interdependent world each one of us is his brother's keeper.
251.	The single all-embracing item on our agenda is the future of man, and it will remain so in the years and decades to come. Man inherited, developed and still nurtures this good earth and is nourished by it. If we realize that his survival is inextricably linked with that of millions of others as never in the past, we shall reach the only answer to the requirement of our times: national sovereignty must adjust itself to international interdependence.
252.	On behalf of India I pledge before this Assembly that our country will never be found wanting in its resolve to share in the sacrifice for the ideals of one world and for the welfare and greater glory of man.
﻿154.	Mr. President, permit me to join those representatives who have already spoken in the debate, and have offered their congratulations to you on your unanimous election to the office of President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly.
155.	The cause of human rights received a powerful impetus this year when the President of the United States told this body on 17 March of this year that every nation has a responsibility to speak out in defence of basic rights and freedoms throughout the world. We subscribed fully to this view and we are proud that, despite intense strains and provocations, Israel has succeeded in maintaining a free, open and multiracial society in which the dignity of man and the rule of law are held supreme.
156.	Unfortunately, the record of the United Nations in the field of human rights is poor. We are witnesses here to a deplorable exercise in double standards and cynicism.
157.	We have also been disappointed that so little progress has been made in implementing the humanitarian principles of the Final Act of Helsinki. Regrettably, there has been no improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Exit from the Soviet Union, the right to leave one's country a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Final Act of Helsinki—is still severely restricted, and those Jews who do insist on their rights are subject to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment and in some cases to arrest and imprisonment. The Government of Israel once again calls on the Soviet Union to permit those Jews who wish to do so to leave in order to go to Israel to join their people and their families.
158.	May I again raise the matter of the sorry plight of the Jewish community in Syria. That community does not enjoy such basic human rights as freedom of movement or the right to be reunited with their families. There can be no valid reason for the Government of Syria to hold those 5,000 innocent people as hostages.
159.	Ever since it joined the United Nations some 28 years ago, Israel has steadily supported all significant moves by this Organization to promote and to propagate the limitation of armaments on a global scale. Although disarmament has always been closely linked with security, Israel is prepared to play its part in the reduction of the arms race in the Middle East.
160.	In the past three years, an estimated $US 7.5 billion in arms supplies have been delivered by East and West to Arab countries in the vicinity of Israel. In addition, about $US 22 billion worth of arms was contracted for by Arab States for delivery from the end of 1976 onwards. Israel is ready to enter into an agreement on arms limitation with all the States in the Middle East.
161.	With regard to another crucial aspect of disarmament, Israel has frequently called on its Arab neighbours to join it in direct negotiations with a view to establishing a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East. Indeed, on this issue as on others, the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Fahmy, has deliberately misled this Assembly. Israel firmly believes that such negotiations should lead to the conclusion of a formal, contractual, multilateral convention between all the States of the region, on the lines of such notable precedents as the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America and the proposals for similar agreements in the areas of south Asia and the south Pacific. Unfortunately, the Arab States have totally rejected this call by Israel which, after all, is in the interests of all the people of the Middle East. On this occasion I repeat our proposal.
162.	A year ago, following the rescue by Israel of innocent hostages hijacked to Entebbe in an Air France airbus, the Vice Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany proposed that the United Nations should draft an international convention banning the taking of hostages and providing for the prosecution or extradition of the "criminals. This was an important step in the right direction, which Israel welcomed. It is therefore very disturbing to note that the Ad Hoc Committee appointed to deal with this matter has made so little progress in attempting to draft a convention for consideration by this Assembly. If this Organization fails, because of the efforts of those who support international terror, to take even this step in the right direction, then it will have lost all credibility as an effective instrument of international action.
163.	It is regrettable that Arab States have played and continue to play a central role in encouraging international terror. It is to Arab airports that hijacked aircraft are directed by terrorists in their search for safe destinations. The recent Japan Air Lines case is a classic example. The kidnappers and murderers of public figures in Germany are graduates of the courses of the PLO.
164.	No cause can justify or condone terrorism. Terrorism is a criminal activity, totally indiscriminate in its effects, which by design strikes at the innocent and the defenceless. The issue is therefore a fundamental one for the international community. The attitude this Organization takes on the question of terrorism is a clear reflection of its moral strength and its international responsibility.
165.	So far, the record of the United Nations in combating terrorism is dismal. Not once has the Security Council convened to condemn terrorists and hijackers.
166.	I noted with interest that, after my Egyptian colleague had talked with the President and the Secretary of State in Washington on 22 September, he announced to the press that, for the first time, Egypt was prepared to accept Israel as a Middle Eastern country and to live in peace in that area. It saddened me therefore that, before this Assembly on 28 September, Mr. Fahmy chose to make a personal attack on my Prime Minister and to vilify Zionism and to launch a move to isolate Israel in this forum. He also made peace conditional on an end to immigration to Israel, and openly threatened war. It would be easy to rebut him, but I shall refrain. I shall only comment that Mr. Fahmy's double-talk does not enhance Egypt's credibility and is prejudicial to the prospects of peace in the Middle East.
167.	Israel will never limit immigration. Zionism is the life-blood of Israel. We will do our utmost to achieve peace and to prevent war; but let me remind Mr. Fahmy, when he threatens us with war, that every war launched by Egypt has ended to its considerable disadvantage. The last cease-fire negotiations between Israel and Egypt after the Yom Kippur war took place 101 kilometres from Cairo. I submit that it would be more appropriate for Mr. Fahmy to stop talking about war and concentrate on the issues of peace.
168.	Similarly, I shall not engage in polemics with any of the other Arab representatives who have made countless false and malicious allegations against Israel.
169.	However, certain facts must be recalled. We have been reminded that General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947 on the partition of Palestine has not been implemented. True, but the Arab States themselves voted against that resolution, obstructed its implementation and destroyed it by force of arms. For the last 30 years they have been guilty of aggression against Israel.
170.	After every war we proposed peace, but in vain. After the 1948 war we negotiated with Abdullah, King of Jordan. We reached an agreement, which was initialled by both sides, but because of that he was assassinated by his own people while praying at the A1 Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. In 1957, we proposed to President Nasser of Egypt that Egyptian troops, and not United Nations troops, should take over Sharm el Sheikh, which controls the Strait of Tiran, on condition that Israeli vessels be guaranteed freedom of passage, but Nasser rejected our proposal. After the 1967 war, we offered to negotiate for peace: we offered to return territory in return for peace. The reply we received from the Arab countries was given to us on 1 September 1967 at the Arab Summit Conference: no negotiation, no recognition, no peace.
171.	Many representatives have referred nostalgically to the 1967 armistice lines, and seem to see an Israeli withdrawal to them as a complete solution to all the problems of the Middle East. But if the 1967 lines are the answer to the problem, why is it that peace was not achieved in the years between 1949 and 1967, when Israel's frontiers were at the pre-1967 lines? During that period the Arab States refused to negotiate peace, as they were pledged to do under the armistice agreements which they signed in 1949. The PLO, an instrument of war for the destruction of Israel, was created in 1964 when Israel was still behind the 1967 lines.
172.	There has been much talk about the territories held by Israel since the six day war. But nothing has been said about the reasons for that war; nothing of President Nasser's blockade of the Strait of Tiran and his public undertakings to annihilate Israel; nothing of Egypt's movement of forces leading up to the war; nothing of how King Hussein ignored our advice, passed on to him by General Odd Bull of the United Nations, when he joined in the attack on Israel with the forces of Egypt and Syria.
173.	We did not plan to go to war. We fought to defend ourselves from the grim fate promised us.
174.	We cannot overlook the fact that the simplistic solution, which has been advocated by so many participants in this debate, was a reality on the ground from 1949 to 1967. It brought us war.
175.	In 1973, Syria and Egypt again launched a war against Israel. After their defeat, the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East was set up in the framework of which two disengagement agreements were reached with Egypt and Syria in 1974, and an interim agreement was made with Egypt in 1975.
176.	Since then, Israel has not ceased to indicate its readiness to resume the peace negotiations at Geneva on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
177.	In view of the many inaccurate constructions that have been put on resolution 242(1967), let us be quite clear what that resolution does say and what it does not say. It does not require Israel to withdraw unilaterally from the territories it occupied in 1967. It does not call upon Israel to leave all those territories. It does not make peace negotiations contingent upon such withdrawal. It does not fix boundaries. What it does require is negotiations between the parties to arrive at an agreed peace treaty.
178.	The wording of the resolution makes it perfectly clear that new boundaries are to be determined between the States of the region. The statement that "secure and recognized boundaries" must be negotiated implies that previous boundaries were not secure or recognized. The fact that new boundaries are to be reached can also be inferred from the fact that Arab and Soviet pressure for the inclusion of a reference to "withdrawal from all the territories" was unsuccessful.
179.	I quote Mr. Joseph Sisco, who was the United States Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
Affairs at the time that resolution 242 (1967) was adopted. He said:
"That resolution did not say 'withdrawal to the pre-June 5 lines'. That resolution said that the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final secure and recognized borders. In other words, the question of the final borders ... is a matter of negotiations between the parties."
This is still our position. We have to establish new boundaries, and not to return to the old ones. We have to negotiate permanent boundaries that will afford Israel security.
180.	According to resolution 242 (1967), the peace settlement must include:
"Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area . ..".
The settlement is therefore to be reached between States, and not to involve the participation of any organization whatsoever.
181.	Resolution 242 (1967) makes no mention whatsoever of the PLO. The PLO is a terrorist organization whose record is one of deliberate and indiscriminate atrocities against innocent civilians, including women and children. The PLO is governed by the Palestinian National Covenant of 1964, as amended in 1968 and reconfirmed as recently as in March of this year by the Palestinian National Council in Cairo.
182.	Article 6 of this Covenant calls for the expulsion of the vast majority of the Jewish population from our country. In article 15, it calls for the elimination of Zionism. In article 19, it calls in effect for the destruction of the State of Israel. In article 20, it makes the preposterous assertion that "the claim of historical or spiritual links between the Jews and Palestine is [not] in conformity with historical fact...". In article 21, it declares that "all alternatives to the total liberation of Palestine" are rejected-that is, any plan that falls short of the destruction of Israel.
183.	There is not a sovereign State in this Organization that would negotiate with a body calling for its destruction.
184.	Many delegations have proposed the establishment of a Palestinian State governed by the PLO on the West Bank and in Gaza. Again, this is but a futile exercise in wishful thinking, totally unacceptable to us, ignoring, as it does, the language of resolution 242 (1967) and the basic facts on the ground.
185.	A PLO mini-State on the West Bank, which could not be viable in itself, would be a base for attempts to destroy Israel. One has only to consult a map and the political programme of the PLO to realize this.
186.	The provisions of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) were accepted by Israel as the basis of negotiation towards peace. We accepted Council resolution 242 (1967). We did not accept an amended Council resolution 242 (1967)-even if such an amendment were feasible, which it is not, Council resolution 242 (1967) derives its strength and authority from the fact that it has been accepted by the States parties to the conflict.
187.	Moreover, the United States regards resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) as the exclusive basis for a settlement of the conflict. The memorandum of agreement between Israel and the United States on the Geneva Peace Conference, signed on I September 1975, declares in article 4 that the United States
"... will oppose and if necessary vote against any initiatives in the Security Council to alter adversely the terms of reference of the Geneva Peace Conference, or to change resolutions 242 and 338 in ways which are incompatible with their original purpose".
This position was reaffirmed by the United States only a few days ago in a joint statement with Israel.
188.	Israel is ready to resume negotiations at Geneva for the achievement of true, contractual and effective peace treaties, including the establishment of diplomatic relations between Israel and the Arab States. There can be no participation of any additional State, group or organization at the Geneva Peace Conference without the agreement of all the initial participants. All negotiations should be conducted on a bilateral basis.
189.	Through the good offices- of the United States, we have conveyed suggestions on the substantive, and not merely on the procedural, issues.
190.	First, we have provided a draft text of a full peace treaty in all its aspects. Secondly, we have supplied details of our approach in respect of discussion and negotiation on the various issues. This part is in turn made up of two elements: first, a presentation of some of the main questions involved in a peace agreement between ourselves and each of our neighbours, questions such as Israel's security, guarantees of freedom of navigation in all international waterways, the security of the Jordan River sources in the north, a basis for coexistence with the Palestinian Arabs in the" Gaza Strip, Judaea and Samaria, and other relevant topics—in other words, the questions which we believe we must contend with if we are to sign a final peace agreement between ourselves and each of the neighbouring Arab States. The second element comprises our ideas for resolving these questions. In our view, there should be complete normalization of relations, including diplomatic relations, trade and cultural ties. We have suggested modalities, including demilitarized zones and other arrangements.
191.	In addition, there remains the cardinal principle that the negotiations should be conducted without prior conditions or commitments. This principle means not only that neither side obligates the other to agree in advance to any condition whatsoever but also that all issues and areas are
open to negotiation. We for our part will be completely open and sincere in listening to, discussing and examining the proposals of the other parties. To illustrate this: we believe that the settlement concerning Judaea and Samaria and the Gaza Strip should be based on our living together with the Palestinian Arabs in those areas, and not on a partition of the territory.
192.	For 10 years, between 1967 and 1977, the Government of Israel was committed to territorial concessions in return for genuine peace, and this implied the redivision of the area. But to no avail.
193.	Now our view is that redivision is not the answer. Nowhere is it possible to draw a dividing line which will satisfy not only the security, but also the historical, economic and social needs of all sides. Bethlehem, a satellite town of Jerusalem and dependent on Jerusalem for its tourist trade and indeed its very existence, cannot be cut off from the holy city. Mount Scopus, the site of the Hebrew University and the Hadassah Hospital, cannot be separated from Israel. And are the Arabs in Gaza once again to be bottled up in an intolerably narrow strip of land, unable to get out without passing an international frontier? No. The model for the future must be united Jerusalem, where since 1967 Jews and Arabs have proved that they can live together harmoniously to their joint benefit, where all residents enjoy freedom of movement in all parts of the holy city and where freedom of access to the Holy Places is assured for all. There is no room—and no need—for barbed wire any more.
194.	But, for all that, had the Arabs proposed partitioning those territories between ourselves and them, we would have discussed and examined their proposal and afterwards would have decided whether we were ready to agree to it or not. In this connexion I should like to point out that we have re-examined the positions of Jordan and of the Palestinian Arabs and we have found no inclination on the part of either for a solution based on the redivision of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza Strip.
- 195. The criticism which has been directed against Israel in respect of the establishment of settlements in Judaea and Samaria is unfounded. The settlements are legal. Under international law neither Jordan nor any other Arab State has any sovereign territorial rights in the West Bank or in any other part of what was mandatory Palestine in 1948 when the United Kingdom surrendered its Mandate. No State today has any claim of sovereignty to what was mandatory Palestine that is better than or even equal to Israel's claims.
196.	The Arab States rejected the United Nations partition resolution and, in violation of the United Nations Charter, they used force in an attempt to prevent its implementation. The Arab use of force in 1948 was an act of aggression-not of self-defence.
197.	"... an armed struggle is taking place in Palestine as a result of the unlawful invasion by a number of States of the territory of Palestine, which does not form part of the territory of any of the States whose armed forces have invaded it."
That is what Mr. Tarasenko of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic said in the Security Council in 1948.
198.	No rights accrued to any of the Arab States from that act, and those States were in fact subject to the restrictions that international law imposes on a "conquering" and "occupying" army.
199.	Jordan's annexation of Judaea and Samaria early in 1950 was never recognized by any State other than Pakistan and the United Kingdom. The United States Department of State, at a press conference on 29 July 1977, confirmed that there were legal problems over the sovereign rights of Jordan in the West Bank.
200.	In view of this illegal annexation of the West Bank, the fourth Geneva Convention is not applicable.
201.	But even if the laws of belligerent occupation were applicable, those rules contain no restrictions on the freedom of persons to take up residence in the area involved. The fourth Geneva Convention bans forcible transfers, not voluntary acts of individuals taking up residence in the area of the West Bank. Mo Arab inhabitants have been displaced by the establishment of these Jewish settlements. Not a single Arab resident of Judaea and Samaria has been made homeless as a result of the establishment of those peaceful villages. And, above all, it is unacceptable to us that Jews should be prohibited from living in any part of their ancestral land.
202.	Let me make one point clear: the settlements will not decide the final borders between Israel and its neighbours. The borders will be decided upon in the negotiations between Israel and its neighbours. The settlements are by no means an obstacle to peace because, if they were, we should have had peace years ago.
203.	We believe that the problem concerning the status of the Arabs living in the West Bank should be settled in the framework of peace negotiations in Geneva between us and the Jordanian delegation, which may include Palestinian Arabs from Judaea and Samaria.
204.	One of the central problems that has to be solved in a peace settlement is the problem of the refugees. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) refers to "refugees", not "Arab refugees": it covers both Jewish and Arab refugees. When the resolution was being drafted, a Soviet attempt to restrict it to Arab refugees failed.
205.	The origin of the Palestinian Arab refugee problem was the Arab rejection of the United Nations partition resolution and the war which the Arab States declared against the State of Israel one day after its establishment. The responsibility is therefore theirs. Had the Arabs accepted the resolution, there would have been no refugee problem. Furthermore, because of the wars conducted by the Arab States against Israel, Jews who had lived for thousands of years in Arab lands were forced to leave, abandoning all their property and possessions. For about 590,000 Arab refugees there were about 600,000 Jewish refugees from Iraq, Yemen, Syria, Egypt, Libya and the rest of North Africa. 

  

206.	Refugees in other parts of the world have been successfully integrated into the national community to which they belong. The only exception to the general rule is the situation of the Arab refugees. The Arab States have refused to absorb and integrate their brothers into their respective societies. The Arab States have made the "restoration" of the "legitimate rights" of those refugees- namely, their return to Israel—the central demand. That demand constitutes a serious distortion of the realities of the refugee problem.
207.	We do not intend to send back Jews to Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Morocco, Yemen and other Arab countries, to be hanged in the public squares of Baghdad and to be deprived of their human rights and to become third-class citizens, imprisoned in ghettoes, as in Syria now, in order to take Arab refugees in their place. The fact is that an exchange of population has taken place between Israel and the Arab countries.
208.	The difference between Israel and the Arab States is that, while we in Israel from the outset integrated all the Jewish refugees into our society, the Arab States deliberately perpetuated the "refugee status" of their own brethren in order to use them as a political weapon against Israel. The Arab demand for the return of the refugees to Israel, coupled with proposals for the establishment of a Palestinian State, is calculated to bring about the destruction of Israel. The refugees should be resettled and integrated into the Arab societies in which they now live. In any peace settlement specific provisions should be made to enable all refugees to find accommodation, employment and adequate compensation.
209.	In any discussion of reparations for the refugees, Israel will raise the question of reparations for Jewish refugees from Arab lands and insist that all their claims be settled within the framework of the peace agreement.
210.	There is only one road along which it is possible to move towards peace; that is the road of direct negotiations with no pre-conditions. No conflict in the world has ever been resolved without the parties to the conflict negotiating face to face. Our conflict is not different.
211.	The heart of the problem is the Arab refusal to recognize the right of Israel to national sovereignty in the ancient, historical land of the Jewish people. That is the heart of the problem, and until it is overcome the obstacles to a just and durable peace will remain.
212.	The developments of recent days and the possibility of a resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, none the less, give room for guarded optimism which could turn into grounds for great hope. For our part, we are prepared to embark on a common effort, long and challenging as it may be, to negotiate a final agreement to live in peace and security.
 

﻿74.	 Mr. President, I offer you my warmest congratulations on your election as President of this Assembly. It is at once a notable mark of confidence in you personally and a timely acknowledgement of your country's standing in the world community.
75.	We welcome as new Members the Republic of Djibouti and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. New Zealand was privileged to be a sponsor of Viet Nam's application for membership. We did so not merely because of our belief in the value of universal membership of the United Nations, but because we regard the participation of Viet Nam as indispensable in the task of solving the pressing problems of South-East Asia. We look forward to developing a positive relationship with this dynamic State both within the United Nations system and in our direct bilateral dealings.
76.	This year's General Assembly, like its predecessors, confronts awesome problems which we human beings have created and which—we must believe—human beings have the intelligence to solve, if only we can summon the will and forge the consensus. Our Secretary-General has pinpointed the issues in his valuable report. Many of them have been with us for a long time. Others, as he notes, are new. All directly affect the peace, security and welfare of our fragile world community. Indeed, they are basic to its continued functioning and even to its continued existence.
77.	Whether the issue be the softening of the expensive and potentially deadly rivalry between the super-Power?;, whether it be the establishment of human justice for all the people of southern Africa and the Middle East, whether it be the imperative of a more just and workable international economic order, whether it be the conservation and orderly use of the resources of the sea and the sea-bed, whether it be the sensible management and sharing of the finite resources of this planet, whether it be the halting and reversal of the arms race-whatever the issue, all of us have a direct stake in the outcome. No one of us can opt out. All of us face the challenge; all of us will share the responsibility if we fail to find solutions and then uphold them in good faith.
78.	It would, of course, be naive to pretend that this body is an objective research institution or a philanthropic agency, or that national or regional interests are likely to be set aside, or that advances will be made except step by step through deals and compromises. That is the nature of national or international political institutions, of which this is one. We represent our constituents, and they have their interests and their aspirations, to which we must be responsive. But all of us, I think, can feel in our bones that in its economic, no less than its political, condition the world is not many steps away from chaos; and that for all of us the consequences of failure are so grave that, however intractable the problems, however elusive the solutions, we are called upon to make the effort to face them with seriousness and compassion. We are then in the area of attitudes. Attitudes determine political will, and without a shift of attitudes the indispensable consensus will continue to elude us.
79.	No issue calls more urgently for agreement among us than that of the more just and effective use of the world's economic resources. It is at our peril that we should ignore the fact that one third of our fellow beings are subsisting in conditions of destitution and mounting despair, that, after two decades of international consideration and some, but all too little, action, development problems have increased in magnitude, that, despite dozens of conferences, the relative position of the people of the developing countries has each year steadily deteriorated.
80.	in recently reviewing the decline in the terms of trade of countless which produce agricultural exports, and considering measures such as the supplementary financing facility established by the IMF, my Prime Minister made this observation:
"We cannot say to a poor country, 'We will pay you much less in relative terms for your goods than we used to pay, but you need not worry as we will lend you the balance at market rates of interest providing you take the steps to lower the standard of living of your people.' It is difficult," he said, "to cut what you haven't got."
81.	As an exporter of agricultural products, New Zealand has suffered greatly from declining terms of trade and, I might add, from the social burdens involved in adjusting to a greatly reduced income. We are therefore well placed to understand the far greater difficulties of the oil-deficient developing countries. We claim no special sympathy for New Zealand because we are well placed by comparison with most of the world's population. But our difficulties stem from causes similar to some of those which frustrate the developing world: declining terms of trade for countries which export agricultural goods and Increasing protectionism on the part of the affluent industrial countries. In many countries belts have already been tightened up to, and beyond, what is socially and politically acceptable. We must all think in terms not of palliatives but of fundamental shifts of attitudes and policies.
82.	In such a situation more attention must be given, not just to financing deficits and tightening the belt, but to enabling the primary producing and newly industrializing countries to increase their earnings. And this must involve facing squarely two fundamental questions, namely, the relationship between the prices of primary products and industrial goods, and the question of access to the markets of the affluent industrial countries of the world. These are political questions of the greatest importance, questions that must be tackled by those in whose power it lies to diminish both surpluses and deficits. And surely it must be obvious that for the rich, industrialized world to do so would be no more than enlightened self-interest. Could it not help to revitalize their faltering economies and to provide their societies with a renewed purpose and sense of direction?
83.	The problem is, of course, at the very essence of politics. It is the far from easy task of convincing electorates and, more specifically, of ensuring that special interest groups in those electorates are harnessed to wider national and international imperatives. We are convinced that most of the leaders of countries whose policies will determine the course of the world's economy, and the social and political ramifications of those policies, are aware of what must be done if the looming economic and political chaos is to be avoided. Their problem, and the problem of all in government, is to mobilize sufficient determination and creative leadership to change entrenched attitudes and to confront those interests which, however obsolete they may be, are nevertheless deeply entrenched in their national history and their political processes. But time is short, and it is running out.
84.	I have concentrated some attention on She responsibilities of the affluent market-economy nations, but it is not only their problem. It is the problem of all, regardless of ideology, regardless of economic system.
85.	There appears to be a general recognition that it is within the United Nations framework that the efforts of the international community to promote such action should be carried forward. The present session of the General Assembly has a special responsibility to put in hand preparations for a new international development strategy. The conclusions and agreements of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation held earlier this year need to be followed up.
86.	New Zealand was not a participant at the Paris Conference. We have, however, welcomed the progress made, and my Government has now completed its study of the measures agreed at that Conference. We endorse the agreements reached, limited though these were, and will take up the debate in the various forums concerned on the topics left uncompleted.
87.	An important element in our efforts to promote development and greater equity in the distribution of the world's resources is, of course, international energy cooperation, with particular reference to the interests and needs of energy-deficient developing countries. We are encouraged that the Secretary-General has recently made proposals for such co-operation within the United Nations system, and we shall play our part in working out this concept in the course of this session and thereafter.
88.	It is now almost three years since the World Food Conference decided to establish an International Fund for Agricultural Development. The Fund represents a new approach to the age-old problem of world hunger-the pooling, on a hitherto unprecedented scale, of resources to be devoted exclusively to improving agriculture in developing countries. The Fund's initial pledging target of SI billion was achieved at the beginning of the year, and the Agreement establishing the Fund was thrown open for signature in February. New Zealand will formally ratify the agreement today. We look forward to its early entry into force and the fulfilment of initial pledges by donor countries so that operations may begin.
89.	New Zealand will also participate actively and constructively in the resumed session of the United Nations Negotiating Conference on a Common Fund under the Integrated Programme for Commodities. We earn our living by the export of primary produce, and therefore share the concern of developing countries that greater stability should be introduced into the commodity markets of the world.
90.	New Zealand is experiencing the most prolonged and deep-seated recession in its post-war economic history. This fact has sharpened our appreciation of the lot of developing countries. It has, however, circumscribed our ability to help those beyond our shores, but we remain pledged to the target of 0.7 per cent for official development assistance, and we shall move again towards that target as soon as our economic circumstances permit.
91.	In our interdependent world there are no issues that can be considered in isolation. The refashioning of the global economic system is closely linked to negotiating settlements in southern Africa and the Middle East, to halting the arms race, and to controlling and ultimately eliminating weapons of mass destruction. The more we can establish conditions of security and stability the more chance there is of securing the massive diversion of resources and the rearrangement of economic activity needed to reduce the unacceptable disparities that new exist among nations. How, then, do we address these problems?
92.	All of us agree that the situation in southern Africa is a tragedy, c tragedy compounded by intransigence and repression, a tragedy of expanding and enveloping dimensions. Change must come, and it will come. The question is not if, but how. Here, of course, there is less agreement.
93.	Some claim that armed struggle is the only way; and if intransigence persists they will, of course, be right. But it is a way that would extract a terrible price in human lives and suffering and would create bitter problems for the future.
94.	When the Anglo-American proposals on Rhodesia were announced, I said publicly that they offered the last chance for a peaceful settlement. If the Smith regime tosses this chance away it might buy itself a little time, but it can only be a time of tension and a time of knowing that the end will almost certainly be bloodshed in Salisbury and Bulawayo. I would urge the Smith regime to realize it, not only for their own sake,- but also for the sake of Zimbabwe as a whole.
95.	There has been some progress on Namibia. The southern African authorities have apparently recognized the futility of pressing ahead with the Turnhalle proposals and have accepted the need for elections on the basis of one man, one vote. The Maputo Conference showed them, if they needed any showing, that the international community is united in its demand that Namibia should be free and independent. But if there has been some progress, there remain formidable problems. One of the most taxing is that of Walvis Bay. There can be no question that any exclusion of Walvis Bay from Namibia would undermine that country's integrity and impede significantly its chances of building a viable economy.
96.	The gravest problems are those of South Africa. They are complex and deep-rooted. And they are on a huge scale. White South Africa remains to be convinced that it has no alternative but to accept fundamental changes of attitude. Even a society that is as inward-looking and as determined to go its own way as South Africa cannot survive alone. It is part of the world whether it likes it or not. If the rest of the world makes it clear that it will have nothing to do with
South Africa so long as it persists with its discriminatory policies, the pressure for change will sooner or later become irresistible.
97.	We in New Zealand have played our part in this process. We took part in the Lagos World Conference for Action against Apartheid and subscribed, without reservation, to the terms of the Lagos Declaration. We have minimal trade with South Africa and virtually no investment. We have supported the Swedish initiative calling for the ending of all new investment in South Africa. We have refused to contemplate any exchange of diplomatic representatives. My Government is actively discouraging sporting contacts. We support the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the appeal for South African refugee students. We are opposed to the creation of the so-called "Bantustans"' which would seek to make black South Africans aliens in their own country. We have scrupulously observed the voluntary arms embargo and will give our full support to any proposal to establish a mandatory arms embargo in terms of the appropriate provisions of the Charter. We have taken a forthright stand in pressing for the release of political prisoners and in condemning the brutal treatment which has led to the unexplained deaths in confinement of more than one black leader-most recently Steven Biko. In short, we shall do all we can to bring about the atmosphere in which a just solution of the problems of racism and minority rule in South Africa might be achieved before a long, drawn-out and bloody armed struggle becomes inevitable.
98.	The Arab-Israeli dispute is another problem that threatens world peace. It is a dispute about which we have little direct knowledge and we are certainly not well placed to presume to offer any new ideas on how it can be resolved. Even so, it seems to us that certain things stand out. One is that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) must continue to form the basis-for any settlement. We are obliged, therefore, to reject any attempt by one party to the dispute to pursue policies that are contrary to the principles laid down in resolution 242(1967). We believe that territory occupied by Israel must be returned.
99.	The second thing is that the Palestinian people have a right to a homeland, either as a separate State or as a part of a larger, Arab State. The precise boundaries of that homeland are a matter for negotiations by the parties directly concerned. But if there is to be a peace in the Middle East, the principle must be recognized. It does not derogate in any way from the fundamental right of Israel to exist as a sovereign, independent State within secure and recognized boundaries, free from threat by any acts of force, and indeed we believe that a final territorial settlement will confirm and help to protect that right.
100.	And, finally, it is imperative that negotiations begin soon. The longer a start is delayed, the greater the build-up of tension and the greater the chances of the outbreak of another war. Obviously, to be constructive, negotiations must include all the parties to the dispute, including the Palestinians, through their chosen representatives.
101.	In another long-standing dispute, that between North and South Korea, the resumption of early negotiations between the parties directly concerned is, in our view, an urgent requirement. My Government remains deeply concerned lest the tensions on the peninsula should lead, once again, to confrontation. It is our earnest hope that, during the pause in international deliberations on the problem, a peaceful solution can be found through negotiations between the two Korean parties. New Zealand hopes that all Governments which are in a position to encourage this peaceful means to a solution will use their influence accordingly.
102.	We have a deep concern also for the security and prosperity of South-East Asia. We therefore welcome the co-operative, constructive efforts of the countries of the region through the Association of South-East Asian Nations. ASEAN is a non-military association dedicated to the establishment of peace and stability in South-East Asia. Its leaders have made clear on many occasions their desire to promote friendship and understanding with their neighbours. We hope they will soon get a response. For our part we are glad to be associated with ASEAN in its efforts to improve the well-being of the people of this area.
103.	This same developing regional co-operation is to be found so in our own part of the world, the South Pacific. There, the South Pacific Forum, a group of ten States, five of which are represented in this Assembly, is the principal vehicle for co-operation and consultation. Two of the Forum's recent initiative deserve particular mention. In June it was agreed to establish a regional shipping line, the Pacific Forum Line. Ships are to be chartered to the Line by participating Governments and it will operate services within the region, commencing early next year. Sea transport, of course, is the key to economic development in the region and the Forum Line will open new possibilities.
104.	The second major initiative was the agreement of the Forum, at its most recent meeting in Papua New Guinea, to establish a fisheries agency to co-ordinate and develop protection and surveillance of fisheries within the economic zones of member countries. The proper control of this huge area, which in total is one of the largest in the world, is clearly beyond the capability of any one member country. By sharing their skills and knowledge, the members will be able to exploit their resources to the best advantage of all countries in the region. At the same time the establishment of exclusive economic zones in the South Pacific and of a regional fishing agency in no way diminishes the importance for the area of the early completion of the treaty on the law of the sea. It is our earnest hope that negotiations will result in an agreed text during 1978.
105.	Before I leave the subject of regional co-operation I should like to refer, very briefly, to the signing on 7 September in Washington of the Panama Canal Treaties. This is a significant advance which my Government welcomes. We see the agreements as a milestone for the principal parties, the United States and the Republic of Panama, for the Americas as a whole, and for countries as far flung as my own. The large volume of our trade which passes through the Canal causes us to take a positive interest in its security and efficiency. I warmly congratulate the Governments concerned.
106.	The protection and promotion of human rights is one of the basic purposes of the United Nations and next year will be the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. New Zealand attaches great importance to the Universal Declaration and to the values enunciated in the International Covenants on Human Rights, the one covering political and civil rights, the other economic, social and cultural rights.
107.	Before formally committing ourselves to the Covenants we have sought to ensure that in every respect our laws and juridical system were capable of enforcing the obligations of those Covenants. This has been a lengthy task involving the drafting of new legislation. That task is now substantially completed. Enactment of this legislation will mean that our laws will sustain any scrutiny under the Covenants. I expect, therefore, that we will ratify both those Covenants, as well as the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide not later than 1978. Respect for human rights, for human dignity and the individual's fundamental freedoms have long had a central place in our traditions and values. Through this codification the law in fact will have caught up with our practice.
108.	In preparing for the ratification of the Covenants the New Zealand Government has drafted, and Parliament is expected to adopt during the current parliamentary session, a measure which will outlaw every kind of discrimination based on sex or religion. Racial discrimination is already contrary to New Zealand tradition, law and practice and New Zealand reports regularly to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Under the new legislation a national commission of human rights will be established to deal with complaints of racial, religious or sexual discrimination. This legislation should facilitate New Zealand's signature and ratification of the draft Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women when it is adopted—in the preparation of which New Zealand has taken an active part. We hope it will be completed and opened for signature at the present session of the Assembly.
109.	I have touched on a number of problems and I want now to turn to the most menacing of all-the arms race. No other issue before this Assembly creates greater hopes and engenders greater despair. The gap between our aspirations and our achievements frustrates and dispirits us, and that gap must be closed.
110.	There has been some progress. It is encouraging that at last serious negotiations have begun among three of the nuclear-weapon States on the content of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. This will provide the most effective restriction on vertical nuclear proliferation so far and is clearly the first priority. We hope that a generally accepted comprehensive test-ban treaty will have been drafted by the time the special session is held. No other development, in our judgement, would provide a happier augury for the success of that session. We do not consider acceptable to wait for technology to solve all the political problems confronting a test ban. This would be to wait indefinitely and perhaps for ever. The time for action is now.
111.	None of the great issues before this Assembly are capable of quick or simple solution. But we can make a start, and if the will is present we can move progressively and consistently to the settlement of our disputes, to the changing of attitudes and to the reconciliation of our differences. The New Zealand delegation approaches this session of the Assembly determined to work conscientiously towards that objective.
 

﻿108.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. I wish you full success in the discharge of this high and responsible task.
109.	At every session of the General Assembly we take satisfaction at seeing the growing ranks of States Members of the United Nations. Their number has now almost reached 150. This is yet one more indication of the positive changes occurring in world affairs. It signifies that the peoples one after another continue to gain freedom and independence, thereby confirming the inexorable advance of the process of national liberation.
110.	But what matters most is that the constant influx of new Members adds to the political weight and capabilities of the United Nations and enhances the over-all potential of the policy of peace. Indeed, the main objective of all activities of the United Nations as laid down in its Charter is  to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war .
111.	Our country made its irrevocable choice long ago. The essence of Soviet foreign policy is to ensure a peaceful, creative life for our people and peace for all people on earth. For 60 years now we have been firmly and unswervingly following this line bequeathed to us by the founder of the Soviet State, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.
112.	In this year of the sixtieth anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution the peaceful goals and humane principles of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union will acquire the force of a fundamental law and as such will be enshrined in the new Constitution of the USSR.
111. The same objectives are served by concrete foreign policy actions of the Soviet Union, by the initiatives which we take in international affairs. Many of them have been enunciated from this very rostrum. In a condensed form they are set forth in the programme of further struggle for peace and international co-operation and for the freedom and independence of peoples, adopted by the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the highest political forum of the party of the Soviet country.
! 12. As an integral part of the world socialist system our country acts in the international arena in close unity with fraternal socialist States. We are proud that the entire world is increasingly recognizing the fact that the socialist community of States commits its growing resources and the full weight of its foreign policy on the side of fruitful co-operation among peoples, their security, and universal peace.
113.	But is it not true that the work for a stronger peace is no less pressing today than it was yesterday? Indeed, it has proved possible in recent years to make headway in this direction. In various parts of the planet people have felt tangibly that it is easier to breathe, that the threat of war is receding. The process of detente is becoming pivotal to the development of international relations. But it is clear that in the current situation with its pluses and minuses intricately intertwined this process is not yet immune from delays or even reverses.
114.	One cannot fail to notice that there are still forces at work in the world which do not find detente to their liking. And to say this is perhaps to put it too mildly if one takes into account how fiercely they are attacking the policy of detente.
115.	Faced with a clear prospect of improvement of the international climate, certain groups are intensifying their attempts to launch an offensive to push the world back to the times of the  cold war . Those groups have a stake in an unrestrained arms race, the preservation of old centers of tensions and the creation of new ones, and the perpetuation of the remnants of colonialism and racism.
116.	As a matter of fact we are confronted with the following alternative: either the world will follow the road of renouncing the use of force, the road of disarmament and equal, mutually beneficial co-operation, or it may plunge even more deeply into the arms race and find itself on the brink of a nuclear catastrophe. That is why our country is laying such stress on the need to continue and consolidate detente.
117.	One hears it said at times:  You know, detente is an abstract thing; nobody really knows what it is all about.  Such an argument is spurious and far-fetched. But if it is really necessary to clarify the meaning which the USSR gives to the concept of a relaxation of tensions, this has been done most authoritatively by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid I. Brezhnev. He said in his speech in the city of Tula last January:
 Detente means, first of all the overcoming of the 'cold war' and transition to normal, stable relations among
States; detente means willingness to resolve differences and disputes not by force, not by threats or sabre-rattling, but by peaceful means, at the conference table. Detente means a certain trust and ability to take into consideration each other's legitimate interests. 
118.	Is there really anything recondite in this definition or indeed anything that could provoke objections from those who truly aspire to peace? No, there is nothing of that kind nor can. there possibly be. All this is exactly what each country should be guided by in its policy when facing the countless variety of problems posed by international life. We note with satisfaction that an - increasing number of responsible statesmen are coming to the conclusion that in a nuclear age there is no reasonable alternative to the policy of detente and peaceful coexistence.
119.	The experience of recent years has shown that when States are inspired by peaceful strivings, in actual deeds and not just in words, they do find a common language in settling on actions that lead to a stronger peace. Moreover, not only do they find it, they also work quite successfully—jointly or along parallel courses—to attain this goal.
120.	Indeed, the very improvement of the international climate in recent years has become possible because this was the common cause for a sizable number of countries and for political and social forces which in their world outlook and ideology often stand quite far apart but are none the less willing to co-operate for the benefit of peace.
121.	The policy of detente cannot be allowed to mark time, still less to take a downward turn. It must be constantly nourished with new initiatives and brought within the reach of an ever greater number of States; in short, we must ensure what one may call the materialization of detente.
122.	The United Nations has a weighty role in this respect also. All States Members of the United Nations, no matter how diverse their positions and views, are called upon to step up their efforts to deepen and strengthen detente.
123.	In the conditions now shaping up in the international arena, we consider it extremely important that the United Nations and all its Member States solemnly declare their commitment to detente and use all their authority to back it up. This directly follows from the obligation to live together in peace with one another which the States Members of the United Nations assumed under the Charter.
124.	If the States Members of the United Nations jointly express their political will and determination to advance the cause of detente, this will contribute to overcoming the obstacles which arise in the path of this process and to the over-all improvement of the political climate in the world. In so doing the General Assembly could determine, in terms of the present-day situation, the top priority areas in which States could exert peaceful efforts and the line of conduct which they should follow in relations with each other.
125.	What, specifically, do we have in mind?
126.	It is necessary, above all, scrupulously to protect the assets of detente that have already been accumulated and to prevent them from being squandered. And these assets accumulated in recent years are quite impressive. It is necessary to assist actively in the implementation of multilateral treaties and agreements which serve the interests of strengthening international security and developing peaceful relations, as well as of United Nations decisions aimed at reaching these goals. And a good many such decisions have indeed been adopted.
127.	Another appropriate channel for directing efforts to the benefit of peace and peaceful relations among States is, of course, that of taking resolute steps to contain the arms race and to turn the course of events towards disarmament. What words can be found to make those responsible for the policies of their States realize the imperative need to act seriously in this area?
128.	In the post-war period the arms race has been spiralling upwards continuously, but we were not the ones to cause this. This race was forced on the world by others. However, at every stage the Soviet Union proposed, backing its proposals up with concrete deeds, that an end be put to the dangerous competition and that funds be diverted to the noble endeavour of improving conditions of life for the peoples of the world. And that is still our position.
129.	The Soviet proposals in the field of disarmament are well known. At the last session of the General Assembly we submitted them again in a summarized form in the memorandum of the Soviet Union on questions of ending the arms race and on disarmament. It emphasizes our willingness to search for new measures in the field of disarmament as well as to advance towards general and complete disarmament.
130.	We do not in the least underestimate the significance of some constraints placed on the arms race in a number of areas in recent years. The Soviet Union has made its contribution, together with other countries, in the preparation and implementation of a whole series of relevant international treaties and agreements. These either curtail the build-up of certain types of weapons or ban the arms race in certain environments. The latest example of this is the signing of the Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques. In our view, all States without exception should accede to it if they want to support by deeds their words about peace.
131.	None the less, in realistic terms very little has been done so far Actually, physical disarmament and the elimination of the material means of warfare have not even been started yet. The armies of States have not been reduced by a single aircraft or a single tank as called for in United Nations resolutions. How many good and excellent concrete proposals failed to materialize because of overt or covert sabotage by those who would not even hear of disarmament? Will they ever give thought to where they are pushing the world by incessantly whipping up war production and the arms race?
132.	If one listens to the pronouncements of certain statesmen, one might even get the impression that they appear to be in favour of putting an end to tills. But what, I ask, is the actual state of affairs?
133.	A closer look at what are sometimes proposed as  comprehensive  disarmament recipes would reveal that the objectives pursued are diametrically opposed to those of reaching agreements. It would seem that the intent here is roughly as follows: what about making a proposal known in advance to be unacceptable to our counterpart? He then will reject it, thereby giving us a convenient excuse, first, to blame him for that and, secondly, by invoking his rejection, to take steps to build up armaments which, in the absence of such camouflage, would appear quite unseemly.
134.	Can one really on the one hand propose various  drastic reductions  while on the other hand authorizing the development of new and, bluntly speaking, merciless, terrifying types of weapons such as the neutron bomb? No wonder the world literally shuddered when it learned of the secret programmes to manufacture that weapon. How can one qualify this inhuman weapon as  humane ? After all, it is intended to be used directly against human beings and is in the same category as such cruel and barbaric means of warfare as bacteriological or chemical weapons. In our view, the United Nations must resolutely demand that the plans for the production of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction, including the neutron bomb, should be discontinued.
135.	It becomes increasingly evident with each passing day that the achievement of concrete results in the field of disarmament requires the mobilization of the efforts of. all States of the world. The United Nations has a special responsibility in this regard. It must be acknowledged that the United Nations does not stand aloof as regards the disarmament problem. It has adopted a whole number of meaningful resolutions on that score. They are said to be recommendations, but if such recommendations express the will of the peoples for disarmament, it is then the duty of all Governments to be guided by them in their practical action.
136.	A special session of the United Nations General Assembly on disarmament is to be convened next year. We shall not merely have to conduct there a wide exchange of views on fundamental approaches to the disarmament problem at. the present stage but we shall also have jointly to identify the main areas where States should concentrate their priority efforts in the field of disarmament. The Soviet Union would like that session to be business-like and to help with practical preparations for a successful convening in the immediate future of a World Disarmament Conference.
137.	Next, efforts in favour of detente presuppose such actions by States as would contribute to an early peaceful settlement of situations of conflict and to the preclusion of new situations of that kind from arising.
138.	Acting in conformity with the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our country continues actively to press for the elimination of the remaining hotbeds of war. Of course, the most dangerous of those is the one in the Middle East. Why is there no durable peace in that region? Simply because the principal causes of the conflict have .not been removed. Israeli troops have not been withdrawn from the Arab lands seized in 1967. The right of the Arab people of Palestine, including its right to self-determination and the creation of a State of its own, has still not been guaranteed. All of that means that the independent existence and security of all the peoples and States of that region have not been ensured.
139.	Serious apprehensions are aroused by the words and deeds of the leaders of Israel. They are well known. A great deal of combustible material has been accumulated in the Middle East, and in the event of another outbreak of hostilities no one would be able to predict its outcome.
140.	For its part the Soviet Union will go on doing all in its power to bring about such settlement in the Middle East as would establish a lasting peace there without infringing the legitimate rights and interests of any people or any State of the region.
141.	From this high rostrum our country declares once again that we have been and remain advocates of the just cause of the Arabs whose lands have been unlawfully taken away and are still retained by force of arms. Those lands must be returned unconditionally to the Arab peoples.
142.	But if there is any need to reiterate once again that Israel has a right to exist as an independent and sovereign State in the Middle East, then on behalf of the Soviet leadership, on behalf of the Soviet Union, I say again that we have always adhered and will continue to adhere to precisely that line. So why should Israel not take advantage of the opportunity that presents itself and agree to a genuinely just settlement in the Middle East? That would, after all, be in its own national interests also.
143.	The Soviet Union is in favour of an early reconvening of the Geneva Peace Conference with the participation on an equal footing of all parties concerned, including representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization. There appears to exist now a broad understanding of the need to reconvene the Geneva Conference at the end of this year, but there are some who oppose it, and Israel is the main opponent. It appears that the Israeli statesmen will not bring themselves to climb one step higher, will not bring themselves closer to common sense and to the abandonment of their plans for expansion at the expense of other countries and peoples. The Soviet Union, as Co-Chairman of the Conference, intends to do its utmost to have it convened and make it work successfully, and it expects the other Co-Chairman-the United States of America-also to follow that line.
144.	For more than a year now tensions have also persisted in Cyprus. No one will convince us that it is impossible to solve this problem without impairing the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It is clear that there a most intricate knot has been tied, but given goodwill it can be untied by peaceful means. The Soviet Union is prepared to facilitate this, and our relevant proposals remain valid.
145.	For many years now the question of withdrawing foreign troops from Korea has been on the agenda. Is it really essential that the United Nations should admit its impotence in this respect? We think otherwise. There are quite a few possibilities for solving this question so as to prevent a potential conflict from erupting in that part of the world.
146.	There is one more point to be emphasized. In conditions of detente, and in its interests, all countries are required to abide by the fundamental principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter and in other major international instruments. This means, in the first place, pursuing a policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States and settling differences and disputes by peaceful means without resorting to the threat or use of force. Experience shows that it is necessary for every country to take into account the legitimate interests of other States and to measure its actions in the international arena against the requirements of detente.
147.	Naturally, all these are basic requirements. Yet, how very often do we see that even such generally recognized norms governing relations between States are violated, and frequently in the most flagrant manner.
148.	A great deal has long been said about those many complications and frictions in the current international situation that are due to the fact that there are still no signs of lessening military confrontation between States or groups of States. This problem is particularly acute in Europe. But on other continents, too, there are some who simply will not abandon the policy of maintaining the old blocs and forming new aggressive blocs, a policy typical of the time of the  cold war . Attempts are made to impart a  defensive  character to certain non-military associations of States as well. And what of the persistent intention to establish more and more military bases?
149.	Attempts to strengthen and expand military blocs run directly counter to the spirit of detente. The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist community have recently made a proposal that at least no action should be taken that could result in enlarging the existing closed groupings and political-military alliances, or creating new ones. However, the attitude of the Western countries to this initiative of the socialist States was, to put it mildly, cool. It would appear that its realization would run counter to their designs.
150.	Let us take the Vienna talks on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. These talks have now been going on for four years, and throughout all those years our Western partners in the talks have stubbornly sought to ensure for themselves unilateral military advantages and to encroach upon the security interest of the socialist countries. Therefore, these talks have so far produced no practical results. We urge that we should proceed to a real search for an understanding rather than just talk about the desire for an agreement.
151.	The relaxation of tensions creates still more favourable conditions for completing, within the shortest possible time, the liberation of all colonial countries and peoples, for eliminating the racist regimes and for eradicating apartheid, the vestiges of national oppression and discrimination of all kinds. On the other hand, there is no doubt 
that the solution of these pending problems will give fresh momentum to the process of detente and add a new geographical dimension to it.
152.	Today, colonialism is on the brink of total collapse. Conditions are improving for the further development of the struggle of peoples for their national liberation. A vivid example of this is the glorious victory of the peoples of Indo-China over imperialist aggression. That victory has opened up favourable prospects for the establishment of peace in South-East Asia and on the entire Asian continent.
153.	It is with special feeling that we welcome the entry into the United Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Justice has been restored: the united socialist State of Viet Nam has taken its rightful place in this Organization. A large State, which has consistently taken a peaceful stand, has joined the United Nations. We whole-heartedly congratulate our Vietnamese friends.
154.	We also welcome the admission of a new African State, the Republic of Djibouti.
155.	When a conflict breaks out in a particular part of the world, more often than not there is, lurking in the background, either a desire to cling to colonial privileges or there are actions of a neo-colonialist nature. Let us look at what is happening in southern Africa. It is now the biggest colonialist and racist enclave in the world. An enormous majority of the population in the Republic of South Africa, Rhodesia and Namibia are deprived of the most elementary human rights. This would seem to be a boundless field of activity where those who clamour for  human rights  could best apply their efforts. But for some reason or other, they shut their eyes to the intolerable plight of millions of people. What is more, they actually connive at the shameful acts of these racist regimes; they support them and cover up their crimes.
156.	Speaking of Africa, some are pointing their finger at Moscow.  This is where , they allege,  the tension on the continent originates . But what is our policy in Africa? We seek no privileges there for ourselves, nor do we covet concessions or bases, nor do we impose on African countries our world outlook. Our aims in Africa are independence, freedom and peace for its peoples.
!
157.	We do not conceal the fact that in Africa, as elsewhere, our sympathies lie with the States that have embarked on a progressive path of development, a path of social and economic transformations for the benefit of the masses. We openly declare our complete solidarity with the peoples fighting for the liquidation of the remaining strongholds of colonialism and racism. The Soviet Union will do its utmost to ensure that the desire to establish peaceful, good-neighbourly relations with one another prevails among African States as well as all other States that have gained independence, and that the sources of discord and conflict stoked up between them by imperialism and reaction be eliminated. In this connection, in Africa just as in Europe it is highly important not only to proclaim the principle of the territorial integrity of States and the inviolability of their borders but also to respect it in practice. And this applies to all parts of the world, to all continents. The violation of this principle results in armed conflicts, torrents of blood and countless sacrifices for the peoples involved in those conflicts.
158.	The sooner we do away with this anachronism of our age-colonialism, racism and apartheid-the cleaner will be the air in Africa and the world at large, and the greater will be the range of action for the policy of detente. This is what was called for by the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted by the United 'Nations 17 years ago.
159.	This is also called for in the specific decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council condemning South African and Rhodesian racists. Those decisions must be strictly implemented by all-and I emphasize this—by all States.
160.	It will not be an exaggeration to say that there is another major world problem, and if it is not solved it is difficult to expect detente to be irreversible. What I have in mind is the development of equal, mutually beneficial economic relations between all States-in short, the restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis.
161.	I should like to stress immediately that one cannot apply to this problem a mere  geographical  yardstick. After all, it is not along meridians or parallels that the boundaries of poverty and wealth run today. What matters here is how, by whom and for what purposes the natural resources of each country are being used. What is involved here is a wide range of economic, social and political factors.
162.	The Soviet Union has for a long time been making a major contribution to the building of the national economies of developing countries. Representatives of many States in this hall know this, not merely by hearsay. And we fail to understand the allegations made here and there in the West-especially after the so-called  North-South dialogue  reached an impasse-to the effect that the USSR should, as they say,  lend a hand  in providing assistance to the developing countries. A strange way of putting things indeed!
163.	We shall continue to give all possible assistance to the countries which have embarked on the road of independent development. But is it not clear to everyone that developing States will hardly be able to stand squarely on their feet if they remain hobbled by hundreds and thousands of tethers of neo-colonialist exploitation?
164.	We resolutely support their demands that all manifestations of inequality, diktat and discrimination in international economic relations be eliminated. This was reiterated in the statement of the Soviet Government submitted to the last session of the General Assembly on restructuring international economic relations.
165.	Now, a few more words about another aspect of the development of friendly relations between States. What we have in mind is cultivating the feelings of friendship and 
trust among all peoples, increasing mutual exchanges in cultural and other humanitarian fields. We have in mind also the need to encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, as determined, inter alia, by the International Covenants on Human Rights. this has always been our approach to these questions and it has been clearly reflected in the draft of the new Constitution of the USSR.
166.	But let no one have any doubts about something else: any attempts at preaching to us, at reading us sermons or, still worse, at interfering in our internal affairs under contrived pretexts, have encountered and will always encounter a most resolute rebuff. We are ready to say this once again from this high rostrum: it is high time to realize that by acting in a spirit of psychological warfare the most that one could hope for would be to poison the international atmosphere and .to sour relations between States. We should like to think that all this will be taken seriously.
167.	An exceptionally important area where the policy of detente is being implemented in practice is the sphere of bilateral relations between States. For us, this is not an abstract proposal. !t is confirmed by our consistent policy of ensuring peaceful coexistence among States belonging to different social systems.
168.	For about 10 years now Soviet-French relations have been developing steadily without a hitch. the joint documents signed as a result of the recent visit of Leonid llyich Brezhnev to France convincingly demonstrate that joint actions of the two countries are making a major contribution to the cause of the relaxation of tensions and the development of co-operation in Europe and elsewhere.
169.	Our relations with the Federal Republic of Germany have now been brought into a normal path, which is a major accomplishment in itself if we recall how strained they were in the not-too-distant past. We intend to go on expanding and deepening our ties with the Federal Republic of Germany in various fields. It is clear, however, that everything does not depend on us. There are quarters in the Federal Republic of Germany that are still exploiting some issues in a manner which is far from conducive to the favourable development of relations between our two countries.
170.	We are satisfied with the way in which our relations are shaping up with Finland, Italy, Austria, Britain and other Western European States, even though all possibilities have not yet been exhausted. Relations with those countries as well as with the other participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe have now been put on a solid foundation-namely, in the principles and understandings embodied in the Final Act. The Soviet Union strictly adheres to all the provisions of that outstanding international document. We expect the same of all the other States whose highest representatives affixed their signatures to the Final Act of the Conference.
171.	The meeting of representatives of the States that participated in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe is due to open in Belgrade in a few days' time. We do not overestimate the significance of that meeting, nor do we underestimate it. For its part, the Soviet Union is prepared to do everything so that that meeting may proceed constructively and become yet another milestone on the road embarked upon at Helsinki.
172.	Relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America merit special consideration. It is difficult to conceive of further progress in the policy of detente unless there is at least a minimum of trust and mutual understanding between them. The experience of the late 1960s and the first half of the 1970s indicates that when both countries are guided by principles of equality, mutual interest in the fate of peace and non-interference in internal affairs it becomes possible not only to reach a number of major agreements and arrangements but also to establish useful co-operation in many areas.
173.	Unfortunately, it must be noted that recently Soviet-American relations have experienced a certain stagnation if not a downright slump. To a somewhat lesser extent that has affected the practical aspects of bilateral ties. However, more complications have emerged now than before regarding issues of broad international concern. We, the Soviet Union, stand for the improvement of relations with the United States, for Soviet-American co-operation in the interests of our peoples, in the interests of peace. But we say just as clearly that the efforts of one side alone are not sufficient for that. In response to relevant remarks by President Carter about the desire of the United States to develop relations with the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev said that if there was an intention to translate those words into the language of practical deeds we would willingly seek mutually acceptable solutions.
174.	The Soviet Union invariably pursues a policy of good-neighbourly relations with Japan. Soviet-Japanese co-operation is developing successfully in a number of areas. In some other areas that is not the case. In our opinion the cause lies in the unhealthy sentiments regarding the Soviet Union that are still strong in some Japanese circles. Besides, those feelings are being whipped up by outside forces. We are convinced that the situation can and must change for the better in the interests of the peoples of our two countries and of peace in Asia.
175.	For many years now Soviet-Indian relations have served as an important stabilizing factor on the vast continent of Asia. They provide a good example of friendly co-operation based upon the principles of peaceful coexistence and enshrined in the relevant treaty. It is our firm intention to continue promoting the development, intensification and enrichment of our ties with India.
176.	A few words now about our relations with a large neighbouring country, China. Our position in this respect was defined by the Twenty-Fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. From the rostrum of the Congress L. I. Brezhnev stated:
 As regards China, as well as other countries, we adhere firmly to the principles of equality, respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and the non-use of force. In short, we are prepared to normalize relations with China in accordance with the principles of peaceful coexistence.  And that position of ours remains fully valid.
177.	Every State, be it in Europe or in Asia, in Africa or in Latin America, if it is guided by the interests of peace and co-operation, can rest assured that it will find a reliable partner in the USSR. In this regard we have an open mind.
178.	For the Soviet Union-and we are confident this is true of others—the struggle for the deepening of detente is at the same time the struggle for the complete elimination of the risk of nuclear conflict. Widening the scope of detente means at the same time pushing back the risk of mankind's finding itself under the crushing steam-roller of a nuclear war. These are in fact two most important aspects of securing a genuinely solid and genuinely lasting peace on earth. It was precisely the atmosphere of detente that made it possible to undertake some major actions with a view to reducing the nuclear threat.
179.	In this connexion one might single out the 1973 Soviet-American Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. Mention could also be made of the Soviet-French agreement to prevent the accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons.11 The interests of peace require that similar agreements be concluded between all the other nuclear Powers as well.
180.	However, there is still a lot more to be done than has been done. We call upon the United Nations and its Member States to continue and intensify their efforts so as to reduce step by step the likelihood of the aforementioned threat in order subsequently to remove it from the lives of human beings.
181.	Of course the most radical and effective means of preventing nuclear war would be the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union has favoured this course ever since that very moment when the world saw the first ominous silhouettes of nuclear explosions. Now, as before, we repeat our readiness to sit down at any time, together with all the other nuclear Powers, at the negotiating table to examine the problem of nuclear disarmament in its entirety and jointly to work out concrete ways for its practical solution.
182.	But while there are no such negotiations—through no fault of our own-one cannot sit twiddling one's thumbs. Any steps would do in this respect provided they bring us closer, even by an inch or two, even gradually but steadily, to a complete removal of the threat of nuclear conflict.
183.	The United Nations has played a certain role in creating a favourable political climate as regards the problem of averting a nuclear war. It suffices to recall the resolution adopted five years ago on the non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. And yet we should like to see a more active United Nations in this matter, which is of the greatest concern to mankind.
184.	How might that look in practice?
185.	Using the full weight of its prestige the United Nations could, on behalf of all its Member States, solemnly call upon all States to act in such a way as to prevent the emergence of situations which could cause a dangerous strain in relations between them and to avoid armed conflicts.
186.	This applies particularly to nuclear-weapon States. What is required of them is continuous restraint in their mutual relations and a readiness to negotiate and settle their differences by peaceful means. In short, they should do all they can to prevent the emergence of conflicts and situations .which give rise to international tensions. After all, they are often but a step away from armed conflicts, and can one always guarantee that such a step will not be taken?
187.	This is closely connected with strict observance of the principle of renunciation of the use or threat of force in international relations involving both nuclear weapons and conventional armaments. This principle has already been enshrined in a series of recent bilateral and multilateral agreements, including the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The non-aligned movement actively advocates the establishment of this principle in relations between States.
188.	The United Nations would accomplish a great deal by calling on ail States to start negotiations to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations. The draft of such a treaty has been circulated among all Members of the United Nations. The replies received by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the questionnaire relating to their attitude to the idea of its conclusion point to a growing interest in our proposal. We are in favour of translating this idea into reality as early as possible.
189.	The joint initiative of the socialist countries advanced last November also had to do with the prevention of nuclear war. This is a proposal addressed to the countries that participated in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to conclude a treaty whereby each would engage not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against the others. This would be of tremendous significance not only for Europe but for the world at large. We express the hope that the States to which this initiative is addressed will adopt a serious attitude. No one should dismiss a proposal which is dictated by life itself. We shall continue to work persistently to translate into practical terms the idea of concluding such a treaty.
190.	I shall mention yet another area where in our view it is possible to arrive at an agreement that would reduce the threat of war. Nuclear countries could start negotiations with a view to working out arrangements concerning the withdrawal of ships carrying nuclear weapons from certain areas of the world's oceans.
191.	Other steps are also possible to curb the arms race. On a broader plane this would meet with the desire of non-nuclear States to establish zones of peace completely free from nuclear weapons. They could include both individual .countries or groups of States and vast geographical regions or even entire continents.
192.	In this connexion, we reaffirm our sympathetic attitude to the idea of turning the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. The main prerequisite for this is the dismantling of the foreign military bases that exist there and the prevention of the establishment of new ones. It is precisely from this position that the Soviet Union approaches this idea. And it is from the same angle that we are holding consultations with the United States on certain problems relating to the Indian Ocean.
193.	An extremely important question which attracts the closest attention throughout the world is the limitation of strategic arms. The need to contain the threat of nuclear war, to achieve progress in other areas of the struggle to end the arms race and for disarmament, the strengthening of international security and the further development of the process of detente call for the speediest solution of this pressing issue. And the United Nations has every right to expect from the countries participating in the talks on the limitation of strategic arms more intensive efforts for their speedy and effective completion and also to call on those States to come to a common agreement on the renunciation of the development of even more destructive systems of such weapons.
194.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, its stand is well known. The USSR has invariably sought to achieve an agreement on the limitation of strategic arms and has done and is doing everything in its power to that end. We are prepared to go even further and to proceed to negotiations on the reduction of existing stockpiled arsenals of strategic weapons.
195.	What is the state of affairs in this respect'?
196.	It is an open secret today that the USSR and the United States were able some time ago to agree to a considerable extent on a new Soviet-American agreement on the limitation of strategic offensive arms on the basis of the well-known Vladivostok agreements. Yet subsequently much of what was agreed upon has been called into question-not by us.
197.	What is the reason for this? The reason is clear. What is involved here above all is the decision of the United States to begin deploying a new type of strategic weapon, the so-called cruise missiles. Thus yet another channel has been opened for the strategic arms race and of course it would be naive to think that the other side would be a passive onlooker.
198.	So what will happen in the long run? Certainly not the strengthening of security-this is openly admitted even in the United States-and certainly not a reduction in military expenditures. The result will be greater rivalry, more billions which could be used far more sensibly thrown into the bottomless pit of the arms race, and consequently greater dangers for peace.
199.	Even now it is not easy to reach an agreement in the field of limiting strategic arms, but the situation would become a more complicated if we had to deal with weapons whose limitation hardly lends itself or does not lend itself at all to verification by the other side. And this could spell extreme danger in the military and political fields. In this really what the USSR and the United States should strive for?
200.	No, it certainly is not. It may be said with confidence that a positive conclusion of the Soviet-American talks on the limitation of strategic arms is extremely important for the peoples of our two countries, for the peoples of the entire world. As-a result of recent meetings in .Washington some progress has been achieved in bringing closer together the positions of the two sides, and this is all to the good. However, there still remain issues to be agreed upon. It is important now to ensure the prompt successful completion of the talks. I repeat that we are doing everything possible to that end in the firm belief that a mutually acceptable agreement at the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks is quite feasible, of course on the basis of strict observance of the principle of the equality and equal security of the sides. We cannot back-track from this unchallengeable position.
201.	While speaking of nuclear missiles, we should not forget that there may emerge new and terrifying means of the annihilation of people. Is it not true that the threat of war will increase many fold if ever more new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction are developed? Two years have elapsed since the Soviet Union proposed the conclusion of an international agreement which would ban their emergence. Negotiations are under way and this of course is a positive factor, but progress has been rather slow.
202.	In the meantime, ever more sophisticated means of killing people go into production from laboratories and experimental facilities. It is the duty of the United Nations to call upon all States to put a dependable road-block in the way of the emergence of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction.
203.	Today the problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons is most acute. It is a fact that many States have not yet become parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and some of those countries are near-nuclear States or have already attained the capability of manufacturing such weapons. Is it really necessary, for example, to speak of the grave consequences for the security of the peoples of Africa and for universal peace which might result from actions of the Republic of South Africa taken in order to get hold of nuclear weapons? We believe that urgent and effective efforts on the part of all Member States of the United Nations are required to prevent the development of such weapons in the Republic of South Africa. We must not wait for the potential threat inherent in the spread of nuclear weapons all over the world to become a reality.
204.	The Soviet Union is a convinced advocate of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Our country is already co-operating in this field with many States and we are prepared to expand that co-operation. However, we are categorically opposed to a state of affairs in which the peaceful uses of the atom would become a channel for the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and yet this is a real danger which is growing. What is required here is co-ordination of the efforts of many States and an elaborate international system of safeguards and controls. We intend to co-operate constructively in this area.
205.	The prohibition of all nuclear-weapon tests would be a major step towards lessening the threat of a nuclear war and deepening detente. As is well known, the Soviet Union has proposed that a treaty be concluded to this effect. Moreover, to meet the wishes of some countries we have expressed our willingness to take part in the search for a generally acceptable agreement on the question of verification. Today we are taking yet one more step forward: under an arrangement with the United States and the United Kingdom we have consented to suspend underground nuclear-weapon tests for a certain period of time even before the other nuclear Powers accede to the future treaty.
206.	It is also important that the countries which have not yet acceded to the treaties on the nuclear weapon test ban in three environments, on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and on the non-emplacement of nuclear weapons on the sea-bed and in outer space /see resolution 2660(XXV)j become parties to them and, pending their accession, strictly observe the provisions of those treaties.
207.	Such are the ideas regarding the key international problems-making detente stable and preventing nuclear war-which the Soviet Union deems it necessary to set forth at the current stage of the development of the international situation from the high rostrum of the United Nations.
208.	Guided by these considerations, the Government of the USSR proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the thirty-second session of the United Nations General Assembly, as an important and urgent question, an item entitled  Deepening and consolidation of international detente and prevention of the danger of nuclear war .
209.	At the same time, the Soviet Union is submitting for consideration by the General Assembly two draft documents: a draft declaration on the deepening and consolidation of international detente and a draft resolution on the prevention of the danger of nuclear war .
210.	We should like to express the hope that the Assembly 'at this session will give thorough consideration to those documents and address a corresponding appeal to all States of the world. In the current situation in the international arena this would no doubt facilitate greater and broader efforts in favour of the security of peoples.
211.	Increasingly broad opportunities to work for the benefit of peace are opening up before the United Nations in conditions of detente. The key to the success of this noble mission is the strict adherence of all the Members of tills body to the United Nations Charter. The Charter contains all that is essential for preserving and strengthening peace on earth.
212.	Our country will work tirelessly for the benefit of peace, hand in hand with fraternal socialist States, together with all our allies and friends, and with the realistically minded forces which put the ensuring of peace and the prevention of the risks of war above transitory considerations. Our country will constantly labour for peace.
213.	The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, recently said:
 The Soviet Union will always be an active participant in any negotiations or any international action aimed at developing peaceful co-operation and strengthening the security of the peoples.
 It is our belief-it is our firm belief—that realism in politics and the will for detente and progress will ultimately prevail and that mankind will be able to step into the twenty-first century in conditions of peace, secure as never before. And we shall do all in our power to make this a reality. 
214.	I trust that this appeal of the Soviet State will evoke a grateful response from those who cherish peace.

﻿1.	 Mr. President, I wish to offer you my congratulations on your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly. It gives my own Government particular satisfaction to work under the leadership of a representative of Yugoslavia, a nation with which the United States enjoys close and valued relations. We pledge our co-operation and we will depend heavily on your experience and skill in guiding these discussions which we are beginning.
2.	I should like also to express again the high esteem in which we hold Secretary-General Waldheim. We continue to benefit greatly from our close consultations with him and we place great trust in his leadership of this Organization.
3.	Thirty-two years ago, in the cold dawn of the atomic age, this Organization came into being. Its first and most urgent purpose has been to tenure peace for an exhausted and ravaged world.
4.	Present conditions in some respects appear quite hopeful, yet the assurance of peace continues to elude us. Before the end of this century a score of nations could possess nuclear weapons. If this should happen the world we leave our children will mock our own hopes for peace.
5.	The level of nuclear armaments could grow by tens of thousands and the same situation could well occur with advanced conventional weapons, The temptation to use those weapons, or fear that someone else might do it first, would be almost irresistible. The ever-growing trade in conventional arms subverts international commerce from a force for peace to a caterer for war.
6.	Violence, terrorism, assassination and undeclared wars all threaten to destroy the restraint and the moderation that must become the dominant characteristic of our age. Unless we establish a code of international behaviour in which the resort to violence becomes increasingly irrelevant to the pursuit of national interests we will crush the world's dreams for human development and the full flowering of human freedom.
7.	We have already become a global community, but only in the sense that we face common problems and share, for good or evil, a common future. In this community, the power to solve the world's problems, particularly economic and political power, no longer lies solely in the hands of a few nations. Power is now widely shared among many nations with different cultures, different histories and different aspirations. The question is whether we will allow our differences to defeat us or whether we will work together to realize our common hopes for peace.
8.	Today I want to address the major dimensions of peace and the role the United States intends to play in limiting and reducing all armaments, controlling nuclear technology, restricting the arms trade and settling disputes by peaceful means.
9.	When atomic weapons were used for the first time Winston Churchill described the power of the atom as  a revelation long mercifully withheld from man . Since then we have learned, in Durrenmatt’s chilling words, that  what has once been thought can never be unthought .
10.	If we are to have any assurance that our children will live out their lives in a world which satisfies our hope—or that they will have a chance to live at all-we must finally come to terms with this enormous nuclear force and turn it to exclusively beneficial ends. Peace will not be assured until the weapons of war are finally put away. While we work towards that goal nations will want sufficient arms to preserve their security. The United States purpose is to ensure peace. It is for that reason that our military posture and our alliances will remain as strong as necessary to deter attack.
11.	However, the security of the global community cannot for ever rest on a balance of terror. In the past, war has been accepted as the ultimate arbiter of disputes among nations, but in the nuclear era we can no longer think of war as merely a continuation of diplomacy by other means. Nuclear war cannot be  measured by the archaic standards of  victory  or  defeat . This stark reality imposes on the 

United States and the Soviet Union an awesome and special responsibility.
12.	The United States is engaged along with other nations in a broad range of negotiations. In Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT], we and the Soviets are within sight of a significant agreement in limiting the total numbers of weapons and in restricting certain categories of weapons of special concern to each of us. We can also start the crucial process of curbing the relentless march of technological development which makes nuclear weapons ever more difficult to control.
13.	We must look beyond the present, and work to prevent the critical threats and instabilities of the future. If the principles of self-restraint, reciprocity and mutual accommodation of interests are observed, then the United States and the Soviet Union not only will succeed in limiting weapons but also will create r foundation for better relations in other spheres of interest.
14.	The United States is willing to go as far as possible, consistent with our security interests, in limiting and reducing our nuclear weapons. On a reciprocal basis we are willing now to reduce them by 10 per cent, 20 percent or even 50 per cent, Then we will work for further reductions with a view to a world truly free of nuclear weapons.
15.	The United States also recognize the threat of continued testing of nuclear explosives.
16.	Negotiations for a comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions are now being conducted by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. As in other areas where vital nation J security interests are engaged, agreements must be verifiable and fair. They must be seen by all the parties as serving a longer-term interest that justifies the restraints of the moment. The longer-term interest in this instance is to close one more avenue of nuclear competition and thereby demonstrate to all the world that the major nuclear Powers take seriously our obligations to reduce the threat of nuclear catastrophe.
17.	My country believes that the time has come to end all explosions of nuclear devices, no matter what their claimed justification—peaceful or military-and we appreciate the efforts of other nations to reach this same goal.
18.	During the past nine months, I have expressed the special importance we attach to controlling nuclear proliferation; but I fear that many do not understand why the United States feels as it does. Why is it so important to avoid the chance that one or two or 10 other nations might acquire one or two or 10 nuclear weapons of their own? Let me try to explain, for I deeply believe that this is one of the greatest challenges that we face in the next quarter of a century.
19.	It is a truism that nuclear weapons are a powerful deterrent. They are a deterrent because they threaten. They could be used for terrorism or blackmail as well as for war. But they threaten not just the intended enemy; they threaten every nation—combatant and non-combatant alike. That is why all of us must be concerned.
20.	Let me be frank. The existence of nuclear weapons in the United States and the Soviet Union, and in the United Kingdom, France and China, is something we cannot undo except by the painstaking process of negotiation. But the existence of these weapons does not mean that other nations need to develop their own weapons, any more than it provides a reason for those of us who have them to share them with others. Rather it imposes two solemn obligations on the nations which have the capacity to export nuclear fuels and nuclear technologies-the obligation to meet legitimate energy needs and, in doing so, the obligation to ensure that nothing we export contributes, directly or indirectly, to the production of nuclear explosives. That is why the supplier nations arc seeking a common policy, and that is why the United States and the Soviet Unions even as we struggle to find common ground in the SALT talks, have already moved closer towards agreement and co-operation in our efforts to limit nuclear proliferation.
22. I believe that the London suppliers group must conclude its work as it is presently constituted, so that world security will be safeguarded from the pressures of commercial competition. We have learned that it is not enough to safeguard just some facilities or some materials. Full-scope, comprehensive safeguard ire necessary.
23 . Two weeks from now, in our own country, more than SO supplier and consuming nations will convene in Washington for the Conference on International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation which we proposed last spring. For the next several years experts will work together on every facet of the nuclear fuel cycle. The scientists and the policy-makers of these nations will face a tremendous challenge.  We know that, by the year 2000, nuclear power reactors could be producing enough plutonium to make tens of thousands of bombs every year. I believe, from my own personal knowledge of this issue, that there are ways to solve the problems we face. I believe that there are alternative fuel cycles that can be managed safely on global basis. I hope, therefore, that the Conference on the international Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation will have the support and encouragement of every nation.
24.	I have heard it said that efforts to control nuclear proliferation are facile  that thing is already out of the bottle. I do not believe this to be true. It should not be forgotten that for 25 years the nuclear club did not expand its membership., By genuine co-operation we can make certain that this terrible club expands no further.
25.	I have talked about the special problems of nuclear arms control' and nuclear proliferation at length. Let me turn to the problem of conventional arms control, which affects potentially or directly every nation represented in this great hall. This is not a matter for the future-even the near future-but one for the immediate present. World-wide military expenditures are. now in the neighborhood of $300 billion a year. Last year the nations of the world spent more than 60 times as much equipping each soldier as we spent educating each child. The industrialized nations spend the most money, but the rate of growth in military spending is faster in the developing world. While only a handful of states produce sophisticated weapons, the number of nations which seek to purchase these weapons is increasing rapidly.
26.	The conventional arms race both causes and feeds on the threat of larger and more deadly wars. It levies an enormous burden on an already troubled world economy.
27.	.For its part, the United States has now begun to reduce its arms exports. Our aim is to reduce both the quantity and the deadliness of the weapons we sell. We have already taken the first few steps, but we cannot go very far alone. Nations whose neighbours are purchasing large quantities of arms feel constrained to do the same. Supplier nations that practise restraint in arms sales sometimes find that they simply lose valuable commercial markets to other suppliers.
28.	We hope to work with other supplier nations to cut back on the flow of arms and to reduce the rate at which the most advanced and sophisticated weapon technologies spread around the world. We do not expect this task to be easy or to produce instant results. But we are committed to stop the spiral of the increasing sale of weapons.
29.	Equally important, we hope that purchaser nations, individually and through regional organizations, will limit their arms imports. We are ready to provide to some nations the necessary means for legitimate self-defence, but we are also eager to work with any nation or region in order to decrease the need for more numerous, more deadly and ever more expensive weapons.
30.	Fourteen years ago, one of my predecessors spoke in this hall under circumstances that in certain ways resembled these. It was a time, he said, of comparative calm and there was art atmosphere of rising hope about the prospect of controlling nuclear energy. The first specific step had been taken to limit the nuclear arms race-a test-ban treaty signed by nearly a hundred nations.
31.	But the succeeding years did not live up to the optimistic prospect John F. Kennedy placed before this Assembly because, as a community of nations, we failed to address the deepest sources of potential conflict among us.
32.	As we seek to establish the principles of detente among the major nuclear Powers, we believe that these principles must also apply in regional conflicts. The United States is committed to the peaceful settlement of differences. We are committed to the strengthening of the peace-making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American States.
33.	The United States supports the United Kingdom's efforts to bring about a peaceful, rapid transition to majority rule and independence in Zimbabwe. We joined .other members of the Security Council last week and also the Secretary-General in efforts to bring about independence and democratic rule in Namibia. We are pleased with the level of co-operation we have achieved with the leaders of the nations in the area, as well as with those peoples who are struggling for independence. We urge South Africa and other nations to support the proposed solution to the problems in Zimbabwe, and to co-operate still more closely in providing for a smooth and prompt transition in Namibia.
34.	But it is essential that all outside nations exercise restraint in their actions in Zimbabwe and Namibia, so that we can bring about that majority rule and avoid a widening war that could engulf the southern half of the African continent.
35.	Of all the regional conflicts in the world, none holds more menace than the Middle East. War there has already carried the world to the edge of nuclear confrontation. It has already disrupted the world economy and imposed severe hardships on the people in the developed and the developing nations alike. So true peace-peace embodied in binding treaties—is essential. It will be in the interest of the Israelis and the Arabs. It is in the interest of the American people. It is in the interest of the entire world.
36.	The United Nations Security Council has provided the basis for peace in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), but negotiations in good faith by all parties is needed to give substance to peace.
37.	Such negotiations in good faith must be inspired by a recognition that all nations in the area-Israel and the Arab countries-have a right to exist in peace, with the early establishment of economic and cultural exchanges and of normal diplomatic relations. Peace must include a process in which the bitter divisions o: generations, even centuries- hatreds and suspicions—can be overcome. Negotiations cannot be successful if any of the parties harbours the deceitful view that peace is simply an interlude in which to prepare for war.
38.	Negotiations in good faith will also require acceptance by all sides of the fundamental rights and interest of everyone involved.
39.	For Israel, this means borders that are recognized and secure. Security arrangements are crucial to a nation that has fought for its survival in each of the last four decades. The commitment of the United States to Israel's security is unquestionable.
40.	For the Arabs, the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people must be recognized. One of the things that binds the American people to Israel is our shared respect for human rights and the courage with which Israel has defended such rights. It is clear that a true and lasting peace in the Middle East must also respect the rights of all the peoples of the area. How these rights are to be defined and implemented is, of course; for the interested parties to decide in detailed negotiations, and not for us to dictate.
41.	We do not intend to impose from the outside a settlement on the nations of the Middle East.
42.	The United States has been meeting with the Foreign Ministers of Israel and the Arab nations involved in the search for peace. We are staying in close contact with the Soviet Union, with which we share responsibility for reconvening the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. As a result of these consultations, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed to call for the resumption of the Geneva Conference before the end of this year. While a number of procedural questions remain, if the parties continue to act in good faith, I believe that these questions can be answered.
310
43.	The major Powers have a special responsibility to act with restraint in areas of the world where they have competing interests because the association of these interests with local rivalries and conflicts can lead to serious confrontation. In the Indian Ocean area neither we nor the Soviet Union has a large military presence, nor is there a rapidly mounting competition between us. Restraint in the area may well begin with a mutual effort to stabilize our presence and to avoid an escalation in military competition. Then both sides can consider how our military activities in the Indian Ocean area might be even further-reduced.
44.	The peaceful settlement of differences is, of course, essential. The United States is willing to abide by that principle, as in the case of the recently signed Panama Canal treaties. Once ratified, these treaties can transform the United States-Panama relationship into one that permanently protects the interests and respects the sovereignty of both our countries.
45.	We have all survived and surmounted major challenges since the United Nations was founded, but we can accelerate progress even in a world of ever-increasing diversity. A commitment to strengthen international institutions is vital, but progress lies also in our own national policies. We can work together to form a community of peace if we accept the kind of obligations that I have suggested today.
46.	To summarize: first, there is an obligation to remove the threat of nuclear weaponry, to reverse the build-up of armaments and the trade in them, and to conclude bilateral and multilateral arms control agreements that can bring security to all of us.
47.	In order to reduce the reliance of nations on nuclear weaponry, 1 hereby solemnly declare, on behalf of the United States, that we will not use nuclear weapons except in self-defence; that is, in circumstances of an actual nuclear or conventional attack on the United States, our territories or armed forces, or such an attack on our allies.
48.	In addition, we hope that initiatives by the Western nations to secure mutual and balanced force reductions in Europe will be met by equal response from the Warsaw Pact countries.
49.	Secondly, an obligation to show restraint in areas of tension, to negotiate disputes and settle them peacefully, and to strengthen the peace-making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations.
50.	And, finally, an effort by all nations, East as well as West, North as well as South, to fulfil mankind's aspirations for human development and human freedom. It is to meet these basic demands that we build Governments and seek peace.
51.	We must share these obligations for our own mutual survival and our own mutual prosperity.
52.	We can see a world at peace. We can work for a world without want. We can build a global community dedicated to these purposes and to human dignity.
53.	The view that I have sketched for you today is that of only one leader in only one nation. However wealthy and powerful the United States may be, however capable of leadership, this power is increasingly only relative. The leadership increasingly is in need of being shared. No nation has a monopoly of vision, of creativity or of ideas. Bringing these together from many nations is our common responsibility and our common challenge. For only in these ways can the idea of a peaceful global community grow and prosper.
 

	

﻿94.	 Mr. President, I would like to begin my speech by congratulating you, Mr. Lazar Mojsov, on your election as President of the current session of the General Assembly. I would also like to take this opportunity to extend warm congratulations to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has made a major contribution to the anti-imperialist cause of the people of the world, and to the Republic of Djibouti, which has won independence after waging a protracted struggle, on their admission to membership in the United Nations, and sincerely to wish them new successes along their road of advance.
95.	The delegation of the People's Republic of China has come to attend this session of the General Assembly shortly after the successful Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China. Our country is now at an important juncture in history, when we are carrying forward the revolutionary cause pioneered by our predecessors and forging ahead into the future. Here I would like first of all to speak on developments in China.
96.	The year 1976 was no ordinary one for China. We lost our great leader and teacher Chairman Mao Tsedung and his long-tested, close comrades-in-arms, our respected and beloved Premier Chou En-lai and Chairman Chu Teh of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. Their passing away was a loss beyond measure to our Party and country, and our entire people was plunged in immense grief. In the same year, our country was hit by earthquakes and other severe natural calamities. Just when our people were faced with these grave difficulties, the counterrevolutionary  gang of four  of Wang Hungwen, Chang Chun-chiao, Chiang Ching and Yao Wen-yuan frenziedly stepped up their conspiratorial activities in a vain attempt to usurp supreme leadership in our Party and State. For a time dark clouds hung heavily over China. The Chinese people were worried about the fate of our Party and country, about whether we could continue to advance along the course charted by Chairman Mao. Our friends abroad also felt anxiety for us. A handful of enemies at home and abroad, however, gloated over our difficulties and hoped that our country would henceforth be thrown into a state of chaos and division and that Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies would no longer be followed. When Chairman Mao was still with us, he had been aware of die gang of four  problem. He waged repeated struggles against those persons and personally chose Chairman Hua Kuo-feng to be his successor so as to forestall their usurpation of Party and state power. After he passed away and at the critical moment when the  gang of four  attempted to seize the chance to take action, the Party Central Committee headed by Chairman Hua followed Chairman Mao's behest, acted on his directives and decisions and smashed this cabal at one blow, thus saving our country from a blood-bath and a major retrogression. The long-steeled Communist Party and people of China stood the rigorous test and won a great victory. The Chinese people rejoiced, and our foreign friends were happy for our
S3K6.
97.	At present, the situation in China is excellent We again have a wise leader in Chairman Hua Kuo-feng Our Party is more united, more unified and stronger than ever. People s democracy in China is being given full play. Our people s enthusiasm for socialism has never been so high the dictatorship of the proletariat is more firmly consolidated The mass movement to expose and criticize the
gang of four has speeded up the rehabilitation and expansion of industrial and agricultural production. A new leap forward is taking shape in the national economy
98.	The Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China was a great milestone in the history of our Party, and it was a congress of great, historic significance and far-reaching influence. The Congress stressed that the banner of Chairman Mao is the banner of victory of the Chinese people's revolution. The Chinese people are determined to rally closely around the Party Central Committee headed by Chairman Hua, forever hold aloft the great banner of Chairman Mao, adhere to his theory of continuing the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat, and steadfastly implement his revolutionary line in domestic and external work. We are determined to work hard for the realization of the strategic decision of grasping the key link of class struggle and bringing about great order across the land, turn China into a powerful modern socialist country by the end of the century and make a greater contribution to humanity. We are confident of surmounting all difficulties and obstacles on our road of advance. Our cause is just. Our line is correct. Our goal must be attained. Our goal can unquestionably be attained.
99.	We are happy to see that the international situation is also excellent. All the basic contradictions in the world are sharpening, and the factors for revolution continue to grow. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution-this has become the irresistible historical trend. The international united front against hegemonism, against the super-Power policies of aggression and war, is broadening.
100.	Over the past year, the revolutionary struggle of the international proletariat, the liberation struggles of the oppressed people and nations and the revolutionary mass movements in many countries have continued to surge forward. The Korean people's struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their country has won more popular support. The people of Democratic Kampuchea, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the Lao People's Democratic Republic, after winning great victories in their war against United States aggression and for national salvation, are actively consolidating their victorious gains and working hard for their countries' reconstruction. The people of the South-East Asian and South Asian countries, upholding independence and sovereignty, have repeatedly frustrated super-Power schemes of interference, control and expansion. The  Asian collective security system  so energetically hawked by a super-Power has been rejected or opposed by virtually all Asian countries. The Arab and Palestinian people's struggle against Israeli Zionism and super-Power hegemonism is deepening. The people in southern Africa have risen in a new upsurge of the struggle against colonialism and racism. The people of Panama, with the support of the people in other Latin American countries, have achieved important results in their struggle for the recovery of the Panama canal. The people of the countries of Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania have won a number of new victories in their struggle to win or safeguard national independence and defend state sovereignty. The numerous developing countries have carried on an unremitting struggle against the super-Powers in order to establish a new international economic order and defend their national economic rights and interests and their maritime rights. The third-world countries and people, who support and encourage one another and fight in unity and co-operation, have played an increasingly remarkable role as the main force in the struggle against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. Faced with the growing superpower menace, the countries of the second world in Western Europe and other regions have shown a stronger tendency towards unity against hegemonism. The mass movement of the Japanese people for the recovery of the four northern islands is sweeping across the land. The two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, which stand opposed to the people of the world, are beset with difficulties and crises at home and abroad. They find the going tougher and tougher. Social-imperialism, in particular, has suffered heavy blows one after another as its aggressive and expansionist features are further revealed. The international situation as a whole continues to develop in a direction favourable to the people of all countries and unfavourable to the super-Powers.
101.	The situation in the Middle East is a question of concern to the entire world. During the past year, the Arab and Palestinian' people have more closely combined their struggle against Zionism with the struggle against superpower hegemonism. Social-imperialism's despicable practice of betrayal and control, under the camouflage of support and aid has been opposed by a growing number of Arab countries and peoples.
102.	The Egyptian Government and people have resolutely resisted social-imperialism's political blackmail and economic pressure and safeguarded their state sovereignty and national dignity. The eighth meeting of the Kings and Presidents of the Arab League, held at Cairo on 25 and 26 October 1976, reached agreement on ending the civil war in Lebanon and strengthening Arab unity, thus frustrating another attempt of the super-Powers to sow discord and split the Arab ranks. While each super-Power tries to out-clamour the other for an over-all settlement of the Middle East question, both of them are in fact still attempting to maintain the unsettled state of  no war, no peace  in the Middle East. They are afraid of the emergence of a strong and united Arab world, of a stable and prosperous Middle East. Driven by the needs of their respective global strategies, they both seek to control the Middle East. Using different ways and tactics, both of them are supporting and abetting the Israeli Zionists and bringing all kinds of pressure to bear on the Arab countries and the Palestinian people. That is why the Israeli Zionists are so obdurate and so insolent. The situation in the Middle East will remain tense and complicated, pregnant with the danger of new military conflicts. But no one can shake the resolve of the Arab and Palestinian people to recover their sacred territories and regain their national rights. Supported by the people of the whole world, the just struggle of the Arab and Palestinian people will be crowned with final victory.
102. The developments in Africa are particularly encouraging. New victories have been won steadily by the great African people in their struggle against imperialism, colonialism, racism and hegemonism. The Government and people of the Sudan foiled the subversive plots engineered by social-imperialism and expelled its military experts, dealing a heavy blow to its ambition of aggression and expansion. The people of Zaire, who are united as one against the common enemy and are supported by fraternal African peoples, crushed the invasion of mercenary troops instigated by social-imperialism and safeguarded the independence and territorial integrity of their country. This victory, which greatly raised the morale of the African people and deflated the arrogance of the aggressors, sets an example of mutual support and joint resistance of African peoples against super-Power aggression. In southern Africa, the people of Zimbabwe and Namibia have persisted in armed struggle against racism and for national liberation under arduous and complex conditions. The people of Azania have fought resolutely against apartheid despite brutal repression, and the mass movement there keeps surging forward. People across the African continent voice strong solidarity for their brothers in southern Africa, whose heroic struggle also enjoys support from the people the world over. The reactionary Vorster and Smith regimes are besieged on all sides and completely isolated.
103.	In their protracted struggle, the African countries and people have come to appreciate more and more the importance of unity against the enemy. Although there exist differences of one kind or another between African countries, yet confronted with the enemy they have sought common ground on major issues, while putting aside their minor differences, and have directed the main thrust of their attack against imperialism, colonialism and racism, and super-Power hegemonism in particular. This has been and will continue to be an important guarantee for the victories of the African people. The first Afro-Arab summit conference and the fourteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity stressed mutual aid and co-operation and the need to oppose foreign interference. These Conferences were a significant testimony to the strength and unity of the 61 African and Arab countries with their more than 400 million people in lighting the common enemy. They were a positive contribution to the struggle of the African and Arab people and of the entire third world against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism.
104.	The struggle of the African people will yet be protracted and arduous. Colonialism and racism are still putting up a last-ditch struggle. What is more serious is that both super-Powers have intensified their interference in African affairs. Owing to the importance of Africa's strategic location and its rich natural resources, each of them regards the control of this continent as an important part of its global strategy of gaining sway in Europe and dominating the world. Super-Power rivalry in Africa is becoming fiercer. One super-Power seeks to preserve and expand its vested interests and influence in Africa. It obdurately supports the forces of colonialism and racism in southern Africa and tries to undermine the liberation struggles of the people there. The other super-Power, flaunting the banner of opposing imperialism and colonialism and supporting the national liberation movement to fool people, has stepped up its infiltration and expansion in Africa. It is exploiting some differences between African countries and between liberation organizations and utilizing some problems left over from the days of colonial rule to sow discord, incite trouble and fish in troubled waters. Against those African countries which dare to resist and oppose its hegemonic behaviour, this super-Power has resorted to brazen and unscrupulous subversion and interference and gone so far as to organize and send mercenary troops for outright military invasion, which poses a grave threat to the security and independence of these countries. Many African countries are worried lest what happened in Angola and Zaire yesterday may befall themselves tomorrow. Facts eloquently show that the rivalry between the super-Powers is the main source of unrest and turbulence in Africa, and that the super-Power which styles itself a  natural ally  of the African people has become their most sinister and ferocious enemy. The African countries and people are indeed faced with the trying task of rebuffing the tiger at the back door while repelling the wolf at the front gate . However, a great change has taken place in Africa. The great African people have stood up; they will never tolerate any foreign force of aggression lording it over them again. It is our conviction that the African people, persisting in unity and struggle against the common enemy, will frustrate all super-Power schemes and demolish the last bastions of colonialism and racism in Africa, thereby winning complete independence and liberation for the whole of Africa.
105.	A question the people of the world are interested in and think about today is whether the world situation is more tense or more relaxed, whether the danger of war is greater or less. A super-Power claims that the danger of war has been  considerably reduced . This is sheer deceptive talk. The stark reality is that the situation in the world has not relaxed, and that the factors for war are visibly growing. In their scramble for hegemony, both superpowers are intensifying their arms expansion and war preparations. Their rivalry extends to every corner of the world. They are carrying out aggression and expansion far and wide, each cutting the ground from under the other's feet and striving to weaken and gain advantage over the other. Because of its political, economic and strategic importance, Europe is strategically the focus of rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers and the arena where they are locked in acute military confrontation. The two antagonistic military blocs keep increasing their troops and armaments and redeploying their forces and frequently conducting large-scale military exercises. The war machine of each super-Power has expanded to unprecedented proportions. The super-Powers are the source of a new world war. This is an ironclad fact which no one can cover up.
106.	It must be pointed out in particular that social- imperialism presents the greater danger. Judging from the current over-all picture of the rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers, the United States is on the defensive, while the Soviet Union is on the offensive. Social- imperialism is exerting its utmost to carry out all-round arms expansion. It surpassed the United States in conventional armed forces long ago and is striving for over-all supremacy in nuclear weapons as well. It has expanded its navy on a massive scale, and its fleets are active on all seas. It wants to grab the whole of Europe, Asia and Africa. It not only maintains a posture of readiness to break through at the centre in Europe, but strives to create a situation in which it can outflank Europe from the north and the south. It is accelerating its plunder of strategic resources and control of strategic areas in Africa and the Middle East and seeks to seize the Persian Gulf in the east, block the strategic routes of the Atlantic Ocean in the west and thrust round the Cape of Good Hope in the south. The ambitions of the new tsars far exceed those of the old tsars.
107.	There are profound political and economic reasons why social-imperialism has become the most dangerous source of war. Being a latecomer among the imperialist Powers, it is more aggressive and adventurous. Owing to its relatively inadequate economic strength, it cannot but rely to a greater extent on military strength and threats of war in pursuing expansion. Its highly concentrated State- monopoly capitalist economy and its political regime of Fascist dictatorship make it easier to militarize its national economy and state apparatus. Besides, it flaunts the banner of  socialism , which can deceive people to a certain extent, and this also makes it more dangerous.
108.	Lenin said:  An essential feature of imperialism is the rivalry between several great Powers in the striving for hegemony. 
109.	Chairman Mao said:
 The United States wants to protect its interests in the world and the Soviet Union wants to expand; this can in no way be changed. In the era in which classes exist, war is an interval between one peace and another. War is a continuation of politics, that is to say, a continuation of peace. Peace itself is politics. 
The continuation of fierce contention between the two super-Powers is bound to lead to a world war some day. This is independent of man's will.
110.	More and more people have recognized that the factors for war are visibly growing and that social- imperialism is the most dangerous source of war. They advocate the strengthening of unity, of defence capabilities and of preparedness against war. But it must not be overlooked that there is still a strong trend towards appeasement in the West. Some people hope that .temporary ease can be gained by making compromises and concessions. They imagine that they can restrain social- imperialism by signing agreements and expanding economic exchanges with it and by giving it loans. Some even seek to divert this peril towards the east in order to preserve themselves at the expense of others. Historical experience tells us that all aggressors bully the soft and fear the tough and always reach out for a yard after taking an inch. Like rearing a tiger to one's ultimate detriment, a policy of appeasement will simply encourage aggression and hasten the outbreak of war. To follow in Neville Chamberlain's footsteps means courting self-destruction. We must not forget the tragic lesson of Munich.
111.	It is understandable that people are interested in the question of disarmament when the super-Powers are stepping up their rivalry and their arms expansion and war preparations and when the danger of a world war is growing. But the super-Powers are playing up disarmament as something miraculous. In particular, the super-Power that most vociferously preaches  peace  dishes up some sort of disarmament proposal every year and describes disarmament virtually as a panacea which will dispel the danger of war, ensure a lasting peace and rid the world of poverty. This is sheer deception. Since the super-Powers are bent on aggression and expansion and are scrambling for world hegemony, they are bound to expand their armaments and go to war. They will never lay down their knives, nor beat their swords into ploughshares. The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva has been going on for 16 years, yet neither super-Power has reduced its armaments by a single gun. The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks have been going on for 8 years, yet strategic arms have kept growing in number. The negotiations on mutual and balanced reduction of forces in Central Europe has entered its fourth year, yet the armaments deployed by the super-Powers in central Europe have continued to increase, and there are endless wrangling and differences even over the exact number of troops maintained by the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty in this region. It is very clear that the super-Powers are prating about disarmament and peace only to cover up their arms expansion and war preparations. They are just using people's desire for peace to lull the people with false hopes so that it may be easier for them to launch a war some day and realize their wild ambition of conquering the world.
112. Our attitude with regard to a world war is,  First, we are against it; second, we are not afraid of it . The people of the world want peace, and the Chinese people also want a peaceful international environment in which they may better build up their country. It is the super-Powers and not the Chinese people and the people of the world who want war. Some people say that in repeatedly stressing the danger of a world war, China is raising a false alarm and that it is warlike and wants to provoke a world war. This is vile slander. All we have done is to call a spade a spade so that the people will be on the alert and oppose the unleashing of a new world war by the super-Powers. And when we say we are not afraid of war, it means still less that we like it, but because to be afraid gets us nowhere. The super-Powers are bent on fighting a war. What is the use of being afraid? Actually, the super-Powers are not so terrifying. They look strong like real tigers. But, as Chairman Mao pointed out:
 ... imperialism and all reactionaries, looked at in essence, from a long-term point of view, from a strategic point of view, must be seen for what they are—paper tigers.   s
Social-imperialism has wild ambitions. But it finds little political support, and its economy is lop-sided. There is a sharpening contradiction between its ruling clique and the broad masses as well as mounting discontent among the oppressed minority nationalities at home. Its  community , which is a colonial set-up, is very unstable and shows a growing centrifugal tendency. Pursuing aggression and expansion everywhere, social-imperialism has set itself against the people of all countries, and this in itself dooms it to defeat. So long as the people of all countries unite and form themselves into a mighty army against hegemonism, heighten their vigilance, get prepared and persevere in struggle, they may be able to put off the war; and in case it does break out, they will find themselves in a favourable
position to abolish unjust war by means of a just war against aggression and win genuine peace. We are revolutionary optimists. We are convinced that the human race will abolish war and not be destroyed by it.
113. Developments on the international scene have proved that Chairman Mao's thesis differentiating the three worlds, which he set forth in 1974, conforms to the political realities of the contemporary world and is in the fundamental interests of the people the world over. Back in 1926 he stressed,
 Who are our enemies? Who are our friends? This is a question of the first importance for the revolution. 
Chairman Mao advanced his thesis differentiating the three worlds after he had observed and studied for years the development and changes of the basic contradictions and the division and realignment of the political forces in the world since the 1960s, as well as the political and economic position of each country internationally. The great significance of this thesis lies in the fact that it provides the people of the world with a powerful ideological instrument with which to identify the main revolutionary forces, the chief enemies, and the middle forces that can be won over and united within the international struggle of today. It thus enables the people of all countries to mobilize better all positive factors, unite with all the forces that can be united and isolate the main common enemy to the maximum and deal it the heaviest blows. At present, the steady reinforcement of the unity and co-operation of the third world, the growing tendency in the second world to unity against hegemonism and the broadening of the international united front against super-Power hegemonism, in which the third world is the main force-all this testifies to the validity of Chairman Mao's thesis. Obviously, the broader the international united front against hegemonism and the more isolated the super-Powers, the more that situation will favour the struggle of the oppressed people and nations for liberation and of the people of all countries, particularly the third-world countries, to win or safeguard national independence, defend State sovereignty and develop their national economy. On the other hand, every victory in the revolutionary struggle of the people of all countries helps to weaken the super-Powers, thwart their aggressive and expansionist ambitions, upset their war plans and deployments, and put off the outbreak of a new world war.
114. Chairman Mao's theory of the three worlds is diametrically opposed to the super-Powers' views on international relations. One super-Power spreads the view that there is only one world, a so-called  interdependent  world. But in fact the different parts of the world are mutually contradictory as well as interrelated. The  interdependence  this super-Power emphasizes has nothing in common with the international co-operation on an equal footing demanded by the many small and medium-sized countries. This super-Power wants to obliterate the actual contradiction between exploiter and exploited, between oppressor and oppressed and between aggressor and victim of aggression. It attempts thereby to preserve the outdated world order and wants all countries to be  dependent  on it. The other super-Power ignores the fact that the socialist camp ceased to exist and the imperialist camp disintegrated long ago, and asserts that the two camps still exist. Evidently, it wants even more to obliterate its acute contradiction with the people of the world, and with the people of the third-world countries, in particular. By continuing to use the signboard  the socialist camp , it attempts to disguise its true nature of social-imperialism, enforce the doctrines of  limited sovereignty  and  international dictatorship  in its  community  so as to preserve its neo-colonial set-up, and at the same time to hoodwink the people and to push its policies of aggression and expansion in the whole world. There is an essential similarity between the two views advanced by the two super-Powers. Both want to prevent us the people of the world from distinguishing between our enemies, our friends and ourselves, so as to strengthen their positions in the rivalry for world hegemony and to undermine the struggle of the world people against hegemonism.
115.	Chairman Mao's strategic concept differentiating the three worlds explodes the fallacies spread by the superpowers and gives a correct orientation to the contemporary international struggle. This brilliant concept will demonstrate greater vitality with the passage of time.
116.	The revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs which were formulated by the Chinese people's great leader and teacher Chairman Mao Tsetung and creatively implemented by our esteemed and beloved Premier Chou En-lai have been and will continue to be the guideline for China's external work. At the Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China, Chairman Hua Kuo-feng solemnly declared that we will hold high the great banner of Chairman Mao, adhere to proletarian internationalism and continue to carry out Chairman Mao's revolutionary line in foreign affairs. We will strengthen our unity with the other socialist countries and with the proletariat and the oppressed people and nations throughout the world, strengthen our unity with the other third-world countries and ally with all countries subjected to the aggression, interference or threats of super-Power hegemonism so as to form the broadest possible united front against the hegemonism of the two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States. We will establish and develop relations with other countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. We will strengthen our unity with all other genuine Marxist-Leninist parties and organizations and carry through to the end the struggle against modern revisionism with the Soviet revisionist renegade clique as its centre.
117.	We have always held that all countries, big and small, should be equal. We are resolutely against big nations bullying small ones and strong nations oppressing weak ones. The affairs of a country should be managed by its own people; the affairs of a region should be managed by the countries in that region; the affairs of the whole world should be managed jointly by all countries.
118.	China is a socialist country. China and the other third-world countries share a common experience and face common fighting tasks. China belongs to the third world. We stand firmly together with the other developing countries and people in Asia, Africa, Latin America and other regions. We firmly support these countries in their struggle to combat imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism and to win or safeguard national independence, defend State sovereignty and develop their national economy. The non-aligned movement, an important force, has developed steadily and become stronger, and together with the other third-world countries, it is playing a role of growing importance in international affairs. We firmly support the non-aligned countries in pursuing their non- aligned policy of independence, peace and neutrality and support them in opposing all foreign aggression and interference.
119.	We firmly support the Korean people in their just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their country. The United Nations Command must be dissolved. The armed forces of the United States and their equipment must be withdrawn immediately and totally from South Korea. The Chung Hee Park clique in South Korea must stop all its provocations which create tensions. The Korean question should be resolved by the Korean people themselves free from any outside interference. Any act to delay and obstruct the reunification of Korea in the hope of perpetuating the division of Korea and creating  two Koreas  runs counter to the aspirations of the entire Korean people and will not be tolerated. The resolution for promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session should be implemented in earnest.
120.	We firmly support the Arab and Palestinian people in their just struggle to recover their lost territories and regain their national rights. We are firmly opposed to the rivalry for hegemony between the two super-Powers in the Middle East and to Israel's policy of aggression. The provocative action of the present administration of Israel in establishing settlements on the West Bank of the Jordan River with a view to permanently occupying Arab territories must be strongly condemned. We reaffirm that we will have no dealings whatsoever with the Israeli Zionists.
121.	We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania in their just struggle against white racism and for national independence and liberation. We reaffirm that we will have no dealings whatsoever with the South African and Rhodesian racist regimes.
122.	We firmly support the Latin American countries in their struggle to strengthen unity and co-operation and combat super-Power hegemonism. We firmly support the Panamanian people in their valiant and protracted struggle for the recovery of the Panama Canal.
123.	We firmly support the third-world countries and people in their struggle against imperialist or social- imperialist exploitation and plunder, for the establishment of a new international economic order and in defence of their national economic rights and interests. The correct principles in the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order and the Programme of Action adopted at the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly must be carried out. We support the series of reasonable proposals advanced by the developing countries, such as the establishment of an integrated programme for commodities and its common fund, the demand for a moratorium on and the reduction or cancellation of debt burdens, etc.
124.	We support the second-world countries and people in their struggle to oppose super-Power control, intimidation and bullying and to defend their security and national independence. We support their efforts to improve relations with third-world countries on the basis of equality. We appreciate the efforts of the Western European countries for unity against hegemonism. We firmly support the Japanese people in their struggle for the recovery of the four northern islands.
125.	We are for genuine disarmament and against sham disarmament. We have consistently stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. As the first step, all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that they will not be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time or in any circumstances, and in particular will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries and nuclear-free zones, and that they must dismantle all their nuclear bases on the territories of other countries and withdraw from abroad all their nuclear armed forces and nuclear weapons. We support the demands of the countries and people in the regions of the Indian Ocean, the  Mediterranean and the Red Sea and in South-East Asia, South Asia and Latin America for the establishment of peace zones, security zones and nuclear-free zones. We are strongly opposed to the super-Powers' policies of nuclear blackmail and nuclear monopoly and to their disarmament fraud.
126.	The Shanghai communiqué of 27 February 1972 is the basis for the relations between China and the United States at present. According to the spirit of the communiqué, if relations between the two countries are to be normalized, the United States must sever its so-called diplomatic relations with the Chiang clique, withdraw all its armed forces and military installations from Taiwan and the Taiwan Strait area and abrogate its so-called  mutual defence treaty  with the Chiang clique. Taiwan is China's sacred territory. The Chinese people are determined to liberate Taiwan and accomplish the great undertaking of unifying our motherland. When and how to liberate Taiwan is entirely China's internal affair, which brooks no foreign interference whatsoever. The above is the unalterable stand of the Chinese Government.
127.	Our controversy with the Soviet leading clique on matters of principle will go on for a long time. We will persevere in our tit-for-tat struggle against its hegemonism. At the same time, we have always held that China and the Soviet Union should maintain normal State relations on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. It is none other than the Soviet leading clique that has worsened the State relations between China and the Soviet Union. If the Soviet leaders really want to improve the State relations between the two countries, they should prove this by deeds.
128.	We will always bear in mind Chairman Mao's teaching,  Dig tunnels deep, store grain everywhere, and never seek hegemony , and be ready at all times to wipe out any enemy that dares to invade China. Our policy is:  We will not attack unless we are attacked; if we are attacked, we will certainly counterattack. 
129.	We will always bear in mind Chairman Mao's teaching that in our external work we should  get rid of great-power chauvinism resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely  We will never seek hegemony or be superpower. We will always stand by the oppressed people and nations throughout the world. On behalf of the Chinese Government, Vice-Premier Teng Hsiao-ping solemnly declared from this rostrum in April 1974:
 If one day China should change its [political] colour and turn into a super-Power, if it too, should play the tyrant in the world, and everywhere subject others to its bullying, aggression and exploitation, then the people of the world should identify it as social imperialism, expose it, oppose it and work together with the Chinese people to overthrow it. 
Here, we the Chinese delegation, would like to reaffirm this stand.
130.	The world is advancing amidst turmoil; the people are awakening in the course of struggle. We are now in a new historical period-a period of struggle against superpower hegemonism. The struggle will be hard and the road tortuous, but the future is bright.  The people, and the people alone, are the motive force in the making of world history. The people of the world have been tempered in great storms of struggle. They have gained experience, strengthened their unity and grown stronger. It is not the one or two super-Powers but the people of the world that decide the destiny of mankind. Victory unquestionably belongs to the people of the world.
 ﻿91.	 Mr. President, I should like first on behalf of the Federal Government to congratulate you on your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and at the same time I should like to express our pleasure that you, an outstanding political personality and diplomat, representing one of the leading countries of the non-aligned movement, are presiding over this Assembly.
92.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany I welcome in our midst the two new Members, the Republic of Djibouti and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. This is an important step towards bringing our Organization nearer to the goal of universality.
93.	We have assembled here to try and bring the world-a world divided by conflicting ideologies, separated by a gulf between poor, and rich nations, torn by various conflicts- further along the long road to our objective: a world of peace, of economic and social progress, a world in which the dignity of man is respected. In fulfilling this task, central importance attaches to the United Nations, the only universal organization.
94.	Our age is one of far-reaching change. New thinking and new action are required. Only a generation ago the course of the world was determined by a few big Powers. Since then a hundred new States have emerged and have entered world politics with their own ideas and their own claims. For the first time in history the nations of the world are aware of their dependence on one another worldwide.
95.	There is a growing recognition of the fact that through co-operation we must transform our period of transition into an era of joint progress, in order to prevent it from becoming, through confrontation; an era of joint decline The world is looking for a just order of co-operation. In the past the system between States was often understood as a relationship of supremacy and subordination, politically, militarily and economically. This policy of supremacy no longer has a future. True, the idea of safeguarding one's own interests through power politics is by no means extinct. But it is confronted by the strongest force of this era: the will of nations for self-determination and independence.
96.	That will is strong particularly in the nations of Africa, Asia and Latin America. It has led to the dissolution of the huge colonial empires, and it will doom to failure any endeavour to establish new dependencies. This also applies to any attempt to establish supremacy by ideological means through ideological colonialism.
97.	Under the conditions prevailing in today's world, a country's interests can be safeguarded on a durable basis only through a policy of co-operation and fair reconciliation of interests. The world order of the future can only be an order based on equality.
98.	The Federal Republic of Germany has from the very outset built its foreign policy on respect for the self-determination and equal rights of all nations. We want self- determination for the indivisible German nation. We are helping to build the European Community, a Community in which all members have equal status and equal rights.
99.	We are also helping to shape the North Atlantic Alliance, an alliance which is a union of equal member States.
100.	With our policy of detente we are seeking co-operation with our Eastern neighbours on the basis of equal rights and mutual benefit.
101.	We seek equal and balanced partnership with the nations of Africa, Asia and Latin America, and we fully support them in their claim to independence and the right to develop as they see fit.
102.	In a nutshell, we want a world devoid of supremacy. We do not want to establish spheres of influence; we do not want to export ideologies. Rather we want a world in which all nations will determine their own way of life politically, economically and culturally and in which they will cooperate as partners, as equals.
103.	The movement of the non-aligned has become a major force in the quest for such a world of independence and equality of nations. Regional groupings as well, based on equality, can also make an essential contribution in Asia, in Africa and in Latin America.
104.	Our aim is a world of partnership. This means we must achieve the following goals. First, in order to safeguard peace, we must bring about constructive co-operation between Western and Eastern industrialized countries, beyond all ideological differences. Secondly, we must stop the arms race, which threatens peace and wastes resources. Thirdly, we must settle the smouldering conflicts in many regions of the world by peaceful means. Fourthly, we must constantly reduce the gap between rich and poor nations. We must overcome hunger and need and misery everywhere in the world. Fifthly, we must make respect for the rights and the dignity of man the foundation of justice and stability in the world.
105.	In a world of nuclear weapons, the policy of safeguarding peace determines the destiny of mankind. Safeguarding peace is the common goal of all democratic forces in my country. Safeguarding peace is more than avoiding war. Through the renunciation of force and the peaceful settlement of conflicts we must build a world of partnership. The member countries of' the European Community have embarked upon that path. Twice in this century they have been embroiled in war. Today, the Europe of the nine countries has become a force for peace in the world. In the North Atlantic Alliance the democracies of Europe and North America have united to secure peace. The European Community and the North Atlantic Alliance, in turn, provided the firm foundations from which it became possible to launch the process of East-West detente.
106.	The Federal Republic of Germany has made a substantial contribution to make detente in Europe possible. By means of the treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague, it has opened the way to normal relations with its Eastern neighbours. Within that context, relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union will also in future be of fundamental importance for detente in Europe. We want to develop these relations further.
107.	The treaty with the German Democratic Republic on the basis of relations has laid a foundation on which the two German States can live together. Part and parcel of that policy pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany is its declared aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination. We are certain that, here again, history will show that a nation's will for unity will assert itself. Nobody can elude the logic of history by using ideology as a subterfuge.
108.	The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has carried forward and developed among the 35 participating countries the process of detente that had been initiated bilaterally. The Final Act of Helsinki is a clear rejection of concepts of supremacy. Relations in the whole of Europe are to be based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all States.
109.	My Polish colleague, the previous speaker, was right in pointing out that the Federal Republic of Germany and the Polish People's Republic have made progress along the road to normalization. The meeting of Federal Chancellor Helmut Schmidt with the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers' Party, Mr. Gierek, in Helsinki has given an important impetus to this development.
110.	At the forthcoming follow-up Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to be held in Belgrade a sober balance-sheet will have to be drawn up as to whether and to what extent the general principles and the specific declarations of intent on economic and humanitarian matters in the Final Act have been put into practice, and what still has to be done.
111.	The Federal Government will do its best to ensure that the follow-up Conference will give fresh impetus to detente. The Belgrade Conference must become not the end of the road, but rather a point along the road in the long-term process of detente. There must be no relapse into cold war. That would render further progress impossible and jeopardize what has been achieved so far.
112.	Detente in Europe starts from the existing realities. Among those realities are the ties between West Berlin and the Federal Republic of Germany. We shall do everything to secure the viability of West Berlin. West Berlin must fully participate in the process of detente and its progress. In this context the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin of 3 September 1971 is of decisive importance. It must be strictly observed and fully implemented. Berlin is both a symbol and a yardstick of the will for detente and co-operation between East and West.
113.	We know that ideological differences will continue to exist between East and West. We are ready for a competition of ideas and achievements. However, detente means that neither side should attempt to impose its system on the other.
114.	Beyond their ideological rivalry, East and West have a common interest in safeguarding world peace, in developing mutually beneficial co-operation, and in resolving the problems of the developing countries. The latter need the contributions of the Western and the Eastern industrialized countries in order to master their problems. The developing countries need least of all a transfer of the East-West conflict to their regions.
115.	President Carter, in his recent speech in Charleston, defined the goal as follows:
 Our goal is not to encourage dissension or to re-divide the world into two opposing ideological camps, but to expand the realm of independent, economically self- reliant nations. 
116.	A world of partnership can thrive only in a climate of international trust. Such trust presupposes that nations and individuals can live free from fear. They have a right to be secure from the threat or use of force, be it force in the form of political or economic subjugation or be it force of weapons of whatever kind.
117.	In 1976 the Western defence alliance demanded that no country build up a higher level of armaments than was required for its defence.
118.	The Federal Republic of Germany has from its beginning taken the position that force cannot be a means to settle problems. That is why it actively advocates balanced and controlled disarmament on a world-wide scale. There must be an end to the arms race.
119.	We take seriously the task which we assumed when we became a member of the Geneva Conference of the Committee on Disarmament of the United Nations. From the beginning, we endorsed the initiative to convene a special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on disarmament. Even before the non-proliferation Treaty came into being we had renounced nuclear weapons. We consider the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons to be an essential prerequisite for safeguarding peace. As a party to the non-proliferation Treaty, we appeal once more to all States which are still standing aside to accede to the Treaty.
120.	The arms race is an enormous waste of resources in a world which ought to concentrate its efforts on the elimination of hunger and distress. Expenditure on armaments amounting to roughly $330 billion in 1976 is a challenge to the common sense and moral conviction of all States.
121.	The forthcoming special session of the General Assembly on disarmament must clearly show how we can live up to this challenge. It must not bog down in generalities.
122.	Besides world-wide endeavours for disarmament, regional efforts are required, especially where the size of the existing military potential makes such action particularly urgent. It is for that reason that the Federal Republic of Germany is actively participating in the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions. Our aims are clear and straightforward: first, we want parity of forces in Central Europe—neither side should have more forces than the other; and, secondly, we want such parity at a lower level. If those aims were to materialize, this would be a step towards greater stability. It could give fresh and strong impetus to the process of detente.
123.	In all efforts for disarmament and arms control- world wide and regional—we are conscious of the importance attaching to the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks between the United States and the Soviet Union. We welcome the efforts made in those negotiations. The progress achieved in the course of those negotiations will have a favourable effect on detente in general and on other endeavours for disarmament and arms control.
124.	Developing a world based on partnership presupposes that we settle conflicts by peaceful means. Three conflicts have been on the General Assembly's agenda for a good number of years—those in the Middle East, Cyprus and southern Africa.
125.	In the Middle East, a region neighbouring on and closely linked with the members of the European Community, we were relieved to witness the termination of the civil war in the greater part of Lebanon. But there is no peace yet. We appeal to all who are involved in the constant outbursts of fighting in southern Lebanon to lay down their arms at last. This is essential not only for Lebanon itself but also for stability and peace in the whole region.
126.	A settlement of the Middle East conflict is of vital importance also to Europe and the world as a whole. Together with its partners in the European Community the Federal Republic of Germany reaffirmed the principles for a solution in the statement on the Middle East made by the European Council in London on 29 June 1977. A just and lasting peace settlement must, starting from Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), give effect to the following principles: it must implement the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force; it must respect the right of all States in the region—and that means the right of Israel as well—to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries; it must end the territorial occupation which Israel has maintained since 1967; it must take into account the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. In the view of the Federal Republic of Germany, those legitimate rights of the Palestinian people include its rights to self-determination and to give effective expression to its national identity. A solution must therefore take into account the need for a homeland for the Palestinian people.
127.	The States members of the European Community have urgently appealed to all parties involved to begin peace negotiations as soon as possible. The Palestinians must participate in those negotiations. The road to negotiations must not be blocked by the unilateral creation of faits accomplis. That is why the Federal Government, in this forum too, comes out against the establishment of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories.
128.	The Federal Republic of Germany has friendly relations with all States in that region and uses them in its efforts to help to bring about a peaceful settlement. Advantage must be taken of the promising signs which emerged at the beginning of the year. This requires all concerned to show respect for the inalienable rights of the other side. I urgently appeal to all parties to the conflict to be aware of their responsibility for maintaining world peace and to make possible a peace settlement through realism and a spirit of compromise.
129.	Stagnation will also have to be overcome at last in the search for a solution of the Cyprus conflict. Any settlement must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The aim of giving the independent Republic of Cyprus a bicommunal and federative structure must and can be attained only through direct negotiations between the two ethnic groups. The Federal Republic of Germany supports the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to bring those negotiations to a successful conclusion under his auspices.
130.	In recent years African problems have moved more and more into the forefront of international politics. The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is unequivocal. We support the independence of the African States; we support racial equality; we are against colonialism, against any kind of racial discrimination and against any attempt to establish, by pursuing power politics from outside, new dependencies in Africa. Having in mind the continuing suppression of the black majorities in southern Africa, President Nyerere once said:
 Man is so constituted that he will not rest until he feels that he has freedom and the human dignity which goes with it. Otherwise, he will sooner or later fight for his own freedom within his society and for the freedom of his society from outside domination. 
131.	The Federal Republic of Germany therefore presses for a peaceful solution of the problems in southern Africa before it is too late—a peaceful change designed to lead all races into a common future of independence and of coexistence based on equality. It is for the community of States which, at the Conferences of Maputo and Lagos, so impressively demonstrated their determination, to eliminate the vestiges of colonialism and racial discrimination in southern Africa. The Federal Republic of Germany shares the objectives of all those who, in liberation movements and elsewhere, champion the cause of self- determination and human rights by peaceful means.
132.	As regards Rhodesia, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany supports all international efforts—in particular the Anglo-American initiative—to replace the illegal minority regime and to bring about a speedy and peaceful transfer of power to the black majority.
133.	As regards the problem of Namibia, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is actively involved in the initiative of the five Western members of the Security Council designed to prepare the way for Namibia's independence on the basis of Security Council resolution 385 (1976). The citizens of Namibia are to determine their future in general and free elections in which SWAPO is to participate. In this the United Nations has to play an important role. We expect the United Nations to appoint a special representative for the transition of Namibia to independence, and to contribute during the transitional period to the protection of Namibia's internal security and territorial integrity by providing peace-keeping forces. After achieving political independence, Namibia will be faced with the huge task of building up its own economy. In doing so it will need the help of its friends. The Federal Republic of Germany considers this to be an important task.
134.	With all the emphasis at its command the Federal Republic of Germany calls for the ending of racial discrimination in the Republic of South Africa. We call for an end to the policy of apartheid, and the policy of  bantustanization  and for the establishment of social, economic and political equality for all sections of the population. That includes the safeguarding of the rights of the minorities.
135.	The States members of the European Community have drawn up a code of conduct for European firms in South Africa  designed to give effect to the principle of equal treatment for black and white workers. That is an important step towards the establishment of the economic and social equality of races, wherever we have an opportunity to do so.
136.	The Federal Government has reacted with concern to indications that South Africa may plan a nuclear weapons test. We take it that the Government of South Africa will keep to the declarations it has made in the meantime. However, we appeal to it once more to accede to the non-proliferation Treaty in order to dispel any doubt concerning its position.
137.	The time for peaceful reform through a constructive dialogue between the races is running out. Further delay, further hesitation, would be bound to result in a racial war which could bring chaos to the whole of southern Africa. We express our sympathy and sorrow for all those who have already become the victims of racial conflict. South Africa can find peace only if it implements human rights for all races.
138.	Besides the Middle East, Cyprus, and southern Africa, there are further sources of serious conflict. At present we all think of the fighting and bloodshed in the Horn of Africa. We must make every effort to settle all these other conflicts peacefully, too.
139.	A world of peace and partnership is inconceivable if we do not overcome the gap which divides today's world more deeply than any ideological differences—the gap between rich and poor. The challenge for us is to create a new international economic order which will make it possible for all men in all countries to lead a life free from hunger or need. There is also the question of implementing human rights in the social and economic fields.
140.	We cannot achieve this new order by discarding existing and proven structures. Such structures must, rather, be steadily developed and in a flexible way adjusted to ever new requirements and conditions. We must preserve the effectiveness of the steering mechanism of the market economy and at the same time ensure for the developing countries both equal participation in world economy and a more than proportionate rate of growth.
141.	The search for a new order must be based on the recognition that neither side-neither developing nor industrialized countries—can reach their economic goal alone. The developing countries can step to, their own progress only in a climate of world-wide economic growth. Commodity prices of greater stability, rising exports of finished goods from the developing countries, a larger transfer of resources—all this presupposes that the industrialized countries will return to stable growth. In turn, the industrialized countries also need the impetus of accelerated development to regain stable growth.
142.	The international economic order must therefore serve the twofold aim of providing more than proportionate growth rates in the developing countries and stable growth in the industrialized countries. It must be an order based on equality and mutual commitment, in which each group of countries assumes responsibility for the realization of both aims in the awareness that only thus will it be able to attain its own goal.
143.	What, specifically, needs to be done? First, all countries must stimulate the growth of the world economy by common effort, without refuelling inflation. There must be no backslide into recession. Following an agreed strategy, the Western industrialized countries should exert every effort to promote continuous non-inflationary growth.
144.	Let me point out for the Federal Republic of Germany that the considerable increase in our imports during the past few years has given a strong impetus to the international economy. At the same time, we have also exported stability in terms of our relatively high, stable prices. We will make further determined efforts to stimulate economic activity in our own country.
145.	Secondly, we must keep the markets of the industrialized countries open and provide them with further finished goods from the developing countries.
146.	The exchange of industrial goods is the most dynamic sector of world trade. It has always offered the best chance for an increase in the export earnings of the developing countries, and will continue to do so.
147.	Only a steady increase in exports of finished goods from the developing countries will make it possible for us to overcome the traditional pattern of exchange in which commodities are supplied mainly by the developing countries. In other words, that is the only way in which we can create a structure of equal rights and opportunities.
148.	A steady change in the structure of world trade is also in the interests of the industrialized countries. Free trade and world-wide structural reform, instead of economic controls and protectionism, are indispensable elements of progress.
149.	The Federal Government cautions against the growing trend towards protectionism, which it considers to be a serious danger for international economic co-operation, in particular the co-operation between industrialized and developing countries.
150.	In all organizations to which it belongs, the Federal Republic of Germany therefore speaks out explicitly in favour of free world trade and of unimpeded and growing access to markets. We continue to be staunch supporters of free world trader even though this implies difficult processes of adjustment for some sectors of our own economy.
151.	Even during the recession of 1975, we increased our imports of industrial goods from developing countries by 24 per cent and in 1976 by as much as 32 per cent. That trend has continued during the current year.
152.	The Federal Republic of Germany ranks first in the world in per capita imports of semi-manufacturers and finished goods from the developing countries. It has also accumulated a foreign trade deficit in its dealings with the developing countries which do not export oil and has thus substantially stimulated their economic growth during the past few years.
153.	Thirdly, we must attain more stable commodity prices. The heavy price fluctuations typical of many commodities are harmful to both sides, raw material exporters as well as raw material consumers. In many developing countries such fluctuations prevent a systematic implementation of development plans, while at the same time they cause an increase in cyclical fluctuations in the industrialized countries, thereby leading to slower growth.
154.	In concert with its partners in the European Community, and in close consultation with the other Western industrialized countries, the Federal Government actively participates in UNCTAD negotiations on the Integrated Programme for Commodities. It advocates the conclusion of commodity agreements where suitable. It also supports the establishment of a common fund as a key instrument in attaining the agreed objectives of the Integrated Programme.
155.	Apart from price stabilization, the Federal Government also advocates measures for the stabilization of export earnings. Such measures are of particular importance for the poorest among the developing countries.
156.	We must promote the transfer of technology to the developing countries. Technology must be accessible to all countries without discrimination. This applies equally to the peaceful use of atomic energy.
157.	The Federal Republic of Germany is trying to co-operate, on the basis of partnership, in strengthening the capacity of the developing countries to absorb technology. It promotes private investment in developing countries as an important vehicle for the transfer of technology. We must step up the transfer of resources to the developing countries.
158.	In 1976 the net capital influx from official and private sources into the non-oil-exporting developing countries reached a total of almost $71 billion, which is double the amount of 1973. This large increase has helped considerably to ease the impact of world recession on the developing countries.
159.	During the past few years the Western industrialized countries have reached the target of a total capital transfer of 1 per cent of their national product; the Federal Republic of Germany has exceeded this target with a capital transfer of 1.18 per cent in 1975 and of 1.19 per cent in 1976.
160.	It must now be our first priority to increase official assistance. The developing countries and especially the poorest among them are increasingly in need of non-repayable grants and credits on concessional terms. Despite budgetary constraints, the Federal Government has therefore raised, by more than 20 per cent its appropriation for development assistance for the 1978 budget. This rate of growth is twice that of the total budget.
161.	The Federal Government takes an active part also in the endeavours to solve the problem of indebtedness of the developing countries. This problem affects some of them in particular. We therefore intend to provide, as before, assistance on a case-by-case basis.
162.	Overcoming hunger and need in the developing countries is the great task of our times, and it can be fulfilled only if all countries which are in a position to do so contribute their share to this. At the Downing Street Summit Conference, held in London on 7 and 8 May, the seven major industrialized countries of the West therefore called upon the industrialized socialist countries to contribute to the necessary increase in the transfer of resources to the developing countries. In 1976 development assistance from member States of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance amounted to less than 25 per cent of the assistance provided by the Federal Republic alone.
163.	Access to markets of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance presents a similar picture. Only 4 per cent of the exports from developing countries go to industrialized socialist countries as against close to 75 per cent to member States of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
164.	The industrialized socialist countries have long been integrated in world economy. They should therefore accept responsibility for a stable and developing world economy. This is also in their own interest.
165.	A substantial contribution to the development process can also be made by foreign private investment in providing capital, technology, modern management methods and channels to world markets. This potential can only be used, however, if industrialized and developing countries jointly commit themselves to creating a climate of mutual confidence which will encourage a smooth and continuous flow of foreign investment.
166.	This does not only imply legal security for investors. It also means that the companies established with foreign participation are ready to act in harmony with development plans and to refrain from trying to exert any political influence. In this respect, too, the Federal Republic, of Germany is committed to the principle of the sovereignty and independence of all countries.
167.	In order to feed a growing world population and to supply an expanding world economy with raw materials, it is imperative that the production of food-stuffs and raw materials should grow at a sufficient and steady pace. The bulk of grain and raw material production is currently concentrated in industrialized countries. On a long-term basis, however, we shall not be able to meet the growing demand unless the developing countries themselves can steadily increase their own production. This is another significant field of co-operation.
168.	One of the greatest challenges for us is the energy issue. In the remaining years of this century, the world must manage to switch from oil to new forms of energy. During the transitional period the oil-producing countries bear a special responsibility. The industrialized countries, for their part, must be prepared to exercise the necessary degree of self-discipline without which the task of restricting fuel consumption and of developing alternative sources of energy can never be accomplished.
169.	Of key importance for the future of the world economy is the successful conclusion of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The exploitation of the mineral resources of the high seas and the sea-bed has become the critical issue of the negotiations. We must establish an international sea-bed regime and we must do so quickly in view of the long lead-time for investments in deep sea mining. This regime must permit rational exploitation of raw materials and meet the interests of all countries-raw material consumers and raw material producers alike. It must not be monopolistic in character and must, give all interested States unqualified access to the mineral resources of the high seas.
170.	Development policy must focus on man. Its first priority must therefore be to satisfy basic needs of all men. Not only must growth be accelerated; it must also be appropriately structured. It must focus on such areas where the poor live and seek a living.
171.	The assumption that somehow growth also reaches the poor has proved false. Poverty must be fought directly, and we must provide the poor with the ability and the means of working productively.
172.	I have singled out a few areas in which we must make real and rapid progress in our search for a new international economic order based on joint responsibility. The Federal Government will strive with all its vigour to achieve such progress.
173.	We hope that our efforts will gain additional momentum from the recently established Independent Commission on International Development Issues. We are pleased that a personality of such international renown and broad political experience as Willy Brandt has agreed to head the Commission.
174.	A world of partnership must also be a world of respect for human rights and their implementation. In our endeavours to make the world a more human place we must put a halt with all our vigour to the ever multiplying forms of violence. The taking of hostages has become an urgent problem for all mankind.
175.	During the last session of the General Assembly the Federal Government therefore proposed an international convention against the taking of hostages.'1 Early deliberations in the Committee which has been requested to prepare the text of a draft convention have confirmed the will for objective co-operation in accomplishing this task.
176.	We must continue the work we have begun with all our vigour. I request the General Assembly to extend the Committee's mandate in accordance with its recommendations. We must also make progress in the solution of the complex problem of terrorism. Terrorism in its national and international forms has become a grave danger for all who want to live in peace and freedom. We must jointly fight this danger.
177.	During the past year the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights have entered into force. These Covenants are inseparably linked. Freedom from want is no less significant a human right than freedom from fear.
178.	It is now a question of applying human rights world-wide. Here again the United Nations must continue to act as a champion. World-wide independent bodies are required. 1 reaffirm what I said last year concerning the tasks of an international court for human rights.
179.	Let us always remember that the concept of human rights is the irresistible force of the modern world to which the future belongs. The implementation of human rights alone will be the yardstick by which progress in the world is measured.
 ﻿154.	 Mr. President, there are many reasons why my delegation welcomes your accession to the office of President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly. Allow me first of all to greet you as a former colleague, since you were the Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia when I was head of France's Permanent Mission in New York. Your strength of character and sound political instincts, your acknowledged competence and the esteem in which you are held make me certain that you will conduct our work here with unchallenged authority.
155.	Yugoslavia has created a special place for itself on the international scene: as a founder and leading member of the group of non-aligned countries, an active member of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, as well as of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation, and the initiator of the special session on disarmament to be held next year. Your country clearly perceives the problems of the day, whether in the context of East-West relations or the North-South dialogue. France is especially pleased with the fresh opportunity our two Heads of State will soon have to strengthen still further the ties of friendship and co-operation which link our countries.
156.	I am equally pleased with the brilliant re-election of our Secretary-General, whose outstanding qualifications have been rightly endorsed by that renewed expression of our confidence.
157.	The current world situation is neither good nor reassuring. With the exception of the positive outcome of the lengthy Panama Canal negotiations, none of the major disputes under consideration in our Organization has made genuine progress towards a settlement. Human rights continue to be violated in several countries, including countries which were once proud of their liberal and humanistic traditions. It is high time that the texts formally adopted in this area guide the conduct of Governments.
158.	Moreover, the difficulties that our economies have been experiencing in recent years may well lead too many nations to look inwardly in the vain hope of evading the rule that governs today's world-the rule of interdependence.
159.	In the face of these persisting tensions, threats and uncertainties, it is more necessary than ever to turn away from fatalistic philosophies. For France, detente arid dialogue cannot be mere slogans.
160.	France initiated the policy of detente in Europe convinced of the merits of that policy, and we will not give it up. We will pursue it without yielding an inch on the most basic points, which are our country's security and independence, and respect for human rights. We will follow it without falling prey to doubts, even understandable ones, which could undermine the foundations of detente.
161.	These are the principles of the joint declaration signed on 22 June of this year at Rambouillet by the President of the French Republic, Mr. Valery Giscard d'Estaing, and the President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, during his state visit to France. These are also the principles that will determine our attitude at the forthcoming Belgrade conference.
162.	With regard to the North-South dialogue which France initiated in the form of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, we believe that the results of this unprecedented meeting are far from negative. Differences did of course appear in the reactions it elicited. This is only natural at the preliminary stages of so vast an undertaking. The final report  drawn up by the experts, however, shows that the Conference made real progress over previous talks in several areas; this was true in the area of raw materials, for one, where the principle of establishing a common fund represents an important step; and also on the subject of the transfer of resources, thanks to new financial commitments by the industrialized nations; and in the area of African development, especially in the context of the 10-year programme to develop transport and telecommunications which will have the backing of the developed countries. Useful talks were held on other important issues such as indebtedness, export earnings, investment and energy.
163.	It is now up to us to continue our efforts according to procedures on which we agree. The new world economic order cannot simply be decreed; we will have to build it step by step. By the same token, the dialogue between North and South, which is so important for the world, must be a continuing process that takes into account the interests of everyone, and therefore implies a commitment by one and all.
164.	At this point I will reiterate that it is up to the socialist countries to make their contribution to this ambitious undertaking. The difference between our philosophies and systems should not veil the interdependence which has become the law of our planet.
165.	We are all experiencing this interdependence with growing awareness in the area of our planet's natural resources, especially energy resources. Those who have these resources have the right to a fair price for them, without, however, exposing the world economy to disorders of which they, too, would be victims. It is the imperative duty of those who live in affluence to eliminate waste. The future of our entire community requires us to manage our energy resources in common, whether they are oil, other fossil fuels, new energy sources—which have yet to be fully explored-or nuclear energy, which we must put to the service of a peaceful future.
166.	Growing energy needs and a desire to diversify energy-supply sources have forced many countries to turn to nuclear means. The price we pay for this must not be proliferation of nuclear weapons, which would put humanity in mortal danger, it is in this light that we should view the international co-operation which has already been started by my country, for one, and which is aimed at reconciling the requirements of non-proliferation with the need to use more nuclear energy.
167.	The negotiations under way on the law of the sea will be a decisive test of whether we are capable of using our scientific know-how and adapting our laws to a higher level of organization. We are not simply dealing with exploitation, however more rational and equitable it may be; we are also concerned with preserving all the sources of life at the international as well as national levels.
168.	Such major undertakings cannot be completed while States and peoples live in the shadow of threats and domination, injustice and disunity.
169.	That is why France, drawing on its experience, is continuing its co-operation with the Soviet Union and the countries of the East at the European level; that is also why France is still determined, despite the crisis, to achieve with its partners in the Community the ambitious goals of European construction. The nine members of the Community are asserting their collective identity more and more in international bodies by expressing common views on many subjects, as they did during the Conference on
International Economic Co-operation. By the same token, the day before yesterday  the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs, current President of the Community, explained the position of the nine countries on many items on the agenda. France is convinced that political co-operation among the members of the Community makes a significant contribution to our work.
170.	But the determination Europe has shown in overcoming its old quarrels, making detente prevail and embarking on the path of co-operation is far from being expressed in other areas of the world.
171.	The situation in the Middle East unfortunately illustrates this point. All of us, and France above all, welcomed the return to peace in Lebanon with the deepest satisfaction. President Sarkis is to be commended for his steadfast efforts to restore authority and see that the unity, integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon are restored. France, which had been set on rendering assistance to a people dear to it, believes that now more than ever the existence of an independent, united, free and prosperous Lebanon is indispensable for the equilibrium of the region. The very disturbing situation in the south of the country shows none the less that the security and stability of Lebanon depend heavily on the course of the conflict in the Middle East.
172.	We are unfortunately still far from a settlement. The desire for peace that I had noted during my visits to the region several months ago have so far not been enough to commit the parties to the path of negotiation. The entrenchment of positions may compromise the efforts under way, and thus gravely affect the stability of the States and the very future of the peoples of the Middle East. And yet the principles which must shape any settlement are not only known but are now accepted by the international community.
173.	The first principle is the evacuation by Israel of the territories occupied in 1967. Peace cannot, in fact, be founded on conquest, on the occupation of territories, or on a fait accompli.
174.	The recognition of the rights of the Palestinians to a homeland is the second fundamental principle. To refuse to grant a people which is displaced or living under an occupation regime the right to a homeland where it can fully express its national identity would be to ignore the fact that nothing lasting can be founded on irredentism. which would doom to failure all attempts at a settlement.
175.	The presence of the Palestine Liberation Organization in our meeting halls, together with our conviction that it is essential for the Palestinians to be associated with the negotiations which will decide their fate, underscores the degree to which this crucial aspect of the conflict is now recognized. It is time that the Palestinian people were granted the opportunity to live in a system and under conditions of their own choosing; it is time this opportunity was included in the terms for a global solution.
176.	I also want to repeat that recognition of the existence of all the States in the region, including Israel, within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries, is another mandatory requirement of any settlement. After so many cruel wars, a genuine peace, implying normal relations, has to be found for this region so that the resources and talents of all sides can finally be employed to promote development and prosperity.
177.	It is important, however, that no one should jeopardize the desired outcome by making gestures that lead nowhere and belie the will to negotiate which has been otherwise clearly displayed. Several measures recently taken by Israel in the occupied territories have given us cause for grave concern. Actions such as these do more than violate international law and the resolutions of the United Nations: they create a climate unconducive to negotiations to a time when the other States have expressed their readiness to seek peace agreements.
178.	At the eastern end of the Mediterranean another de facto situation persists. Efforts to find a settlement to the problem of Cyprus continue to meet with suspicion and resentment. The death of President Makarios - and I should like to pay a tribute here to the memory of that patriot and statesman-should not delay our quest for the goal to which we are still committed: namely, to bring about a reconciliation between the Greek and Turkish communities, and to preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. We hope that the Secretary-General will continue the mission entrusted to him by the Security Council two years ago, and that the bases for a comprehensive settlement will be actively explored with his assistance and that of his Special Representative without pre-conditions and without regard for the de facto situation.
179.	It is hard to imagine what other reasonable approach might be substituted for the current efforts: the present method of giving the communities themselves responsibility for drawing up the terms of a settlement corresponds to the particular nature of a dispute that could only be aggravated still further if it were extended. While the solution sought by the negotiators will have to take into account the strong individuality of the parties concerned, it will also have to contain a satisfactory answer to the important problem of the refugees and provide for a reasonable territorial settlement through significant adjustments in the present line of separation.
180.	Africa, to which France is linked by so many ties, has been the special focus of my Government's concerns this year. Our position rests on the following principles. First, it is for the African countries themselves to resolve their differences and accordingly reject any interference that would make Africa an arena for external rivalry. Secondly, the solidarity that exists between France and Africa is practiced with full respect for the sovereignty of all States. Thirdly, the security and stability of the continent, the best guarantee of its development, will not be assured so long as the questions of southern Africa remain unsolved, be it Namibia, Rhodesia or the odious system of apartheid.
181.	In the case of Namibia, first of all, my country, which is taking an active part in the efforts currently being pursued by the five Powers that are members of the Security Council, believes that free elections should be held under United Nations auspices, with the participation of all the political organizations in the Territory, including the South West Africa People's Organization.
182.	As far as Rhodesia is concerned, by stubbornly refusing to allow the black population of Zimbabwe to exercise its political rights, the rebel Government in Salisbury is bringing a growing threat to bear on the entire region and is undermining the security of Mozambique and Zambia. France supports the action taken by the United Kingdom and the United States in conjunction with the countries and liberation movements concerned.
183.	Since the South African regime is based on the unacceptable system of apartheid, the risk of worsening tension which may disintegrate into racial war continues to grow. These grave perils were reason enough for the Conferences in Maputo  and Lagos,  at which apartheid was unanimously condemned.
184.	If decisive progress is not achieved in solving these questions and if the necessary changes are not made, South Africa may well become increasingly isolated in our community, with the consequences that would inevitably result from this. In addition to the voluntary ban on arms sales which our countries, including France, have successively imposed, a code of conduct for companies with subsidiaries, branches or representation in South Africa was recently adopted by the nine countries of the European Community.
185.	South Africa was allegedly planning a nuclear explosion. The South African Prime Minister made a statement in which he said that his Government did not plan to acquire nuclear weapons. I have taken note of this. As I said last month, if that were not the case, it could jeopardize all the current peace efforts, and we would be obliged to react.
186.	At this point I should like once again to dispose of a ridiculous allegation to the effect that a very common type of electronuclear plant, which has not even been built yet, has supposedly served or could have served in the manufacture of atomic weapons by the Pretoria regime. France and several other industrialized countries are building and exporting dozens of reactors for the peaceful production of nuclear energy which is needed throughout the world. As far as South Africa is concerned, the strictest controls are stipulated and precautions have been increased. The problems of proliferation with which we must concern ourselves are too serious to be left to malice and stupidity.
187.	In addition to these persistent sources of tension, armed conflict has flared up among African countries themselves elsewhere on the continent. It is at the conference table, in the framework of its own institutions and through the efforts of its own mediators that Africa traditionally settles its problems. We hope that this will continue to be the case. Disunity in Africa on the procedures to be followed and appeals for massive outside help, whether for troops or weapons, would soon make the Africans pawns in	struggles. The motto  Africa for the Africans  implies respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the right of these States to security in the framework of their own political options and the rejection of all outside interference.
188.	This principle has guided and still guides France in its relations with all the African countries. The process of decolonization, which we began on that continent nearly 20 years ago, was recently completed when Djibouti acceded to independence following a referendum and elections that the Organization for African Unity, the United Nations and the League of Arab States witnessed as being democratic. My country, which has already established ties of co-operation with the new State, hopes that it will avoid becoming embroiled in the ambitions and confrontations swirling dangerously around it. It is with very great pleasure that I welcome here the presence of the delegation from Djibouti, which is making its debut in the international community.
189.	France feels and shows solidarity for countries it has been closely associated with through history, and we are fully prepared to demonstrate the same solidarity in the Comoros- Misunderstandings are still evident in the interpretation of certain decisions regarding the island of Mayotte. The inhabitants of that island have opted by vote in favour of a future different from that of their neighbors. The status of the island does, however, leave them the possibility of stating their position about their future on another occasion. France will not stand in the way of any course of action, provided it is followed with mutual regard for the rights of the parties.
190.	France respects the sovereignty of each African State and has joined in the development effort of the countries of the continent, but we strongly decry the tragic fate of two French nationals killed on 1 May in Zouerate and six others kidnapped while carrying out peaceful work to benefit the economic progress of Mauritania. The taking of hostages directly contravenes international conventions; and it is to be condemned even more because so far, despite the efforts of our Secretary-General and the International Red Cross, it has been impossible for us to obtain the precise information needed to reassure fully their families. We cannot allow men and women dedicated to peaceful work to be brought into conflicts unrelated to them. I formally request the international organizations and Governments that are in contact with those who kidnapped our compatriots to assist us in obtaining their release.
191.	In endeavoring to explain France's position on the major sources of tension today, I have been obliged to omit references to situations in other areas of the world which have been less in need of our Assembly's attention. I should like, nevertheless, to repeat here my delegation's best wishes to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has finally joined our Organization. The sponsorship France gave this country shows how important we believed it was to obtain its contribution to our work.
192.	 In spite of our commitment to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, we cannot remain silent in the face of the news reaching us from Kampuchea. In the name of the friendship France feels for the Khmer people, I express the hope that this State
Member of our Organization will respect the fundamental rights of the human being as set forth in our Charter.
193.	I could not conclude these brief remarks about the Asian continent without praising the very good relations my country enjoys with the People's Republic of China, a country that holds a unique place in world affairs commensurate with its historic and human dimensions.
194.	I should now like to take up a subject that has traditionally been one of the central themes of the discussions and work of our Assembly. My Government has always believed that the arms reduction effort is vital for peace in the world, for the development of States and the prosperity of peoples. It intends to make a positive contribution to the preparation of the special session to be devoted to this subject in May 1978: first of all because for 20 years my country has constantly spoken out in favour of general, complete and controlled disarmament, and we intend to continue to work in this direction; secondly, because our defence has been organized on the basis of our profoundly peaceful policy with the sole aim of preserving our independence and guaranteeing our security; and lastly because France is located in a region of the world where, despite a manifest spirit of detente, means of destruction continue to grow and to be perfected.
195.	We cannot resign ourselves to the apparently inevitable build-up of nuclear and conventional weapons, and we cannot fail to deplore the senseless squandering of resources that could be put to better use for development. In 1976 $350 billion was spent on arms.
196.	We cannot remain indifferent to the intense competition among certain Powers, resulting in a perpetual increase in their overcapacity for mutual destruction.
197.	Lastly, we cannot observe without concern the constant perfecting of technologies and of the most sophisticated means of destruction and death.
198.	The effort to reduce arsenals is therefore one of the priorities of our era, and we must not be satisfied with mere appearances.
199.	Of course for years there have been attempts to prohibit or limit certain types of weapons. Banning means of destruction that have not yet been produced, or agreeing to phase out gradually weapons of apparently dubious or  marginal military importance, stems from praiseworthy intentions. But because measures such as these are still partial, they can only give an illusion of disarmament and do not make any substantial contribution to the reduction of weapons or to the greater safety of the international community.
200.	By the same token, the efforts of the two superpowers to ensure a balance in their strategic relationship, however desirable these efforts may be, should not in and of themselves be confused with the over-all disarmament effort.
201.	As anyone can see, the problem of verifying commitments is fundamental in the quest for arms reduction and greater safety.
202.	For there to be disarmament, there must be a genuine reduction of arsenals. The major Powers should take a part in this common effort consistent with the part they have played in the last 30 years in overarming the planet.
203.	For there to be disarmament, not only nuclear weapons but also conventional weapons must be included.
204.	Disarmament must be genuine, that is, it must produce a significant reduction in the level of weapons, both quantitatively and qualitatively, and must begin first with those countries whose arsenals pose the gravest threat in our world and are out of all proportion either with those of other Powers or with what is needed for world strategic balance.
205.	It must be general and complete; that is, it must not allow for discrimination in favour of any one State, geographic area or type of weapon.
206.	It must be gradual and balanced; that is, it must be carried out under the same safety conditions for all parties and must help reduce factors of instability.
207.	It must also comprise effective measures of control and verification. It is essential in this respect for the United Nations to be able to take a real part in this task, without which no progress can be made. In fact, there can be no disarmament without trust, and no trust without control, and no control unless it is independent, that is to say, international.
208.	How should these necessarily very general principles be applied?
209.	We will obviously have to discuss this in detail at the special session of the Assembly in May 1978. It is difficult to separate questions of procedure from questions of substance. We will therefore of necessity have to ascertain which forums are best suited to deal with the matter of disarmament. It-is not the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. All of us here are familiar with the limitations on the work that can be accomplished there. The reasons for this are well known. I will not go over them again.
210.	When the time comes, France will present its proposals on all these questions with a view to the discussions of the special session of the Assembly. As the President of the French Republic said on 24 August, the overarmament of the world  requires urgent and resolute action . The United Nations community in its entirety must come to grips with this problem.
211.	I said a moment ago that the world situation was neither good nor reassuring. There was probably little need to give examples; how many of us can say that we feel safe from the scourges of economic crisis, hunger and war? In this difficult world, no one is spared.
212.	It is also up to us to see that man is the ultimate beneficiary of all our action and that human rights are better respected. France, which has given asylum to nearly 100,000 political refugees, was one of the first nations to believe in the need to proclaim human rights. We are soon to ratify the covenants solemnly adopted on this subject by the international community. We cannot help being disturbed at seeing so many Governments retreat behind emergency legislation, establish unequal systems, or practise oppression of entire peoples. No injustice will bring us any closer to the goals of our Charter, which will remain a dead letter unless all our Members agree to move forward within the law.
213.	Interdependence is a fact in our international society, but it can also be the bas>s for great undertakings which, if mankind stands together, will lead us to greater freedom, dignity and well-being.
214.	This, must be the ambition of each of our Governments, for we know full well that our collective institutions, the principles to which we have all adhered by being here, and the noble goals which we set for our meetings and conferences, ultimately depend on the determination of sovereign States.
214. The lessons of history and loyalty to its principles have led France, while exercising its independence, to propose two important concepts for our times: detente and dialogue. One describes the relations which should be fostered between the East and the West; the other suggests fruitful negotiations between the industrialized North and the developing South. Both fall within the framework of the collective effort that brings us together and corresponds to the legitimate expectations of our peoples. France will bring to this effort all the wealth of its creativity and determination.

﻿97.	First, Mr. President, I should like to offer you my congratulations on your election. The United Kingdom delegation looks forward to working under a President so experienced in the work of the United Nations.
98.	I should like also to extend a welcome to the two new Members of this Assembly, Djibouti and Viet Nam.
99.	The constant struggle to close the gap between aspiration and performance in the United Nations was described 22 years ago by the then Secretary-General as making the difference between civilization and chaos. Today, this gap between aspiration and performance remains and the danger of chaos is ever present.
100.	The United Nations has from its inception championed all the most fundamental human rights: the right to live without hunger or disease, in peace, free from conflict and the fear of nuclear or any other kind of war.
101.	Appalling and well-documented events naturally focus great attention world wide on the abuse or absence of political, civil and legal rights; and on violations and degradations of the integrity of the person, though the sense of outrage over Chile and Uganda, to take but two examples, has not yet been matched by effective international action. But the global challenge of chronic poverty, malnutrition and disease ensures that we cannot escape our responsibility for economic and social rights.
102.	Between 1952 and 1972 the gross product of the advanced industrialized nations increased by $1.82 trillion. The aggregate product of the under-developed world in 1972 was less than a third of this increase. This statistic is shocking enough. The reality behind it is even more so. It is generally agreed that more than 400 million people have an insufficient protein supply. About 70 million of them are immediately threatened by starvation. In some of the very poorest countries there is a 50 per cent infant mortality rate, and the development of people's brains is literally stunted by protein and calorie insufficiencies. Most of the world's poor only have access to unsafe water. They are, therefore, chronically vulnerable to schistosomiasis, and to filariasis, the leading cause of blindness. In some areas of conflict the disruption of basic social and medical services poses a challenge to world health. We risk a recrudescence of smallpox in the Horn of Africa and a re-emergence of the tsetse fly in east and southern Africa.
103.	The human needs of the developing world are an inescapable challenge to us all and a central element in any foreign policy based on human rights.
104.	To establish a fairer and more rational international economic order, both developed and developing nations must work together as equal partners. The dialogue, if it is to be successful, must be seen as a long-term sequence of negotiations on specific issues. The Governments of the industrialized democracies are at present under tremendous domestic political pressures to reduce rapidly high rates of unemployment. We need a greater frankness and realism in the dialogue. The present world recession has hit both developed and developing nations. The developing nations will easily become cynical and despairing if the developed world's actions run counter to its rhetoric. Those of us who represent the industrialized democracies are not entitled to use our economic difficulties as an excuse for abdicating from the dialogue. We must all try to ensure that we develop a long-term strategy which is credible and corrects the effects of some of the short-term decisions which we may feel compelled to take. If we continue into the future the present allocation of resources, we will only perpetuate the existing imbalance between the developed and the developing world.
105.	One of the benefits we all derived from the work we did together at the Conference on International Economic Co-operation was a realization of the crucial role that collaboration with regard to energy must play for all sectors of the world economy. It is for this reason that I warmly welcome the Secretary-General's recent proposals for some institutional development within the United Nations framework for the discussion of energy. Its exact form will have to be discussed further—whether an institute, as the Secretary-General has suggested, a new agency, or some other body.
106.	The United Nations is rightly devoting a high priority—nearly 40 per cent of its net regular budget-to economic and social activities. Britain, in addition to its own European Community aid programmes, contributed in 1976 some $85 million to the United Nations work in the economic and social field.
107.	In my judgment, despite the immense problems which still face us, in the crucial areas of poverty, hunger and disease, the United Nations has shown itself to be an effective and practical instrument. The institutions of the United Nations have also made a major technical contribution towards a more orderly international environment in, for instance, the fields of labour relations, posts and telecommunications, shipping and civil aviation.
108.	But in reducing conflict in the world, in achieving peace and in restraining the armaments race, the United Nations cannot claim that its performance has anywhere near matched its aspirations. It is worth examining the distribution of the total financial effort of the United Nations.
109.	The United Nations here in New York, together with the all-important autonomous agencies, spent last financial year some $2,200 million. Of the total United Nations financial commitment, only 8 per cent went on what can be summarized briefly as political, diplomatic and peacekeeping activities. If words uttered and words written were anything to go by, those activities would occupy a far higher position in our order of priorities than any other United Nations activity. Why do we write and speak so much about this area and yet spend relatively so little on it, for the consequences of conflict are grievous for millions?
110.	It is a regrettable fact of life that in institutional terms the maintenance of world security is the most neglected activity within the United Nations. Health, hunger and poverty are issues on which Member nations are prepared to concede an institutional competence and role for the United Nations. But, with few exceptions, security is seen as the preserve of national Governments. We are prepared to see our doctors, agriculturists, sociologists and economists working together and pooling their expertise within a United Nations institutional framework. But we are reluctant to see our generals and our admirals and our strategic thinkers working within such a framework on behalf of world security.
111.	We are all familiar with our own national security problems. But there is all too little understanding of each other's security problems, fears and objectives. We are, as an international body, unable to foresee areas of dispute and to act in time to prevent open conflicts from breaking out. We are unable to act speedily to damp down a dispute in its early stages. The United Nations, if it is involved in a conflict, is usually involved late, and with reluctance.
112.	The United Nations is the only forum in which the whole international community is represented. It has the right and they duty to be involved in disputes which threaten peace and stability whether on a regional or on a global scale. But to date it has lacked the necessary authority and commitment, which can only be given to it by Member States for a truly effective security role.
113.	In the United Nations we are reluctant to make even modest commitments to international security arrangements. But it is also true that the amount of resources devoted to peace-keeping matters is only a fraction of those employed in the United Nations as a whole, and that the role of the United Nations in peace keeping has in the past received far less attention than its deserves both in speeches from this rostrum and in various committees of our Organization. These facts alone highlight the low priority we give to this area of our Organization's activity.
114.	Now, the over-all record of the United Nations in the field of world security is one which we should be prepared to analyse critically, particularly now that the cold-war era and confrontation diplomacy are over and when the super-Powers themselves now exchange detailed information on the most sensitive security issue of all, namely, strategic nuclear weapons. What is needed is for the United Nations to stimulate a specialized and constructive dialogue between Governments on every aspect of world security in a way which would improve the ability of the international community to respond quickly and effectively in situations where action by the United Nations is required. If such a dialogue had been in operation today, we would have been far better able to examine some of the detailed security problems which now confront us all in Africa.
115.	The present limitations, as well as the value of the United Nations in its peace-keeping role, are clearly demonstrated by the situation in the Middle East and Cyprus where the United Nations has made a massive, sustained, but all too frequently unappreciated, effort over the years to keep the peace.
116.	In the Middle East, the world still faces the most serious of all potential conflicts. The recent resurgence of fighting in southern Lebanon is a sad reminder both of the urgency of finding a solution to the Middle East conflict as a whole and of the difficulties which the Lebanese Government faces in restoring peace and security in that country. One might have thought that here was an obvious situation in which the United Nations could and should have played a more prominent role. For a number of reasons, which we understand, this has not so far been the case. Nevertheless, the assistance of the United Nations remains a possibility, should the present effort of those in the region fail to yield the success for which we all hope. The United Nations has been involved diplomatically in the whole question of the Middle East since 1947. Its involvement in security arrangements through UNEF and UNDOF has cost more than $269 million. In the current financial year it will cost $98 million.
117.	The United Nations presence in the Middle East has been at times controversial. But in my view there would have been even greater conflict without it.
118.	In the debate about occupied territory, security issues are of central importance and of deep and genuine concern. Hitherto nations have tended to equate security solely with the possession of territories. This is no longer the only relevant security factor. Sophisticated electronic devices can now give a military security which nations had hitherto believed could only come from the physical occupation of territory. The monitoring techniques already in place in Sinai have made possible a measure of disengagement and lessened mistrust between Israel and Egypt. Confidence-building measures, in the shape of demilitarized zones, zones of limited forces, surveillance and early warning systems, and microwave links, could all be an essential component in any final settlement. The United Nations has a role to play, either by supervising and operating these devices or, even more importantly, by promoting an informed public debate on the underlying technical security issues. Now, Mr. Simonet, speaking for the nine member countries of the European Community, has set out our views on the main ingredients of a negotiated settlement, and I do not intend to recapitulate those here this afternoon.
119.	The danger of United Nations peace-keeping involvement, initially to hold the ring, is that it can become an excuse for political inactivity or a substitute for serious negotiation. In Cyprus, as in the Middle East, the United Nations peace-keeping forces have reduced hostilities and provided time in which serious negotiations could and, in my view, should have taken place. The meetings between the late Archbishop Makarios and Mr. Denktaf, which led to the resumption of the intercommunal talks, appeared to offer the prospect of some progress. The mission undertaken by Mr. Clark Clifford to Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in February and March has also played an important part. But so far the current intercommunal talks have shown sadly little progress, and the situation has, if anything, deteriorated in recent months. The United Nations, in the person of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has acted with tremendous skill between the parties. But the present United Nations commitment in Cyprus cannot be taken for granted. In the last 13 years the existence of UNFICYP has cost Member States, by way of voluntary contributions, some $200 million. Furthermore, UNFICYP is now seriously in deficit to the tune of some $50 million. The United Kingdom has contributed $45 million in men and in logistical support. This year our contingent, numbering 800 men, is the single largest contribution. The United Nations does not enjoy infinite resources, as the Secretary-General's recent appeal for further contributions to UNFICYP made plain.
120.	The United Nations cannot therefore in either Cyprus or the Middle East be used indefinitely as a cover for a stalemate in negotiations. It cannot continue to be seen as a refuge of last resort—a permanent crutch for remaining in a state of  no peace, no war . What the United Nations can do is both to establish the political framework within which negotiations between the parties can take place and, through harnessing the initiatives of its Member States and acting as a catalyst for their ideas, to help to provide the impetus needed to break out of the present stalemate.
121.	I turn to southern Africa.
122.	It has become increasingly clear that only negotiated settlements which are internationally acceptable and which have the full support of the United Nations will end the violence and achieve stable government by majority rule. This is the hope for a future Zimbabwe and Namibia. In considering how Britain could best exercise its responsibilities in Rhodesia the British Government faced up to the fact that Britain alone could not ensure a peaceful transfer to a majority rule. We also recognized that, though the Commonwealth and the Organization of African Unity [OAUJ had a legitimate and major interest in the future of Zimbabwe, neither organization had an institutional framework which could help to provide the stable climate and international recognition for free elections.
123.	It was equally clear that, while Britain has legal responsibilities—which we do not seek, and have never sought, to evade—some additional catalyst to make the transition from war to peace, from illegality to legality, was necessary for an internationally acceptable settlement.
124.	The United Nations is already deeply involved in the problem of Rhodesia through the various sanctions resolutions. So United Nations involvement is not a new issue of principle for the Security Council. It is probably a realistic constraint on the power of initiative of the United Nations that progress in the Security Council is not responsible unless there is a clearly perceived support from the countries of the region in question for the course of action proposed.
125.	We believe that the draft resolution which my Government will submit very shortly in the Security Council has such support. The draft resolution will provide for the appointment by the Secretary-General of a representative to enter into discussions with the British Resident Commissioner designate and with all the parties, with a view to establishing in detail the respective roles of all the forces in Southern Rhodesia during the transition to majority rule. The draft resolution will, we believe, provide the necessary basis for the cease-fire negotiations referred to in the documents which were presented to the Security Council on 1 and 8 September. No final settlement can be agreed or brought to the Council until these essential preliminary negotiations are completed.
126.	Now, it is a truism that the Organization is only what its Members make of it. It is precisely because the British Government is acutely aware of the paradox of the United Nations role—on the one hand, indispensable in the search for peace, and on the other, limited in what it can achieve on its own initiative-that we have framed proposals for Rhodesia which acknowledge the vital importance of a United Nations role in guaranteeing an impartial and orderly framework for negotiations, arid in helping to supervise fair and free elections.
127.	Our proposals also reflect the blunt truth that peace on the ground is unobtainable unless there is first agreement between the parties who are conducting the fighting. The lesson of United Nations involvement in the Congo and in Cyprus is that a peace-keeping force has little chance of doing its job if, around it, rival armed forces are building up their strength and are determined to use it. This is why the five front-line States and OAU have an important role in helping to achieve an independent Zimbabwe. They have supported the liberation forces in their struggle for freedom, but they have always maintained that it is for the people of Zimbabwe to determine who is to be the future president and who should form the government on independence.
128.	Over Namibia the five Western members of the Security Council, including my own country, took an initiative. Negotiations are still in progress, so it is hard to be specific, but we are all under no illusions that, without the support of the United Nations, no settlement can be achieved there which will command the support of the international community, end the violence and allow for a majority-rule government to be freely elected.
129.	Now, southern Africa, over the next few months and years, will be the focus of growing tensions. There is at the moment a controlled anger among the majority of the population. The risk that this anger will develop into urban violence is considerable. Those of us here in the United Nations who uphold the essentially peaceful values of a pluralist democracy will come under growing challenge to support violent change. But if we cannot become the advocates of violence and at the same time stay true to our beliefs, our responsibility to the world is to show, beyond any shadow of doubt, that change can be brought about by peaceful means, whether we are talking of Rhodesia, Namibia or South Africa. If we turn our backs on the path of peace—a path of peace—a path which still lies open—then once again the barrel of the gun will be seen to wield more power and influence than reason. Peaceful persuasion and pressures can still achieve results. Violence is the last resort. To advocate it alone is to threaten the whole system of values on which the United Nations rests, and which we are all pledged to sustain.
130.	These considerations apply with particular force to the situation in South Africa. South Africa will not be allowed to avoid its responsibilities. It sustains and supports the illegal regime in Rhodesia; it has allowed United Nations sanctions to be systematically undermined since 1967. Within South Africa, apartheid is abhorrent to us all.
South Africa faces a choice between a democratic and orderly evolution and an inevitable descent into bloodshed and violence. The choice which South Africa makes may present a challenge to all of us, as Members of the United Nations. Rhodesia is not just an issue for Britain or for the United States, whose support has been so important to my country; it is not just an issue for the freedom fighters, the nationalist leaders, the front-line Presidents, OAU: it is an issue for us all.
131.	Over southern Africa the world community and individual Member States may have some awesome and difficult choices in the next few months. These issues cannot be treated with anything other than the utmost seriousness. Certainly, if the negotiations over Rhodesia produced a settlement which the Security Council could endorse, the world would not allow South Africa to continue, in the face of such a settlement, to sustain an obdurate illegal regime in Rhodesia, were it to refuse to give up power.
132.	As a world community we are, over South Africa, attempting to change human behaviour, to turn a State away from institutionalized racialism. It will not be achieved overnight, but it must be achieved, Without a serious programme of reform inside South Africa the oppressed majority will have no hope. The tough code of conduct recently adopted by the European Community for its companies operating in South Africa demonstrates, by attacking racialism at the place of work, one form of positive action which I hope others will also adopt. It is but one of the pressures for continuing change which it is vital we espouse if peaceful change is to  be successful.
133.	Anxiety over the proliferation of nuclear weapons also lurks in the background. It is in the interests of us all that South Africa should sign the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [see resolution 2373(XXII)l and agree to international inspection of all its nuclear installations. A State which feels itself under attack may, regardless of logic or long-term interest, seek to acquire nuclear weapons as an act of desperation. Desperation is the crucible of violence.
134.	My Government, traditionally active in seeking disarmament and promoting the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, is engaged in various negotiations. I am particularly glad that the United States, the Soviet Union and my country are now actively negotiating about a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. This achievement has eluded the world for too long. A comprehensive nuclear test-ban would have a profound effect in limiting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The development of a specialized dialogue between the Soviet Union and the United States on strategic nuclear weapons and the signing of the first agreement concluded as a result of the Strategic Arms limitation Talks [SALT] was a major step. We all hope that the present negotiations will be successful. It would have been inconceivable, even 10 years ago, that military and scientific personnel from these two countries would share such detailed and highly-classified information about their own national security. We need now to widen and build on this important dialogue.
135.	World security involves more than conflict situations. It is intimately associated with the search for practical and realizable measures of disarmament. All Member States aspire to the objective of total disarmament, but the relentless increase in most Member States' armament budgets shows how far performance falls short of aspiration.
136.	In the more general field of disarmament, we welcome next year's special session of the General Assembly. It will directly engage the international community and the United Nations in what must be a world effort to promote disarmament and check nuclear proliferation. While certain important disarmament negotiations, such as SALT, are necessarily the subject of a bilateral or restricted dialogue, it is vital that the international community and the United Nations in particular should not be excluded from the disarmament effort. It would perhaps have been easier to secure more accessions by now to the non-proliferation Treaty had the international community as a whole, as opposed to a small group of major nuclear Powers, been more closely involved in drawing up its provisions at the start. It means, however, that if the United Nations is to be involved meaningfully it must move from just passing resolutions to the intricacies and the detail of complex scientific negotiations. It will need to develop and expertise that can work in the interests of all the Member States.
137.	The search for peace, the promotion of human rights and individual freedom, the elimination of poverty and want in all its forms—these are formidable but inescapable challenges. To meet them our performance will have to move closer to our aspirations. To succeed in this endeavour we must make, in the recent words of the Secretary- General,  a conscious effort to develop more positive attitudes to the work of the United Nations both among ourselves and in the outside world. In Britain, support for the United Nations is a corner-stone of our foreign policy. We for our part are resolute in our determination to help make the United Nations a more effective instrument for world peace and co-operation.
 

﻿183.	India recently accomplished a historic non-violent revolution. In a magnificent assertion of the indomitable human spirit, our people reaffirmed in March last their firm faith in a free and open society. Calculated efforts by forces of darkness and tyranny to destroy democracy were decisively defeated. The March revolution was clearly of far-reaching significance for our 600 million people. We are happy that its significance has been equally appreciated by freedom-loving people all over the world.
184.	Our people boldly upheld the basic principles, values and aspirations on which the United Nations was founded more than three decades ago, and regained their hard-won freedom and fundamental human rights. I have, therefore, great pleasure in bringing to the United Nations the greetings of our people and of reiterating, on their behalf, at this thirty-second session of the General Assembly, India's abiding faith in the United Nations as an instrument for maintaining global peace and security and for promoting orderly progress through co-operation among nations based on justice and equality.
185.	Our new Janata Government has been in office for barely six months. Nevertheless, much has already been achieved during this time. Basic human rights have been restored. The pall of fear that hung menacingly over our people has been lifted. Constitutional measures are being devised to ensure that democracy and fundamental freedoms can never be smothered again. But we are not going to rest content with this only. As solemnly affirmed by our Parliament on 22 July 1977, our people are determined to bring about by peaceful and legitimate methods  a socio-economic revolution, illuminated by democratic standards, vivified by socialist ideals and firmly founded on moral and spiritual values .
186.	I am a newcomer to the United Nations, but India is not, having been associated actively with the Organization from its very inception. For me, it is a great privilege to address this Assembly. Indeed, as one who has been a  parliamentarian in my own country for two decades and more, I feel a special sense of exhilaration in attending this assembly of nations for the first time.
187.	What has added to my pleasure is to have in the Chair, Mr. President, the representative of a country which, together with India, was one of the founders of the non-aligned movement, and with which we have firm bonds of friendship. I extend to you, Mr. President, the cordial felicitations of my Government and myself on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-second General Assembly. Your election is as much a tribute to your personal eminence and wide diplomatic experience as to Yugoslavia and the role it has been playing in strengthening the forces of peace and stability. We assure you of our fullest co-operation in the discharge of your responsibilities.
188.	I also take this opportunity to pay a warm tribute to the outgoing President, Ambassador Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe, the representative of our close neighbour, Sri Lanka, for steering the thirty-first session with great tact and ability.
189.	May I also join the other delegations in paying my sincere tribute to our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who brings to his heavy responsibilities wisdom, patience and a deep commitment to the United Nations and its role in the promotion of international understanding and global well-being.
190.	I should, moreover, like to compliment Mr. Waldheim for his thought-provoking report to the Assembly in which he has candidly drawn attention to the challenging tasks that lie ahead. The United Nations, he has pointed out,  presents unrivalled opportunities  and  is still to some extent, an Organization in search of its identity and its true role .
191.	The Janata Government stands firmly for peace, non-alignment and friendship with all countries. These policies have always represented India's national consensus and tradition. Non-alignment is a projection of national sovereignty in international relations. Its essence is not neutrality but freedom, which is the natural consequence of the struggle for the liberation of our nation from colonial rule and the liberation of the human spirit from subjugation and oppression. We believe in the true independence of nation-States and their freedom to pursue policies in their best national interests, and to judge every issue on its merit.
192.	The new Government took the earliest opportunity, on assuming office, to declare its resolve not only to continue non-alignment but in fact to restore to the policy its original positive thrust. It is a matter of some satisfaction that our stress on genuine non-alignment and our decision to pursue the policy with vigour and dynamism has been understood and appreciated in its proper perspective.
193.	The vision of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakum is an old one. We in India have all along believed in the concept of the world as one family. After many trials and tribulations there are prospects of realizing the dream in the shape of the United Nations which has reached near universality in its membership representing 4,000 million people of diverse races, colours and creeds. However, the United Nations should not function merely as a conclave of governmental delegations. We must see how this assembly of nations can be transformed into a parliament of man, representing the collective conscience and will of humanity.
194.	The United Nations Charter was a pledge not just by nations or for nations. It was a declaration on behalf of the peoples of the world to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war and, what is more, to build a new world order in true freedom,
195.	My thoughts are not in terms of the might and majesty of nations. Much more important to me are the dignity and demands of the common man. Our successes and failures should be judged ultimately by one yardstick alone: whether we are working towards social justice and dignity for all peoples, indeed for every man, woman and child. For its success the United Nations must become the effective voice of all humanity and a dynamic forum for collective action and co-operation based on interdependence between nations.
196.	Our own history and political experience have taught us that the real sanction, indeed the ultimate power, rests in the will and response of the people, not in governments. Thirty years ago under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi our people courageously fought the might of a great imperial Power and ended its domination over India without resort to arms. Earlier this year our people successfully frustrated attempts by a self-seeking regime to deprive them of their fundamental freedoms.
197.	What came to pass took many friends abroad by surprise. But to me the great political courage shown by the people came from our ethos and tradition. The individual in India has always been given the pivotal place in our religious and philosophic tradition. Our scriptures and epics have all along made one central point: the cosmos and creation hinge on the individual and his fulfilment.
198.	We have accepted all along that divinity may have many forms. Everyone in India is therefore free to pursue his own path to salvation, irrespective of birth or belief. At the same time, however, our seers, in an unbroken line from ancient Vedic times to the present, have taught us compassion and tolerance towards our fellow man. Gandhi summed up the essence of this teaching in a favourite word: Antyodaya, which means  unto this last . This word, which he used time and again in his messages, signifies the concern which any society should have for the well-being of the poorest, the lowliest and the lost.
199.	I am, therefore,, convinced that our national as well as international politics must be constantly permeated with the thought of man, his happiness and well-being, and his essential unity with fellow beings. I am not thinking of man in the abstract, in whose name tyranny has been perpetrated down the ages. What I have in mind is man of flesh and blood. Our central concern must be his joys and sorrows, his hopes and aspirations.
200.	We stand for peace—a warm, living peace—which is the bedrock of all our efforts. Peace, however, is not just the absence of war. The tenuous fabric of world peace could be torn asunder any time. Peace can be secured only by collective effort to end the exploitation and domination of one people over another and by eliminating glaring inequalities and imbalances between nations, and in the rights and opportunities for the world's peoples.
201.	Each nation-State has, no doubt, to preserve and promote its national interests. But no country can live in isolation within the four corners of its frontiers. We have to recognize the inevitability of global interdependence for promoting human welfare and happiness in every part of the world. And interdependence  demands that we should all look beyond our national horizons and display a spirit of accommodation and sacrifice in order to share with the rest of mankind the fruits of progress and prosperity.
202.	The world has come a long way since India launched its national liberation movement against colonialism and imperialism. As an Asian country, we watched with anguish the enormity of the suffering and sacrifice of the brave Vietnamese people in their long struggle for national liberation. Their ultimate success is a shining tribute to the might and power of the human spirit and its indomitable resistance to subjugation.
203.	We are happy that the United Nations has rightly and properly mounted an international operation to provide assistance for the reconstruction of Viet Nam and for the rehabilitation of its people, as task in which my country is extending its full co-operation.
204.	It is with a feeling of great joy that we welcome the entry of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam into the United Nations. We also extend a cordial welcome to a new African State, the Republic of Djibouti. The entry of these two countries into the United Nations has taken this Organization one step closer to its goal of universality. We have friendly ties with both countries and look forward to working with them in closest co-operation.
205.	We mourn the passing of Archbishop Makarios, the President of Cyprus, and pay our homage to his memory. The late Archbishop was a world statesman and one of the founding fathers of the non-aligned movement. He was the chief architect of the independence of Cyprus and its struggle to preserve its identity.
206.	The agenda before the Assembly is one covering a multitude of problems of current concern to the world. May I spotlight only a few specific issues which are of great importance and urgency and must take priority in our collective deliberations.
207.	Foremost among these problems is the momentous and agonizing struggle for human rights and freedom in southern Africa. India has always been opposed to unnecessary bloodshed and violence in national affairs and interstate relations. It stands for non-violence and for resolving conflicts along the path of peace and negotiations. Even during the dark period of foreign subjugation, India adhered to certain basic principles:  steadfast opposition to colonial oppression and total rejection of any form of racialism and suppression of human rights. India's dedication to these principles is even deeper today.
324
208.	The challenge in Africa is clear: whether a people have the inalienable right to live in dignity and freedom or whether a racist minority can be allowed to perpetuate injustice and oppression over the vast majority. There is no question that all forms of racialism must be eradicated, root and branch. Apartheid must go. Its continuance is a blot on humanity and a grave reflection on the United Nations.
209.	India would like to see the problem of Zimbabwe resolved at the earliest possible moment through peaceful means. It has thus welcomed the positive elements in the recent Anglo-United States initiative taken towards the establishment of genuine majority rule within a time-bound framework. We hope that the Security Council resolution adopted recently on the subject, resolution 415 (1977), will lead to a ceasefire and eventually to a solution of the problem.
210.	Much will depend upon the willingness of the illegal Ian Smith regime to see reason and give up its arrogance and intransigence. Until the Smith regime is ousted from power and freedom is restored to the long-suffering people, we cannot expect the freedom fighters to lay down their arms. In the meantime, India reaffirms its support for, and solidarity with, the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe, who are valiantly fighting for the liberation of their country against heavy odds. If world opinion continues to be wilfully defied by Ian Smith in a desperate bid to cling to power, the United Nations will have to exercise all its authority to widen its mandatory sanctions against the illegal minority regime and its South African supporter. That alone would hasten its collapse and help to restore to the people of Zimbabwe their inalienable right to determine their own destiny.
211.	The authority, credibility and prestige of the United Nations face an equally stubborn challenge in Namibia, which has the status of an international Territory. If remains to be seen whether the efforts of the Western Powers can bring about the withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia so that the resolutions of the United Nations may be implemented. We condemn South Africa for its decision to integrate Walvis Bay, a part of Namibia, with the Cape Province. We also condemn South Africa for its reported plans to use a part of Namibian territory for nuclear testing.
212.	We stand by the South West Africa People's Organization and urge all nations to recognize its representative character. We cannot expect the people of Namibia not to resort to armed struggle if that is the only means left to them to achieve their goal of independence. However, the issue cannot be left to be resolved only by the efforts and struggle of that Organization. The United Nations has a collective and direct responsibility. It has by no means exhausted its capacity to discipline the South African regime into total withdrawal from Namibia.
213.	While in southern Africa we face colonialism and racialism at its worst, in west Asia there remains an even more explosive threat to international peace. Here, too, some basic principles are involved, First, no one can be permitted to enjoy the fruits of aggression. Secondly, no people can be denied their inalienable right to their homeland. Thirdly, all border disputes should be resolved by negotiation and not by force.
214.	There can thus be no recognition of the territories illegally occupied by Israel through the use of force and aggression, and they must be vacated. At the same time the Arab people of Palestine who have been forcibly evicted from their hearths and homes must be enabled to exercise their inalienable right to return to their land. All peoples and States in the region have the right to live in peace and harmony with their neighbours. That is an essential prerequisite for a durable solution to the problems of the region.
215.	The United Nations must also reject and repudiate the recent efforts by Israel to alter further the demographic character of the territories occupied through new settlements on the West Bank and in Gaza. Unless resolved satisfactorily and in good time, the problem would have disastrous repercussions far beyond the region. There is clearly urgent need to reconvene the Geneva Conference, with the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization in it.
216.	The situation in Cyprus remains unresolved. We still hope that bicommunal talks may be resumed and a solution will be found which is consistent with the territorial integrity, sovereignty and non-aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus.
217.	Economic issues are an increasingly vital dimension of international relations. The concept of a new international economic order based on equality and justice has already been accepted by the world community. We must now move forward to its early realization so that men and women everywhere may look forward to more just and equitable opportunities and rewards for their labours.
218.	I mentioned earlier the challenge and paradox of how to balance national responsibilities with the imperatives of unavoidable international co-operation. After over 30 years with the United Nations we recognize, better than before, that no nation or group of nations can become islands of prosperity in an ocean of poverty. The discussions on international economic relations have been going on for more than two decades. Even the modest targets set for the current Second United Nations Development Decade have been either disregarded or diluted. The transfer of resources and technology has never been sufficient to correct the accentuated disparities.
219.	All these problems were vividly explained and projected in the Conference on International Economic Cooperation, which ended in Paris this year. In the 18 months of long deliberations some progress WAS made, but results were deeply disappointing. A special fund is to be set up and some commitment to fulfil the allocation of overseas development aid has been reaffirmed. But the major problems of transfer of resources-and technology and relief from the burden of debt remain. The common fund within the Integrated Programme for Commodities has been agreed to in principle but remains to be realized in practice.
220.	Arguments and theories are being put forward which do not show sufficient appreciation of the grave crisis confronting the developing countries. Perhaps that is due to the preoccupation of the developed nations with their own problems and difficulties. In many cases, what is being given by one hand is being taken away by the other.
221.	It is claimed that modern science and technology have- the means of removing poverty and spreading the benefits of progress to the v/hole world. The fact, however, remains that the non-availability of the right type of technology for the developing countries is only accentuating the disparities between the rich and the poor. International commerce has undoubtedly multiplied in the post-war decades. But the advantage from its manifold increase has contributed mainly to the material progress and higher standards of living in the developed world.
222.	The problems of the easing of trade barriers for the developing countries and protection of remunerative prices for their exports remain more or less where they were following the energy crisis. The problem of oil-importing developing countries is so serious that they can look forward to nothing but mounting debts for survival.
223.	We recognize that developed nations have their own internal social and economic problems. But they need to lift their perspectives and policies beyond immediate and narrow national concerns. One could ask, Would it not be economically sound to facilitate a significant flow of financial and technological capabilities from the developed to the developing world as an enlightened answer to structural problem? for their own economies? An increase in the purchasing power of 3,000 million people inhabiting the developing countries could well provide an answer to the problems of unemployment and economic dislocation in the affluent world.
224.	India has participated with vigour and sincerity in all the deliberations of the world community, not in a sprit of confrontation, but in the recognition that the world economic malaise requires a new sense of international interdependence.
225.	In this regard I venture to suggest an approach which was suggested many decades ago by Mahatma Gandhi. He was indeed a universal man. Only two days ago we celebrated the one hundred and eighth anniversary of his birth. He had a clear perception of the world economic order based on certain principles which, in my opinion, may be summed up as follows.
226.	First, all peoples have a right to the satisfaction of their primary needs, irrespective of the state of their economies, their levels of productivity, or their geographic location.
227.	Secondly, interdependence between nations must be without exploitation. Since there can be no genuine interdependence among unequals, action must be taken to correct this inequality.
228.	Thirdly, the developing countries must pursue paths of individual and collective self-reliance as part of their over-all strategy to secure the transfer or resources and technology from the developed world.
229.	Fourthly, despite their division into nation-States, the people of the world constitute one family. An integrated world economic order demands movement across frontiers, not only of goods, capital resources and technology, as at present, but even more so of people themselves.
230.	Fifthly, economic strategy should be directed towards the growth of employment rather than the growth of gross national product alone.
231.	Sixthly, there should be a world-wide movement against the extravagance of consumption, which tends to dehumanize and alienate man from his fellow-beings.
232.	Seventhly, the developing countries, no less than the developed world, must reduce the gap between their elite and their masses. An equitable world economic order can only be based on an equitable economic system within each nation.
233.	As the second most populous country in the world, the dimensions of our problems are immense. Our achievements are noteworthy, but challenging tasks lie ahead. As a country which has recently recommitted itself to the democratic path and the principle of rule by consent our tasks tend to become more complex.
234.	We have no magic wand or instant solutions to the myriad problems inherited from the near and the distant past. But we have reason to be optimistic and confident. In three decades of independence, the traditional genius of our people has enabled them to show their capacity to grasp the new opportunities offered by science and technology and to bend these modern tools of innovation and advancement to serve our own national needs.
235.	While recognizing the advantages of international co-operation, we have sought to depend largely on our own effort for national progress and economic self-reliance. Our new Government is in the process of setting itself new priorities and removing the distortions that have crept into our policies and planning. On the  economic front, we want to move away from the  growthmanship  and blind imitation of industrialized States towards integrated planning in which man is at the centre.
236.	We propose to concentrate more on the development of our rural areas, where an overwhelming proportion of our people live and will always belong. We do not seek affluence based on elitist consumption. Man must be judged by what he is, and not by what he has. We want to provide our jobless people with purposeful employment and fulfil the basic needs of the underprivileged masses. We seek to arrest, if not to reverse, the process of urbanization, which has become one of the biggest social and economic problems of the developing world—a subject on which Gandhi sounded a note of caution many decades ago.
237.	Even as India struggles for a better tomorrow, it has demonstrated its willingness to share the benefits of its economic and technological experience with other developing countries. Our professional and academic institutions have been providing training and instruction to thousands of students from other developing countries in diverse fields of social and economic development. We stand for increasing co-operation with other developing countries to mutual advantage, without in any way seeking exclusive advantage, either economic or political.
238.	India seeks friendship with all and dominance over none. The Janata Government has actively sought to build bridges of friendship, understanding and co-operation with all countries. Attention has been paid, first and foremost, to strengthening ties with our immediate neighbours. This is the message I sought to carry to Nepal, Burma and Afghanistan in my recent visits. We look forward to consolidating the process of normalization of relations with Pakistan, not only to ensure durable peace, but to promote beneficial bilateral co-operation.
239.	Four days ago, on 30 September, the representatives of India and Bangladesh initialed the text of an agreement on the Gang waters issue. It is a comprehensive understanding covering the short-term problem, and lays the foundation for a long-term solution to meet the optimum requirements of both countries.
240.	This problem has bedevilled the relations between us and our neighbour for 25 years. The agreement vindicates our faith that so complex a problem, affecting the economy and lives of millions of people of two neighbouring nations, could only be resolved in a spirit of shared sacrifice and mutual accommodation through sincerely motivated bilateral negotiations.
241.	Many political changes have taken place in the last year in South Asia. Even so, it is a tribute to the people that this area is today freer of tension than it has been for decades. If, indeed, South Asia can find a recipe for peace and co-operation, all of us with similar burdens can then devote greater attention to development and to constructive endeavour. In fact, it is in this context that we make the special plea that the area around us-the region enveloping the Indian Ocean-should be made free of great-Power rivalry and bases which can be used for aggressive actions. In the wider context, India welcomes the continuing search for detente—detente not only in Europe but everywhere—so that the benefits flowing from it can be enjoyed by all.
242.	Year after yea: scores of resolutions have been adopted at the United Nations calling for general and complete disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament. The arms race, with the resulting arsenals of fearsome weapons, has reached such an alarming stage that the world is poised on the horns of a strange dilemma. We are told that nuclear weapons are necessary as a deterrent against war and that it is only the assurance of their use that constitutes the core of deterrence. ,we do not accept that thesis.
243.	We believe that nuclear weapons are dangerous whether they are in the possession of one country, some countries or many countries. We are not only against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, we are against nuclear weapons themselves. India has been consistently opposed to the acquisition and development of nuclear weapons. Indeed, India was the first country to plead at the United Nations more than 20 years ago for a ban on the testing of all nuclear weapons. The great Powers were not in a mood to listen to us at that time. When they were ready for it, they signed the partial test-ban Treaty. That was 14 years ago. The world rejoiced and believed that a comprehensive test-ban treaty was close at hand, but we are still waiting. More nuclear-weapons tests have been conducted since the partial test ban than prior to it. Weapon tests underground are being conducted even now. There has been no progress in nuclear disarmament.
244.	We are not a nuclear-weapon Power and have no intention of being one. The new Government has reiterated this position in unambiguous terms. Our Prime Minister, Mr. Moraiji Desai, has said that India would not go in for nuclear weapons even if all the other countries in the world did so. We did not sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons because it was a discriminatory and unequal Treaty. Nothing has happened since that Treaty was formulated nearly 10 years ago to change our view.
245.	India embarked upon a programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy nearly 25 years ago. We continue to be committed to it. We fully share the view that non- proliferation of nuclear weapons should not be confused with non-dissemination of nuclear technology. We shall oppose, as before, any moves or measures that would stand in the way of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. We shall also oppose moves or measures that are discriminatory in nature. At the same time we are prepared to co-operate whole-heartedly with other countries in discussing ways and means of putting an end to the danger of nuclear weapons.
246.	It is both urgent and necessary for the political mind to free itself of military logic and for the political will to assert the force of reason and reverse the nuclear arms race in the direction of nuclear disarmament. We trust that the discussions in the special session on disarmament to be held next year will identify the priorities in nuclear disarmament and help the formulation of a time-bound programme of realistic and concrete measures for disarmament without further delay.
247.	Already the establishment of the new international economic order is being delayed because of diversion of scarce resources to the futile arms race. World military expenditure is estimated to be more than $300 billion annually at current prices. Of this amount 90 per cent is accounted for by developed countries, which is equivalent to 20 times the official development assistance now given by them to developing countries. Even 5 per cent of the total expenditure incurred by the developed countries could vastly help the efforts of the developing countries to achieve many of their modest economic goals. Disarmament is thus vital not only to ensure peace and security but to promote speedy economic and social progress.
248.	A great deal undoubtedly remains to be done. We often complain of the lack of will or progress. However, there is no occasion for cynicism and despair. Despite our many disappointments the family of the United Nations has an impressive record of achievement. I would commend the work of the ILO, WHO, UNESCO, FAO, UNCTAD and many other bodies within the United Nations system. Given the required funds these bodies could do a lot more to alleviate human suffering and promote well-being. A case in point is the WHO efforts to eradicate malaria, which is again raising its ugly head: Its programme to eradicate this scourge from the globe is estimated to cost about $450 million—half of what is spent daily for military purposes- yet the programme is dragging for lack of funds.
249.	India is convinced of the necessity of supporting, strengthening and developing the United Nations as a universal Organization, not only for preserving peace among nation States and promoting respect for human rights, but also for fostering economic co-operation and harmonizing the actions of States. This is clearly a vital task facing the international community.
250.	In the final analysis, I return to my basic theme. The greatest task before us, which envelops all the issues confronting mankind, concerns the welfare of man, regardless of race, colour, creed or nationality. All our problems, the questions of war and peace, economic malaise and rapidly diminishing natural resources, must lead us to one conclusion: in our interdependent world each one of us is his brother's keeper.
251.	The single all-embracing item on our agenda is the future of man, and it will remain so in the years and decades to come. Man inherited, developed and still nurtures this good earth and is nourished by it. If we realize that his survival is inextricably linked with that of millions of others as never in the past, we shall reach the only answer to the requirement of our times: national sovereignty must adjust itself to international interdependence.
252.	On behalf of India I pledge before this Assembly that our country will never be found wanting in its resolve to share in the sacrifice for the ideals of one world and for the welfare and greater glory of man.
﻿154.	Mr. President, permit me to join those representatives who have already spoken in the debate, and have offered their congratulations to you on your unanimous election to the office of President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly.
155.	The cause of human rights received a powerful impetus this year when the President of the United States told this body on 17 March of this year that every nation has a responsibility to speak out in defence of basic rights and freedoms throughout the world. We subscribed fully to this view and we are proud that, despite intense strains and provocations, Israel has succeeded in maintaining a free, open and multiracial society in which the dignity of man and the rule of law are held supreme.
156.	Unfortunately, the record of the United Nations in the field of human rights is poor. We are witnesses here to a deplorable exercise in double standards and cynicism.
157.	We have also been disappointed that so little progress has been made in implementing the humanitarian principles of the Final Act of Helsinki. Regrettably, there has been no improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Exit from the Soviet Union, the right to leave one's country a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Final Act of Helsinki—is still severely restricted, and those Jews who do insist on their rights are subject to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment and in some cases to arrest and imprisonment. The Government of Israel once again calls on the Soviet Union to permit those Jews who wish to do so to leave in order to go to Israel to join their people and their families.
158.	May I again raise the matter of the sorry plight of the Jewish community in Syria. That community does not enjoy such basic human rights as freedom of movement or the right to be reunited with their families. There can be no valid reason for the Government of Syria to hold those 5,000 innocent people as hostages.
159.	Ever since it joined the United Nations some 28 years ago, Israel has steadily supported all significant moves by this Organization to promote and to propagate the limitation of armaments on a global scale. Although disarmament has always been closely linked with security, Israel is prepared to play its part in the reduction of the arms race in the Middle East.
160.	In the past three years, an estimated $US 7.5 billion in arms supplies have been delivered by East and West to Arab countries in the vicinity of Israel. In addition, about $US 22 billion worth of arms was contracted for by Arab States for delivery from the end of 1976 onwards. Israel is ready to enter into an agreement on arms limitation with all the States in the Middle East.
161.	With regard to another crucial aspect of disarmament, Israel has frequently called on its Arab neighbours to join it in direct negotiations with a view to establishing a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East. Indeed, on this issue as on others, the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Fahmy, has deliberately misled this Assembly. Israel firmly believes that such negotiations should lead to the conclusion of a formal, contractual, multilateral convention between all the States of the region, on the lines of such notable precedents as the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America and the proposals for similar agreements in the areas of south Asia and the south Pacific. Unfortunately, the Arab States have totally rejected this call by Israel which, after all, is in the interests of all the people of the Middle East. On this occasion I repeat our proposal.
162.	A year ago, following the rescue by Israel of innocent hostages hijacked to Entebbe in an Air France airbus, the Vice Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany proposed that the United Nations should draft an international convention banning the taking of hostages and providing for the prosecution or extradition of the "criminals. This was an important step in the right direction, which Israel welcomed. It is therefore very disturbing to note that the Ad Hoc Committee appointed to deal with this matter has made so little progress in attempting to draft a convention for consideration by this Assembly. If this Organization fails, because of the efforts of those who support international terror, to take even this step in the right direction, then it will have lost all credibility as an effective instrument of international action.
163.	It is regrettable that Arab States have played and continue to play a central role in encouraging international terror. It is to Arab airports that hijacked aircraft are directed by terrorists in their search for safe destinations. The recent Japan Air Lines case is a classic example. The kidnappers and murderers of public figures in Germany are graduates of the courses of the PLO.
164.	No cause can justify or condone terrorism. Terrorism is a criminal activity, totally indiscriminate in its effects, which by design strikes at the innocent and the defenceless. The issue is therefore a fundamental one for the international community. The attitude this Organization takes on the question of terrorism is a clear reflection of its moral strength and its international responsibility.
165.	So far, the record of the United Nations in combating terrorism is dismal. Not once has the Security Council convened to condemn terrorists and hijackers.
166.	I noted with interest that, after my Egyptian colleague had talked with the President and the Secretary of State in Washington on 22 September, he announced to the press that, for the first time, Egypt was prepared to accept Israel as a Middle Eastern country and to live in peace in that area. It saddened me therefore that, before this Assembly on 28 September, Mr. Fahmy chose to make a personal attack on my Prime Minister and to vilify Zionism and to launch a move to isolate Israel in this forum. He also made peace conditional on an end to immigration to Israel, and openly threatened war. It would be easy to rebut him, but I shall refrain. I shall only comment that Mr. Fahmy's double-talk does not enhance Egypt's credibility and is prejudicial to the prospects of peace in the Middle East.
167.	Israel will never limit immigration. Zionism is the life-blood of Israel. We will do our utmost to achieve peace and to prevent war; but let me remind Mr. Fahmy, when he threatens us with war, that every war launched by Egypt has ended to its considerable disadvantage. The last cease-fire negotiations between Israel and Egypt after the Yom Kippur war took place 101 kilometres from Cairo. I submit that it would be more appropriate for Mr. Fahmy to stop talking about war and concentrate on the issues of peace.
168.	Similarly, I shall not engage in polemics with any of the other Arab representatives who have made countless false and malicious allegations against Israel.
169.	However, certain facts must be recalled. We have been reminded that General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947 on the partition of Palestine has not been implemented. True, but the Arab States themselves voted against that resolution, obstructed its implementation and destroyed it by force of arms. For the last 30 years they have been guilty of aggression against Israel.
170.	After every war we proposed peace, but in vain. After the 1948 war we negotiated with Abdullah, King of Jordan. We reached an agreement, which was initialled by both sides, but because of that he was assassinated by his own people while praying at the A1 Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. In 1957, we proposed to President Nasser of Egypt that Egyptian troops, and not United Nations troops, should take over Sharm el Sheikh, which controls the Strait of Tiran, on condition that Israeli vessels be guaranteed freedom of passage, but Nasser rejected our proposal. After the 1967 war, we offered to negotiate for peace: we offered to return territory in return for peace. The reply we received from the Arab countries was given to us on 1 September 1967 at the Arab Summit Conference: no negotiation, no recognition, no peace.
171.	Many representatives have referred nostalgically to the 1967 armistice lines, and seem to see an Israeli withdrawal to them as a complete solution to all the problems of the Middle East. But if the 1967 lines are the answer to the problem, why is it that peace was not achieved in the years between 1949 and 1967, when Israel's frontiers were at the pre-1967 lines? During that period the Arab States refused to negotiate peace, as they were pledged to do under the armistice agreements which they signed in 1949. The PLO, an instrument of war for the destruction of Israel, was created in 1964 when Israel was still behind the 1967 lines.
172.	There has been much talk about the territories held by Israel since the six day war. But nothing has been said about the reasons for that war; nothing of President Nasser's blockade of the Strait of Tiran and his public undertakings to annihilate Israel; nothing of Egypt's movement of forces leading up to the war; nothing of how King Hussein ignored our advice, passed on to him by General Odd Bull of the United Nations, when he joined in the attack on Israel with the forces of Egypt and Syria.
173.	We did not plan to go to war. We fought to defend ourselves from the grim fate promised us.
174.	We cannot overlook the fact that the simplistic solution, which has been advocated by so many participants in this debate, was a reality on the ground from 1949 to 1967. It brought us war.
175.	In 1973, Syria and Egypt again launched a war against Israel. After their defeat, the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East was set up in the framework of which two disengagement agreements were reached with Egypt and Syria in 1974, and an interim agreement was made with Egypt in 1975.
176.	Since then, Israel has not ceased to indicate its readiness to resume the peace negotiations at Geneva on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
177.	In view of the many inaccurate constructions that have been put on resolution 242(1967), let us be quite clear what that resolution does say and what it does not say. It does not require Israel to withdraw unilaterally from the territories it occupied in 1967. It does not call upon Israel to leave all those territories. It does not make peace negotiations contingent upon such withdrawal. It does not fix boundaries. What it does require is negotiations between the parties to arrive at an agreed peace treaty.
178.	The wording of the resolution makes it perfectly clear that new boundaries are to be determined between the States of the region. The statement that "secure and recognized boundaries" must be negotiated implies that previous boundaries were not secure or recognized. The fact that new boundaries are to be reached can also be inferred from the fact that Arab and Soviet pressure for the inclusion of a reference to "withdrawal from all the territories" was unsuccessful.
179.	I quote Mr. Joseph Sisco, who was the United States Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
Affairs at the time that resolution 242 (1967) was adopted. He said:
"That resolution did not say 'withdrawal to the pre-June 5 lines'. That resolution said that the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final secure and recognized borders. In other words, the question of the final borders ... is a matter of negotiations between the parties."
This is still our position. We have to establish new boundaries, and not to return to the old ones. We have to negotiate permanent boundaries that will afford Israel security.
180.	According to resolution 242 (1967), the peace settlement must include:
"Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area . ..".
The settlement is therefore to be reached between States, and not to involve the participation of any organization whatsoever.
181.	Resolution 242 (1967) makes no mention whatsoever of the PLO. The PLO is a terrorist organization whose record is one of deliberate and indiscriminate atrocities against innocent civilians, including women and children. The PLO is governed by the Palestinian National Covenant of 1964, as amended in 1968 and reconfirmed as recently as in March of this year by the Palestinian National Council in Cairo.
182.	Article 6 of this Covenant calls for the expulsion of the vast majority of the Jewish population from our country. In article 15, it calls for the elimination of Zionism. In article 19, it calls in effect for the destruction of the State of Israel. In article 20, it makes the preposterous assertion that "the claim of historical or spiritual links between the Jews and Palestine is [not] in conformity with historical fact...". In article 21, it declares that "all alternatives to the total liberation of Palestine" are rejected-that is, any plan that falls short of the destruction of Israel.
183.	There is not a sovereign State in this Organization that would negotiate with a body calling for its destruction.
184.	Many delegations have proposed the establishment of a Palestinian State governed by the PLO on the West Bank and in Gaza. Again, this is but a futile exercise in wishful thinking, totally unacceptable to us, ignoring, as it does, the language of resolution 242 (1967) and the basic facts on the ground.
185.	A PLO mini-State on the West Bank, which could not be viable in itself, would be a base for attempts to destroy Israel. One has only to consult a map and the political programme of the PLO to realize this.
186.	The provisions of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) were accepted by Israel as the basis of negotiation towards peace. We accepted Council resolution 242 (1967). We did not accept an amended Council resolution 242 (1967)-even if such an amendment were feasible, which it is not, Council resolution 242 (1967) derives its strength and authority from the fact that it has been accepted by the States parties to the conflict.
187.	Moreover, the United States regards resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) as the exclusive basis for a settlement of the conflict. The memorandum of agreement between Israel and the United States on the Geneva Peace Conference, signed on I September 1975, declares in article 4 that the United States
"... will oppose and if necessary vote against any initiatives in the Security Council to alter adversely the terms of reference of the Geneva Peace Conference, or to change resolutions 242 and 338 in ways which are incompatible with their original purpose".
This position was reaffirmed by the United States only a few days ago in a joint statement with Israel.
188.	Israel is ready to resume negotiations at Geneva for the achievement of true, contractual and effective peace treaties, including the establishment of diplomatic relations between Israel and the Arab States. There can be no participation of any additional State, group or organization at the Geneva Peace Conference without the agreement of all the initial participants. All negotiations should be conducted on a bilateral basis.
189.	Through the good offices- of the United States, we have conveyed suggestions on the substantive, and not merely on the procedural, issues.
190.	First, we have provided a draft text of a full peace treaty in all its aspects. Secondly, we have supplied details of our approach in respect of discussion and negotiation on the various issues. This part is in turn made up of two elements: first, a presentation of some of the main questions involved in a peace agreement between ourselves and each of our neighbours, questions such as Israel's security, guarantees of freedom of navigation in all international waterways, the security of the Jordan River sources in the north, a basis for coexistence with the Palestinian Arabs in the" Gaza Strip, Judaea and Samaria, and other relevant topics—in other words, the questions which we believe we must contend with if we are to sign a final peace agreement between ourselves and each of the neighbouring Arab States. The second element comprises our ideas for resolving these questions. In our view, there should be complete normalization of relations, including diplomatic relations, trade and cultural ties. We have suggested modalities, including demilitarized zones and other arrangements.
191.	In addition, there remains the cardinal principle that the negotiations should be conducted without prior conditions or commitments. This principle means not only that neither side obligates the other to agree in advance to any condition whatsoever but also that all issues and areas are
open to negotiation. We for our part will be completely open and sincere in listening to, discussing and examining the proposals of the other parties. To illustrate this: we believe that the settlement concerning Judaea and Samaria and the Gaza Strip should be based on our living together with the Palestinian Arabs in those areas, and not on a partition of the territory.
192.	For 10 years, between 1967 and 1977, the Government of Israel was committed to territorial concessions in return for genuine peace, and this implied the redivision of the area. But to no avail.
193.	Now our view is that redivision is not the answer. Nowhere is it possible to draw a dividing line which will satisfy not only the security, but also the historical, economic and social needs of all sides. Bethlehem, a satellite town of Jerusalem and dependent on Jerusalem for its tourist trade and indeed its very existence, cannot be cut off from the holy city. Mount Scopus, the site of the Hebrew University and the Hadassah Hospital, cannot be separated from Israel. And are the Arabs in Gaza once again to be bottled up in an intolerably narrow strip of land, unable to get out without passing an international frontier? No. The model for the future must be united Jerusalem, where since 1967 Jews and Arabs have proved that they can live together harmoniously to their joint benefit, where all residents enjoy freedom of movement in all parts of the holy city and where freedom of access to the Holy Places is assured for all. There is no room—and no need—for barbed wire any more.
194.	But, for all that, had the Arabs proposed partitioning those territories between ourselves and them, we would have discussed and examined their proposal and afterwards would have decided whether we were ready to agree to it or not. In this connexion I should like to point out that we have re-examined the positions of Jordan and of the Palestinian Arabs and we have found no inclination on the part of either for a solution based on the redivision of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza Strip.
- 195. The criticism which has been directed against Israel in respect of the establishment of settlements in Judaea and Samaria is unfounded. The settlements are legal. Under international law neither Jordan nor any other Arab State has any sovereign territorial rights in the West Bank or in any other part of what was mandatory Palestine in 1948 when the United Kingdom surrendered its Mandate. No State today has any claim of sovereignty to what was mandatory Palestine that is better than or even equal to Israel's claims.
196.	The Arab States rejected the United Nations partition resolution and, in violation of the United Nations Charter, they used force in an attempt to prevent its implementation. The Arab use of force in 1948 was an act of aggression-not of self-defence.
197.	"... an armed struggle is taking place in Palestine as a result of the unlawful invasion by a number of States of the territory of Palestine, which does not form part of the territory of any of the States whose armed forces have invaded it."
That is what Mr. Tarasenko of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic said in the Security Council in 1948.
198.	No rights accrued to any of the Arab States from that act, and those States were in fact subject to the restrictions that international law imposes on a "conquering" and "occupying" army.
199.	Jordan's annexation of Judaea and Samaria early in 1950 was never recognized by any State other than Pakistan and the United Kingdom. The United States Department of State, at a press conference on 29 July 1977, confirmed that there were legal problems over the sovereign rights of Jordan in the West Bank.
200.	In view of this illegal annexation of the West Bank, the fourth Geneva Convention is not applicable.
201.	But even if the laws of belligerent occupation were applicable, those rules contain no restrictions on the freedom of persons to take up residence in the area involved. The fourth Geneva Convention bans forcible transfers, not voluntary acts of individuals taking up residence in the area of the West Bank. Mo Arab inhabitants have been displaced by the establishment of these Jewish settlements. Not a single Arab resident of Judaea and Samaria has been made homeless as a result of the establishment of those peaceful villages. And, above all, it is unacceptable to us that Jews should be prohibited from living in any part of their ancestral land.
202.	Let me make one point clear: the settlements will not decide the final borders between Israel and its neighbours. The borders will be decided upon in the negotiations between Israel and its neighbours. The settlements are by no means an obstacle to peace because, if they were, we should have had peace years ago.
203.	We believe that the problem concerning the status of the Arabs living in the West Bank should be settled in the framework of peace negotiations in Geneva between us and the Jordanian delegation, which may include Palestinian Arabs from Judaea and Samaria.
204.	One of the central problems that has to be solved in a peace settlement is the problem of the refugees. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) refers to "refugees", not "Arab refugees": it covers both Jewish and Arab refugees. When the resolution was being drafted, a Soviet attempt to restrict it to Arab refugees failed.
205.	The origin of the Palestinian Arab refugee problem was the Arab rejection of the United Nations partition resolution and the war which the Arab States declared against the State of Israel one day after its establishment. The responsibility is therefore theirs. Had the Arabs accepted the resolution, there would have been no refugee problem. Furthermore, because of the wars conducted by the Arab States against Israel, Jews who had lived for thousands of years in Arab lands were forced to leave, abandoning all their property and possessions. For about 590,000 Arab refugees there were about 600,000 Jewish refugees from Iraq, Yemen, Syria, Egypt, Libya and the rest of North Africa. 

  

206.	Refugees in other parts of the world have been successfully integrated into the national community to which they belong. The only exception to the general rule is the situation of the Arab refugees. The Arab States have refused to absorb and integrate their brothers into their respective societies. The Arab States have made the "restoration" of the "legitimate rights" of those refugees- namely, their return to Israel—the central demand. That demand constitutes a serious distortion of the realities of the refugee problem.
207.	We do not intend to send back Jews to Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Morocco, Yemen and other Arab countries, to be hanged in the public squares of Baghdad and to be deprived of their human rights and to become third-class citizens, imprisoned in ghettoes, as in Syria now, in order to take Arab refugees in their place. The fact is that an exchange of population has taken place between Israel and the Arab countries.
208.	The difference between Israel and the Arab States is that, while we in Israel from the outset integrated all the Jewish refugees into our society, the Arab States deliberately perpetuated the "refugee status" of their own brethren in order to use them as a political weapon against Israel. The Arab demand for the return of the refugees to Israel, coupled with proposals for the establishment of a Palestinian State, is calculated to bring about the destruction of Israel. The refugees should be resettled and integrated into the Arab societies in which they now live. In any peace settlement specific provisions should be made to enable all refugees to find accommodation, employment and adequate compensation.
209.	In any discussion of reparations for the refugees, Israel will raise the question of reparations for Jewish refugees from Arab lands and insist that all their claims be settled within the framework of the peace agreement.
210.	There is only one road along which it is possible to move towards peace; that is the road of direct negotiations with no pre-conditions. No conflict in the world has ever been resolved without the parties to the conflict negotiating face to face. Our conflict is not different.
211.	The heart of the problem is the Arab refusal to recognize the right of Israel to national sovereignty in the ancient, historical land of the Jewish people. That is the heart of the problem, and until it is overcome the obstacles to a just and durable peace will remain.
212.	The developments of recent days and the possibility of a resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, none the less, give room for guarded optimism which could turn into grounds for great hope. For our part, we are prepared to embark on a common effort, long and challenging as it may be, to negotiate a final agreement to live in peace and security.
 

﻿74.	 Mr. President, I offer you my warmest congratulations on your election as President of this Assembly. It is at once a notable mark of confidence in you personally and a timely acknowledgement of your country's standing in the world community.
75.	We welcome as new Members the Republic of Djibouti and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. New Zealand was privileged to be a sponsor of Viet Nam's application for membership. We did so not merely because of our belief in the value of universal membership of the United Nations, but because we regard the participation of Viet Nam as indispensable in the task of solving the pressing problems of South-East Asia. We look forward to developing a positive relationship with this dynamic State both within the United Nations system and in our direct bilateral dealings.
76.	This year's General Assembly, like its predecessors, confronts awesome problems which we human beings have created and which—we must believe—human beings have the intelligence to solve, if only we can summon the will and forge the consensus. Our Secretary-General has pinpointed the issues in his valuable report. Many of them have been with us for a long time. Others, as he notes, are new. All directly affect the peace, security and welfare of our fragile world community. Indeed, they are basic to its continued functioning and even to its continued existence.
77.	Whether the issue be the softening of the expensive and potentially deadly rivalry between the super-Power?;, whether it be the establishment of human justice for all the people of southern Africa and the Middle East, whether it be the imperative of a more just and workable international economic order, whether it be the conservation and orderly use of the resources of the sea and the sea-bed, whether it be the sensible management and sharing of the finite resources of this planet, whether it be the halting and reversal of the arms race-whatever the issue, all of us have a direct stake in the outcome. No one of us can opt out. All of us face the challenge; all of us will share the responsibility if we fail to find solutions and then uphold them in good faith.
78.	It would, of course, be naive to pretend that this body is an objective research institution or a philanthropic agency, or that national or regional interests are likely to be set aside, or that advances will be made except step by step through deals and compromises. That is the nature of national or international political institutions, of which this is one. We represent our constituents, and they have their interests and their aspirations, to which we must be responsive. But all of us, I think, can feel in our bones that in its economic, no less than its political, condition the world is not many steps away from chaos; and that for all of us the consequences of failure are so grave that, however intractable the problems, however elusive the solutions, we are called upon to make the effort to face them with seriousness and compassion. We are then in the area of attitudes. Attitudes determine political will, and without a shift of attitudes the indispensable consensus will continue to elude us.
79.	No issue calls more urgently for agreement among us than that of the more just and effective use of the world's economic resources. It is at our peril that we should ignore the fact that one third of our fellow beings are subsisting in conditions of destitution and mounting despair, that, after two decades of international consideration and some, but all too little, action, development problems have increased in magnitude, that, despite dozens of conferences, the relative position of the people of the developing countries has each year steadily deteriorated.
80.	in recently reviewing the decline in the terms of trade of countless which produce agricultural exports, and considering measures such as the supplementary financing facility established by the IMF, my Prime Minister made this observation:
"We cannot say to a poor country, 'We will pay you much less in relative terms for your goods than we used to pay, but you need not worry as we will lend you the balance at market rates of interest providing you take the steps to lower the standard of living of your people.' It is difficult," he said, "to cut what you haven't got."
81.	As an exporter of agricultural products, New Zealand has suffered greatly from declining terms of trade and, I might add, from the social burdens involved in adjusting to a greatly reduced income. We are therefore well placed to understand the far greater difficulties of the oil-deficient developing countries. We claim no special sympathy for New Zealand because we are well placed by comparison with most of the world's population. But our difficulties stem from causes similar to some of those which frustrate the developing world: declining terms of trade for countries which export agricultural goods and Increasing protectionism on the part of the affluent industrial countries. In many countries belts have already been tightened up to, and beyond, what is socially and politically acceptable. We must all think in terms not of palliatives but of fundamental shifts of attitudes and policies.
82.	In such a situation more attention must be given, not just to financing deficits and tightening the belt, but to enabling the primary producing and newly industrializing countries to increase their earnings. And this must involve facing squarely two fundamental questions, namely, the relationship between the prices of primary products and industrial goods, and the question of access to the markets of the affluent industrial countries of the world. These are political questions of the greatest importance, questions that must be tackled by those in whose power it lies to diminish both surpluses and deficits. And surely it must be obvious that for the rich, industrialized world to do so would be no more than enlightened self-interest. Could it not help to revitalize their faltering economies and to provide their societies with a renewed purpose and sense of direction?
83.	The problem is, of course, at the very essence of politics. It is the far from easy task of convincing electorates and, more specifically, of ensuring that special interest groups in those electorates are harnessed to wider national and international imperatives. We are convinced that most of the leaders of countries whose policies will determine the course of the world's economy, and the social and political ramifications of those policies, are aware of what must be done if the looming economic and political chaos is to be avoided. Their problem, and the problem of all in government, is to mobilize sufficient determination and creative leadership to change entrenched attitudes and to confront those interests which, however obsolete they may be, are nevertheless deeply entrenched in their national history and their political processes. But time is short, and it is running out.
84.	I have concentrated some attention on She responsibilities of the affluent market-economy nations, but it is not only their problem. It is the problem of all, regardless of ideology, regardless of economic system.
85.	There appears to be a general recognition that it is within the United Nations framework that the efforts of the international community to promote such action should be carried forward. The present session of the General Assembly has a special responsibility to put in hand preparations for a new international development strategy. The conclusions and agreements of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation held earlier this year need to be followed up.
86.	New Zealand was not a participant at the Paris Conference. We have, however, welcomed the progress made, and my Government has now completed its study of the measures agreed at that Conference. We endorse the agreements reached, limited though these were, and will take up the debate in the various forums concerned on the topics left uncompleted.
87.	An important element in our efforts to promote development and greater equity in the distribution of the world's resources is, of course, international energy cooperation, with particular reference to the interests and needs of energy-deficient developing countries. We are encouraged that the Secretary-General has recently made proposals for such co-operation within the United Nations system, and we shall play our part in working out this concept in the course of this session and thereafter.
88.	It is now almost three years since the World Food Conference decided to establish an International Fund for Agricultural Development. The Fund represents a new approach to the age-old problem of world hunger-the pooling, on a hitherto unprecedented scale, of resources to be devoted exclusively to improving agriculture in developing countries. The Fund's initial pledging target of SI billion was achieved at the beginning of the year, and the Agreement establishing the Fund was thrown open for signature in February. New Zealand will formally ratify the agreement today. We look forward to its early entry into force and the fulfilment of initial pledges by donor countries so that operations may begin.
89.	New Zealand will also participate actively and constructively in the resumed session of the United Nations Negotiating Conference on a Common Fund under the Integrated Programme for Commodities. We earn our living by the export of primary produce, and therefore share the concern of developing countries that greater stability should be introduced into the commodity markets of the world.
90.	New Zealand is experiencing the most prolonged and deep-seated recession in its post-war economic history. This fact has sharpened our appreciation of the lot of developing countries. It has, however, circumscribed our ability to help those beyond our shores, but we remain pledged to the target of 0.7 per cent for official development assistance, and we shall move again towards that target as soon as our economic circumstances permit.
91.	In our interdependent world there are no issues that can be considered in isolation. The refashioning of the global economic system is closely linked to negotiating settlements in southern Africa and the Middle East, to halting the arms race, and to controlling and ultimately eliminating weapons of mass destruction. The more we can establish conditions of security and stability the more chance there is of securing the massive diversion of resources and the rearrangement of economic activity needed to reduce the unacceptable disparities that new exist among nations. How, then, do we address these problems?
92.	All of us agree that the situation in southern Africa is a tragedy, c tragedy compounded by intransigence and repression, a tragedy of expanding and enveloping dimensions. Change must come, and it will come. The question is not if, but how. Here, of course, there is less agreement.
93.	Some claim that armed struggle is the only way; and if intransigence persists they will, of course, be right. But it is a way that would extract a terrible price in human lives and suffering and would create bitter problems for the future.
94.	When the Anglo-American proposals on Rhodesia were announced, I said publicly that they offered the last chance for a peaceful settlement. If the Smith regime tosses this chance away it might buy itself a little time, but it can only be a time of tension and a time of knowing that the end will almost certainly be bloodshed in Salisbury and Bulawayo. I would urge the Smith regime to realize it, not only for their own sake,- but also for the sake of Zimbabwe as a whole.
95.	There has been some progress on Namibia. The southern African authorities have apparently recognized the futility of pressing ahead with the Turnhalle proposals and have accepted the need for elections on the basis of one man, one vote. The Maputo Conference showed them, if they needed any showing, that the international community is united in its demand that Namibia should be free and independent. But if there has been some progress, there remain formidable problems. One of the most taxing is that of Walvis Bay. There can be no question that any exclusion of Walvis Bay from Namibia would undermine that country's integrity and impede significantly its chances of building a viable economy.
96.	The gravest problems are those of South Africa. They are complex and deep-rooted. And they are on a huge scale. White South Africa remains to be convinced that it has no alternative but to accept fundamental changes of attitude. Even a society that is as inward-looking and as determined to go its own way as South Africa cannot survive alone. It is part of the world whether it likes it or not. If the rest of the world makes it clear that it will have nothing to do with
South Africa so long as it persists with its discriminatory policies, the pressure for change will sooner or later become irresistible.
97.	We in New Zealand have played our part in this process. We took part in the Lagos World Conference for Action against Apartheid and subscribed, without reservation, to the terms of the Lagos Declaration. We have minimal trade with South Africa and virtually no investment. We have supported the Swedish initiative calling for the ending of all new investment in South Africa. We have refused to contemplate any exchange of diplomatic representatives. My Government is actively discouraging sporting contacts. We support the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the appeal for South African refugee students. We are opposed to the creation of the so-called "Bantustans"' which would seek to make black South Africans aliens in their own country. We have scrupulously observed the voluntary arms embargo and will give our full support to any proposal to establish a mandatory arms embargo in terms of the appropriate provisions of the Charter. We have taken a forthright stand in pressing for the release of political prisoners and in condemning the brutal treatment which has led to the unexplained deaths in confinement of more than one black leader-most recently Steven Biko. In short, we shall do all we can to bring about the atmosphere in which a just solution of the problems of racism and minority rule in South Africa might be achieved before a long, drawn-out and bloody armed struggle becomes inevitable.
98.	The Arab-Israeli dispute is another problem that threatens world peace. It is a dispute about which we have little direct knowledge and we are certainly not well placed to presume to offer any new ideas on how it can be resolved. Even so, it seems to us that certain things stand out. One is that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) must continue to form the basis-for any settlement. We are obliged, therefore, to reject any attempt by one party to the dispute to pursue policies that are contrary to the principles laid down in resolution 242(1967). We believe that territory occupied by Israel must be returned.
99.	The second thing is that the Palestinian people have a right to a homeland, either as a separate State or as a part of a larger, Arab State. The precise boundaries of that homeland are a matter for negotiations by the parties directly concerned. But if there is to be a peace in the Middle East, the principle must be recognized. It does not derogate in any way from the fundamental right of Israel to exist as a sovereign, independent State within secure and recognized boundaries, free from threat by any acts of force, and indeed we believe that a final territorial settlement will confirm and help to protect that right.
100.	And, finally, it is imperative that negotiations begin soon. The longer a start is delayed, the greater the build-up of tension and the greater the chances of the outbreak of another war. Obviously, to be constructive, negotiations must include all the parties to the dispute, including the Palestinians, through their chosen representatives.
101.	In another long-standing dispute, that between North and South Korea, the resumption of early negotiations between the parties directly concerned is, in our view, an urgent requirement. My Government remains deeply concerned lest the tensions on the peninsula should lead, once again, to confrontation. It is our earnest hope that, during the pause in international deliberations on the problem, a peaceful solution can be found through negotiations between the two Korean parties. New Zealand hopes that all Governments which are in a position to encourage this peaceful means to a solution will use their influence accordingly.
102.	We have a deep concern also for the security and prosperity of South-East Asia. We therefore welcome the co-operative, constructive efforts of the countries of the region through the Association of South-East Asian Nations. ASEAN is a non-military association dedicated to the establishment of peace and stability in South-East Asia. Its leaders have made clear on many occasions their desire to promote friendship and understanding with their neighbours. We hope they will soon get a response. For our part we are glad to be associated with ASEAN in its efforts to improve the well-being of the people of this area.
103.	This same developing regional co-operation is to be found so in our own part of the world, the South Pacific. There, the South Pacific Forum, a group of ten States, five of which are represented in this Assembly, is the principal vehicle for co-operation and consultation. Two of the Forum's recent initiative deserve particular mention. In June it was agreed to establish a regional shipping line, the Pacific Forum Line. Ships are to be chartered to the Line by participating Governments and it will operate services within the region, commencing early next year. Sea transport, of course, is the key to economic development in the region and the Forum Line will open new possibilities.
104.	The second major initiative was the agreement of the Forum, at its most recent meeting in Papua New Guinea, to establish a fisheries agency to co-ordinate and develop protection and surveillance of fisheries within the economic zones of member countries. The proper control of this huge area, which in total is one of the largest in the world, is clearly beyond the capability of any one member country. By sharing their skills and knowledge, the members will be able to exploit their resources to the best advantage of all countries in the region. At the same time the establishment of exclusive economic zones in the South Pacific and of a regional fishing agency in no way diminishes the importance for the area of the early completion of the treaty on the law of the sea. It is our earnest hope that negotiations will result in an agreed text during 1978.
105.	Before I leave the subject of regional co-operation I should like to refer, very briefly, to the signing on 7 September in Washington of the Panama Canal Treaties. This is a significant advance which my Government welcomes. We see the agreements as a milestone for the principal parties, the United States and the Republic of Panama, for the Americas as a whole, and for countries as far flung as my own. The large volume of our trade which passes through the Canal causes us to take a positive interest in its security and efficiency. I warmly congratulate the Governments concerned.
106.	The protection and promotion of human rights is one of the basic purposes of the United Nations and next year will be the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. New Zealand attaches great importance to the Universal Declaration and to the values enunciated in the International Covenants on Human Rights, the one covering political and civil rights, the other economic, social and cultural rights.
107.	Before formally committing ourselves to the Covenants we have sought to ensure that in every respect our laws and juridical system were capable of enforcing the obligations of those Covenants. This has been a lengthy task involving the drafting of new legislation. That task is now substantially completed. Enactment of this legislation will mean that our laws will sustain any scrutiny under the Covenants. I expect, therefore, that we will ratify both those Covenants, as well as the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide not later than 1978. Respect for human rights, for human dignity and the individual's fundamental freedoms have long had a central place in our traditions and values. Through this codification the law in fact will have caught up with our practice.
108.	In preparing for the ratification of the Covenants the New Zealand Government has drafted, and Parliament is expected to adopt during the current parliamentary session, a measure which will outlaw every kind of discrimination based on sex or religion. Racial discrimination is already contrary to New Zealand tradition, law and practice and New Zealand reports regularly to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Under the new legislation a national commission of human rights will be established to deal with complaints of racial, religious or sexual discrimination. This legislation should facilitate New Zealand's signature and ratification of the draft Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women when it is adopted—in the preparation of which New Zealand has taken an active part. We hope it will be completed and opened for signature at the present session of the Assembly.
109.	I have touched on a number of problems and I want now to turn to the most menacing of all-the arms race. No other issue before this Assembly creates greater hopes and engenders greater despair. The gap between our aspirations and our achievements frustrates and dispirits us, and that gap must be closed.
110.	There has been some progress. It is encouraging that at last serious negotiations have begun among three of the nuclear-weapon States on the content of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. This will provide the most effective restriction on vertical nuclear proliferation so far and is clearly the first priority. We hope that a generally accepted comprehensive test-ban treaty will have been drafted by the time the special session is held. No other development, in our judgement, would provide a happier augury for the success of that session. We do not consider acceptable to wait for technology to solve all the political problems confronting a test ban. This would be to wait indefinitely and perhaps for ever. The time for action is now.
111.	None of the great issues before this Assembly are capable of quick or simple solution. But we can make a start, and if the will is present we can move progressively and consistently to the settlement of our disputes, to the changing of attitudes and to the reconciliation of our differences. The New Zealand delegation approaches this session of the Assembly determined to work conscientiously towards that objective.
 

﻿108.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. I wish you full success in the discharge of this high and responsible task.
109.	At every session of the General Assembly we take satisfaction at seeing the growing ranks of States Members of the United Nations. Their number has now almost reached 150. This is yet one more indication of the positive changes occurring in world affairs. It signifies that the peoples one after another continue to gain freedom and independence, thereby confirming the inexorable advance of the process of national liberation.
110.	But what matters most is that the constant influx of new Members adds to the political weight and capabilities of the United Nations and enhances the over-all potential of the policy of peace. Indeed, the main objective of all activities of the United Nations as laid down in its Charter is  to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war .
111.	Our country made its irrevocable choice long ago. The essence of Soviet foreign policy is to ensure a peaceful, creative life for our people and peace for all people on earth. For 60 years now we have been firmly and unswervingly following this line bequeathed to us by the founder of the Soviet State, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.
112.	In this year of the sixtieth anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution the peaceful goals and humane principles of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union will acquire the force of a fundamental law and as such will be enshrined in the new Constitution of the USSR.
111. The same objectives are served by concrete foreign policy actions of the Soviet Union, by the initiatives which we take in international affairs. Many of them have been enunciated from this very rostrum. In a condensed form they are set forth in the programme of further struggle for peace and international co-operation and for the freedom and independence of peoples, adopted by the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the highest political forum of the party of the Soviet country.
! 12. As an integral part of the world socialist system our country acts in the international arena in close unity with fraternal socialist States. We are proud that the entire world is increasingly recognizing the fact that the socialist community of States commits its growing resources and the full weight of its foreign policy on the side of fruitful co-operation among peoples, their security, and universal peace.
113.	But is it not true that the work for a stronger peace is no less pressing today than it was yesterday? Indeed, it has proved possible in recent years to make headway in this direction. In various parts of the planet people have felt tangibly that it is easier to breathe, that the threat of war is receding. The process of detente is becoming pivotal to the development of international relations. But it is clear that in the current situation with its pluses and minuses intricately intertwined this process is not yet immune from delays or even reverses.
114.	One cannot fail to notice that there are still forces at work in the world which do not find detente to their liking. And to say this is perhaps to put it too mildly if one takes into account how fiercely they are attacking the policy of detente.
115.	Faced with a clear prospect of improvement of the international climate, certain groups are intensifying their attempts to launch an offensive to push the world back to the times of the  cold war . Those groups have a stake in an unrestrained arms race, the preservation of old centers of tensions and the creation of new ones, and the perpetuation of the remnants of colonialism and racism.
116.	As a matter of fact we are confronted with the following alternative: either the world will follow the road of renouncing the use of force, the road of disarmament and equal, mutually beneficial co-operation, or it may plunge even more deeply into the arms race and find itself on the brink of a nuclear catastrophe. That is why our country is laying such stress on the need to continue and consolidate detente.
117.	One hears it said at times:  You know, detente is an abstract thing; nobody really knows what it is all about.  Such an argument is spurious and far-fetched. But if it is really necessary to clarify the meaning which the USSR gives to the concept of a relaxation of tensions, this has been done most authoritatively by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid I. Brezhnev. He said in his speech in the city of Tula last January:
 Detente means, first of all the overcoming of the 'cold war' and transition to normal, stable relations among
States; detente means willingness to resolve differences and disputes not by force, not by threats or sabre-rattling, but by peaceful means, at the conference table. Detente means a certain trust and ability to take into consideration each other's legitimate interests. 
118.	Is there really anything recondite in this definition or indeed anything that could provoke objections from those who truly aspire to peace? No, there is nothing of that kind nor can. there possibly be. All this is exactly what each country should be guided by in its policy when facing the countless variety of problems posed by international life. We note with satisfaction that an - increasing number of responsible statesmen are coming to the conclusion that in a nuclear age there is no reasonable alternative to the policy of detente and peaceful coexistence.
119.	The experience of recent years has shown that when States are inspired by peaceful strivings, in actual deeds and not just in words, they do find a common language in settling on actions that lead to a stronger peace. Moreover, not only do they find it, they also work quite successfully—jointly or along parallel courses—to attain this goal.
120.	Indeed, the very improvement of the international climate in recent years has become possible because this was the common cause for a sizable number of countries and for political and social forces which in their world outlook and ideology often stand quite far apart but are none the less willing to co-operate for the benefit of peace.
121.	The policy of detente cannot be allowed to mark time, still less to take a downward turn. It must be constantly nourished with new initiatives and brought within the reach of an ever greater number of States; in short, we must ensure what one may call the materialization of detente.
122.	The United Nations has a weighty role in this respect also. All States Members of the United Nations, no matter how diverse their positions and views, are called upon to step up their efforts to deepen and strengthen detente.
123.	In the conditions now shaping up in the international arena, we consider it extremely important that the United Nations and all its Member States solemnly declare their commitment to detente and use all their authority to back it up. This directly follows from the obligation to live together in peace with one another which the States Members of the United Nations assumed under the Charter.
124.	If the States Members of the United Nations jointly express their political will and determination to advance the cause of detente, this will contribute to overcoming the obstacles which arise in the path of this process and to the over-all improvement of the political climate in the world. In so doing the General Assembly could determine, in terms of the present-day situation, the top priority areas in which States could exert peaceful efforts and the line of conduct which they should follow in relations with each other.
125.	What, specifically, do we have in mind?
126.	It is necessary, above all, scrupulously to protect the assets of detente that have already been accumulated and to prevent them from being squandered. And these assets accumulated in recent years are quite impressive. It is necessary to assist actively in the implementation of multilateral treaties and agreements which serve the interests of strengthening international security and developing peaceful relations, as well as of United Nations decisions aimed at reaching these goals. And a good many such decisions have indeed been adopted.
127.	Another appropriate channel for directing efforts to the benefit of peace and peaceful relations among States is, of course, that of taking resolute steps to contain the arms race and to turn the course of events towards disarmament. What words can be found to make those responsible for the policies of their States realize the imperative need to act seriously in this area?
128.	In the post-war period the arms race has been spiralling upwards continuously, but we were not the ones to cause this. This race was forced on the world by others. However, at every stage the Soviet Union proposed, backing its proposals up with concrete deeds, that an end be put to the dangerous competition and that funds be diverted to the noble endeavour of improving conditions of life for the peoples of the world. And that is still our position.
129.	The Soviet proposals in the field of disarmament are well known. At the last session of the General Assembly we submitted them again in a summarized form in the memorandum of the Soviet Union on questions of ending the arms race and on disarmament. It emphasizes our willingness to search for new measures in the field of disarmament as well as to advance towards general and complete disarmament.
130.	We do not in the least underestimate the significance of some constraints placed on the arms race in a number of areas in recent years. The Soviet Union has made its contribution, together with other countries, in the preparation and implementation of a whole series of relevant international treaties and agreements. These either curtail the build-up of certain types of weapons or ban the arms race in certain environments. The latest example of this is the signing of the Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques. In our view, all States without exception should accede to it if they want to support by deeds their words about peace.
131.	None the less, in realistic terms very little has been done so far Actually, physical disarmament and the elimination of the material means of warfare have not even been started yet. The armies of States have not been reduced by a single aircraft or a single tank as called for in United Nations resolutions. How many good and excellent concrete proposals failed to materialize because of overt or covert sabotage by those who would not even hear of disarmament? Will they ever give thought to where they are pushing the world by incessantly whipping up war production and the arms race?
132.	If one listens to the pronouncements of certain statesmen, one might even get the impression that they appear to be in favour of putting an end to tills. But what, I ask, is the actual state of affairs?
133.	A closer look at what are sometimes proposed as  comprehensive  disarmament recipes would reveal that the objectives pursued are diametrically opposed to those of reaching agreements. It would seem that the intent here is roughly as follows: what about making a proposal known in advance to be unacceptable to our counterpart? He then will reject it, thereby giving us a convenient excuse, first, to blame him for that and, secondly, by invoking his rejection, to take steps to build up armaments which, in the absence of such camouflage, would appear quite unseemly.
134.	Can one really on the one hand propose various  drastic reductions  while on the other hand authorizing the development of new and, bluntly speaking, merciless, terrifying types of weapons such as the neutron bomb? No wonder the world literally shuddered when it learned of the secret programmes to manufacture that weapon. How can one qualify this inhuman weapon as  humane ? After all, it is intended to be used directly against human beings and is in the same category as such cruel and barbaric means of warfare as bacteriological or chemical weapons. In our view, the United Nations must resolutely demand that the plans for the production of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction, including the neutron bomb, should be discontinued.
135.	It becomes increasingly evident with each passing day that the achievement of concrete results in the field of disarmament requires the mobilization of the efforts of. all States of the world. The United Nations has a special responsibility in this regard. It must be acknowledged that the United Nations does not stand aloof as regards the disarmament problem. It has adopted a whole number of meaningful resolutions on that score. They are said to be recommendations, but if such recommendations express the will of the peoples for disarmament, it is then the duty of all Governments to be guided by them in their practical action.
136.	A special session of the United Nations General Assembly on disarmament is to be convened next year. We shall not merely have to conduct there a wide exchange of views on fundamental approaches to the disarmament problem at. the present stage but we shall also have jointly to identify the main areas where States should concentrate their priority efforts in the field of disarmament. The Soviet Union would like that session to be business-like and to help with practical preparations for a successful convening in the immediate future of a World Disarmament Conference.
137.	Next, efforts in favour of detente presuppose such actions by States as would contribute to an early peaceful settlement of situations of conflict and to the preclusion of new situations of that kind from arising.
138.	Acting in conformity with the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our country continues actively to press for the elimination of the remaining hotbeds of war. Of course, the most dangerous of those is the one in the Middle East. Why is there no durable peace in that region? Simply because the principal causes of the conflict have .not been removed. Israeli troops have not been withdrawn from the Arab lands seized in 1967. The right of the Arab people of Palestine, including its right to self-determination and the creation of a State of its own, has still not been guaranteed. All of that means that the independent existence and security of all the peoples and States of that region have not been ensured.
139.	Serious apprehensions are aroused by the words and deeds of the leaders of Israel. They are well known. A great deal of combustible material has been accumulated in the Middle East, and in the event of another outbreak of hostilities no one would be able to predict its outcome.
140.	For its part the Soviet Union will go on doing all in its power to bring about such settlement in the Middle East as would establish a lasting peace there without infringing the legitimate rights and interests of any people or any State of the region.
141.	From this high rostrum our country declares once again that we have been and remain advocates of the just cause of the Arabs whose lands have been unlawfully taken away and are still retained by force of arms. Those lands must be returned unconditionally to the Arab peoples.
142.	But if there is any need to reiterate once again that Israel has a right to exist as an independent and sovereign State in the Middle East, then on behalf of the Soviet leadership, on behalf of the Soviet Union, I say again that we have always adhered and will continue to adhere to precisely that line. So why should Israel not take advantage of the opportunity that presents itself and agree to a genuinely just settlement in the Middle East? That would, after all, be in its own national interests also.
143.	The Soviet Union is in favour of an early reconvening of the Geneva Peace Conference with the participation on an equal footing of all parties concerned, including representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization. There appears to exist now a broad understanding of the need to reconvene the Geneva Conference at the end of this year, but there are some who oppose it, and Israel is the main opponent. It appears that the Israeli statesmen will not bring themselves to climb one step higher, will not bring themselves closer to common sense and to the abandonment of their plans for expansion at the expense of other countries and peoples. The Soviet Union, as Co-Chairman of the Conference, intends to do its utmost to have it convened and make it work successfully, and it expects the other Co-Chairman-the United States of America-also to follow that line.
144.	For more than a year now tensions have also persisted in Cyprus. No one will convince us that it is impossible to solve this problem without impairing the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It is clear that there a most intricate knot has been tied, but given goodwill it can be untied by peaceful means. The Soviet Union is prepared to facilitate this, and our relevant proposals remain valid.
145.	For many years now the question of withdrawing foreign troops from Korea has been on the agenda. Is it really essential that the United Nations should admit its impotence in this respect? We think otherwise. There are quite a few possibilities for solving this question so as to prevent a potential conflict from erupting in that part of the world.
146.	There is one more point to be emphasized. In conditions of detente, and in its interests, all countries are required to abide by the fundamental principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter and in other major international instruments. This means, in the first place, pursuing a policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States and settling differences and disputes by peaceful means without resorting to the threat or use of force. Experience shows that it is necessary for every country to take into account the legitimate interests of other States and to measure its actions in the international arena against the requirements of detente.
147.	Naturally, all these are basic requirements. Yet, how very often do we see that even such generally recognized norms governing relations between States are violated, and frequently in the most flagrant manner.
148.	A great deal has long been said about those many complications and frictions in the current international situation that are due to the fact that there are still no signs of lessening military confrontation between States or groups of States. This problem is particularly acute in Europe. But on other continents, too, there are some who simply will not abandon the policy of maintaining the old blocs and forming new aggressive blocs, a policy typical of the time of the  cold war . Attempts are made to impart a  defensive  character to certain non-military associations of States as well. And what of the persistent intention to establish more and more military bases?
149.	Attempts to strengthen and expand military blocs run directly counter to the spirit of detente. The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist community have recently made a proposal that at least no action should be taken that could result in enlarging the existing closed groupings and political-military alliances, or creating new ones. However, the attitude of the Western countries to this initiative of the socialist States was, to put it mildly, cool. It would appear that its realization would run counter to their designs.
150.	Let us take the Vienna talks on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. These talks have now been going on for four years, and throughout all those years our Western partners in the talks have stubbornly sought to ensure for themselves unilateral military advantages and to encroach upon the security interest of the socialist countries. Therefore, these talks have so far produced no practical results. We urge that we should proceed to a real search for an understanding rather than just talk about the desire for an agreement.
151.	The relaxation of tensions creates still more favourable conditions for completing, within the shortest possible time, the liberation of all colonial countries and peoples, for eliminating the racist regimes and for eradicating apartheid, the vestiges of national oppression and discrimination of all kinds. On the other hand, there is no doubt 
that the solution of these pending problems will give fresh momentum to the process of detente and add a new geographical dimension to it.
152.	Today, colonialism is on the brink of total collapse. Conditions are improving for the further development of the struggle of peoples for their national liberation. A vivid example of this is the glorious victory of the peoples of Indo-China over imperialist aggression. That victory has opened up favourable prospects for the establishment of peace in South-East Asia and on the entire Asian continent.
153.	It is with special feeling that we welcome the entry into the United Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Justice has been restored: the united socialist State of Viet Nam has taken its rightful place in this Organization. A large State, which has consistently taken a peaceful stand, has joined the United Nations. We whole-heartedly congratulate our Vietnamese friends.
154.	We also welcome the admission of a new African State, the Republic of Djibouti.
155.	When a conflict breaks out in a particular part of the world, more often than not there is, lurking in the background, either a desire to cling to colonial privileges or there are actions of a neo-colonialist nature. Let us look at what is happening in southern Africa. It is now the biggest colonialist and racist enclave in the world. An enormous majority of the population in the Republic of South Africa, Rhodesia and Namibia are deprived of the most elementary human rights. This would seem to be a boundless field of activity where those who clamour for  human rights  could best apply their efforts. But for some reason or other, they shut their eyes to the intolerable plight of millions of people. What is more, they actually connive at the shameful acts of these racist regimes; they support them and cover up their crimes.
156.	Speaking of Africa, some are pointing their finger at Moscow.  This is where , they allege,  the tension on the continent originates . But what is our policy in Africa? We seek no privileges there for ourselves, nor do we covet concessions or bases, nor do we impose on African countries our world outlook. Our aims in Africa are independence, freedom and peace for its peoples.
!
157.	We do not conceal the fact that in Africa, as elsewhere, our sympathies lie with the States that have embarked on a progressive path of development, a path of social and economic transformations for the benefit of the masses. We openly declare our complete solidarity with the peoples fighting for the liquidation of the remaining strongholds of colonialism and racism. The Soviet Union will do its utmost to ensure that the desire to establish peaceful, good-neighbourly relations with one another prevails among African States as well as all other States that have gained independence, and that the sources of discord and conflict stoked up between them by imperialism and reaction be eliminated. In this connection, in Africa just as in Europe it is highly important not only to proclaim the principle of the territorial integrity of States and the inviolability of their borders but also to respect it in practice. And this applies to all parts of the world, to all continents. The violation of this principle results in armed conflicts, torrents of blood and countless sacrifices for the peoples involved in those conflicts.
158.	The sooner we do away with this anachronism of our age-colonialism, racism and apartheid-the cleaner will be the air in Africa and the world at large, and the greater will be the range of action for the policy of detente. This is what was called for by the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted by the United 'Nations 17 years ago.
159.	This is also called for in the specific decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council condemning South African and Rhodesian racists. Those decisions must be strictly implemented by all-and I emphasize this—by all States.
160.	It will not be an exaggeration to say that there is another major world problem, and if it is not solved it is difficult to expect detente to be irreversible. What I have in mind is the development of equal, mutually beneficial economic relations between all States-in short, the restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis.
161.	I should like to stress immediately that one cannot apply to this problem a mere  geographical  yardstick. After all, it is not along meridians or parallels that the boundaries of poverty and wealth run today. What matters here is how, by whom and for what purposes the natural resources of each country are being used. What is involved here is a wide range of economic, social and political factors.
162.	The Soviet Union has for a long time been making a major contribution to the building of the national economies of developing countries. Representatives of many States in this hall know this, not merely by hearsay. And we fail to understand the allegations made here and there in the West-especially after the so-called  North-South dialogue  reached an impasse-to the effect that the USSR should, as they say,  lend a hand  in providing assistance to the developing countries. A strange way of putting things indeed!
163.	We shall continue to give all possible assistance to the countries which have embarked on the road of independent development. But is it not clear to everyone that developing States will hardly be able to stand squarely on their feet if they remain hobbled by hundreds and thousands of tethers of neo-colonialist exploitation?
164.	We resolutely support their demands that all manifestations of inequality, diktat and discrimination in international economic relations be eliminated. This was reiterated in the statement of the Soviet Government submitted to the last session of the General Assembly on restructuring international economic relations.
165.	Now, a few more words about another aspect of the development of friendly relations between States. What we have in mind is cultivating the feelings of friendship and 
trust among all peoples, increasing mutual exchanges in cultural and other humanitarian fields. We have in mind also the need to encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, as determined, inter alia, by the International Covenants on Human Rights. this has always been our approach to these questions and it has been clearly reflected in the draft of the new Constitution of the USSR.
166.	But let no one have any doubts about something else: any attempts at preaching to us, at reading us sermons or, still worse, at interfering in our internal affairs under contrived pretexts, have encountered and will always encounter a most resolute rebuff. We are ready to say this once again from this high rostrum: it is high time to realize that by acting in a spirit of psychological warfare the most that one could hope for would be to poison the international atmosphere and .to sour relations between States. We should like to think that all this will be taken seriously.
167.	An exceptionally important area where the policy of detente is being implemented in practice is the sphere of bilateral relations between States. For us, this is not an abstract proposal. !t is confirmed by our consistent policy of ensuring peaceful coexistence among States belonging to different social systems.
168.	For about 10 years now Soviet-French relations have been developing steadily without a hitch. the joint documents signed as a result of the recent visit of Leonid llyich Brezhnev to France convincingly demonstrate that joint actions of the two countries are making a major contribution to the cause of the relaxation of tensions and the development of co-operation in Europe and elsewhere.
169.	Our relations with the Federal Republic of Germany have now been brought into a normal path, which is a major accomplishment in itself if we recall how strained they were in the not-too-distant past. We intend to go on expanding and deepening our ties with the Federal Republic of Germany in various fields. It is clear, however, that everything does not depend on us. There are quarters in the Federal Republic of Germany that are still exploiting some issues in a manner which is far from conducive to the favourable development of relations between our two countries.
170.	We are satisfied with the way in which our relations are shaping up with Finland, Italy, Austria, Britain and other Western European States, even though all possibilities have not yet been exhausted. Relations with those countries as well as with the other participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe have now been put on a solid foundation-namely, in the principles and understandings embodied in the Final Act. The Soviet Union strictly adheres to all the provisions of that outstanding international document. We expect the same of all the other States whose highest representatives affixed their signatures to the Final Act of the Conference.
171.	The meeting of representatives of the States that participated in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe is due to open in Belgrade in a few days' time. We do not overestimate the significance of that meeting, nor do we underestimate it. For its part, the Soviet Union is prepared to do everything so that that meeting may proceed constructively and become yet another milestone on the road embarked upon at Helsinki.
172.	Relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America merit special consideration. It is difficult to conceive of further progress in the policy of detente unless there is at least a minimum of trust and mutual understanding between them. The experience of the late 1960s and the first half of the 1970s indicates that when both countries are guided by principles of equality, mutual interest in the fate of peace and non-interference in internal affairs it becomes possible not only to reach a number of major agreements and arrangements but also to establish useful co-operation in many areas.
173.	Unfortunately, it must be noted that recently Soviet-American relations have experienced a certain stagnation if not a downright slump. To a somewhat lesser extent that has affected the practical aspects of bilateral ties. However, more complications have emerged now than before regarding issues of broad international concern. We, the Soviet Union, stand for the improvement of relations with the United States, for Soviet-American co-operation in the interests of our peoples, in the interests of peace. But we say just as clearly that the efforts of one side alone are not sufficient for that. In response to relevant remarks by President Carter about the desire of the United States to develop relations with the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev said that if there was an intention to translate those words into the language of practical deeds we would willingly seek mutually acceptable solutions.
174.	The Soviet Union invariably pursues a policy of good-neighbourly relations with Japan. Soviet-Japanese co-operation is developing successfully in a number of areas. In some other areas that is not the case. In our opinion the cause lies in the unhealthy sentiments regarding the Soviet Union that are still strong in some Japanese circles. Besides, those feelings are being whipped up by outside forces. We are convinced that the situation can and must change for the better in the interests of the peoples of our two countries and of peace in Asia.
175.	For many years now Soviet-Indian relations have served as an important stabilizing factor on the vast continent of Asia. They provide a good example of friendly co-operation based upon the principles of peaceful coexistence and enshrined in the relevant treaty. It is our firm intention to continue promoting the development, intensification and enrichment of our ties with India.
176.	A few words now about our relations with a large neighbouring country, China. Our position in this respect was defined by the Twenty-Fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. From the rostrum of the Congress L. I. Brezhnev stated:
 As regards China, as well as other countries, we adhere firmly to the principles of equality, respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and the non-use of force. In short, we are prepared to normalize relations with China in accordance with the principles of peaceful coexistence.  And that position of ours remains fully valid.
177.	Every State, be it in Europe or in Asia, in Africa or in Latin America, if it is guided by the interests of peace and co-operation, can rest assured that it will find a reliable partner in the USSR. In this regard we have an open mind.
178.	For the Soviet Union-and we are confident this is true of others—the struggle for the deepening of detente is at the same time the struggle for the complete elimination of the risk of nuclear conflict. Widening the scope of detente means at the same time pushing back the risk of mankind's finding itself under the crushing steam-roller of a nuclear war. These are in fact two most important aspects of securing a genuinely solid and genuinely lasting peace on earth. It was precisely the atmosphere of detente that made it possible to undertake some major actions with a view to reducing the nuclear threat.
179.	In this connexion one might single out the 1973 Soviet-American Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. Mention could also be made of the Soviet-French agreement to prevent the accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons.11 The interests of peace require that similar agreements be concluded between all the other nuclear Powers as well.
180.	However, there is still a lot more to be done than has been done. We call upon the United Nations and its Member States to continue and intensify their efforts so as to reduce step by step the likelihood of the aforementioned threat in order subsequently to remove it from the lives of human beings.
181.	Of course the most radical and effective means of preventing nuclear war would be the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union has favoured this course ever since that very moment when the world saw the first ominous silhouettes of nuclear explosions. Now, as before, we repeat our readiness to sit down at any time, together with all the other nuclear Powers, at the negotiating table to examine the problem of nuclear disarmament in its entirety and jointly to work out concrete ways for its practical solution.
182.	But while there are no such negotiations—through no fault of our own-one cannot sit twiddling one's thumbs. Any steps would do in this respect provided they bring us closer, even by an inch or two, even gradually but steadily, to a complete removal of the threat of nuclear conflict.
183.	The United Nations has played a certain role in creating a favourable political climate as regards the problem of averting a nuclear war. It suffices to recall the resolution adopted five years ago on the non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. And yet we should like to see a more active United Nations in this matter, which is of the greatest concern to mankind.
184.	How might that look in practice?
185.	Using the full weight of its prestige the United Nations could, on behalf of all its Member States, solemnly call upon all States to act in such a way as to prevent the emergence of situations which could cause a dangerous strain in relations between them and to avoid armed conflicts.
186.	This applies particularly to nuclear-weapon States. What is required of them is continuous restraint in their mutual relations and a readiness to negotiate and settle their differences by peaceful means. In short, they should do all they can to prevent the emergence of conflicts and situations .which give rise to international tensions. After all, they are often but a step away from armed conflicts, and can one always guarantee that such a step will not be taken?
187.	This is closely connected with strict observance of the principle of renunciation of the use or threat of force in international relations involving both nuclear weapons and conventional armaments. This principle has already been enshrined in a series of recent bilateral and multilateral agreements, including the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The non-aligned movement actively advocates the establishment of this principle in relations between States.
188.	The United Nations would accomplish a great deal by calling on ail States to start negotiations to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations. The draft of such a treaty has been circulated among all Members of the United Nations. The replies received by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the questionnaire relating to their attitude to the idea of its conclusion point to a growing interest in our proposal. We are in favour of translating this idea into reality as early as possible.
189.	The joint initiative of the socialist countries advanced last November also had to do with the prevention of nuclear war. This is a proposal addressed to the countries that participated in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to conclude a treaty whereby each would engage not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against the others. This would be of tremendous significance not only for Europe but for the world at large. We express the hope that the States to which this initiative is addressed will adopt a serious attitude. No one should dismiss a proposal which is dictated by life itself. We shall continue to work persistently to translate into practical terms the idea of concluding such a treaty.
190.	I shall mention yet another area where in our view it is possible to arrive at an agreement that would reduce the threat of war. Nuclear countries could start negotiations with a view to working out arrangements concerning the withdrawal of ships carrying nuclear weapons from certain areas of the world's oceans.
191.	Other steps are also possible to curb the arms race. On a broader plane this would meet with the desire of non-nuclear States to establish zones of peace completely free from nuclear weapons. They could include both individual .countries or groups of States and vast geographical regions or even entire continents.
192.	In this connexion, we reaffirm our sympathetic attitude to the idea of turning the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. The main prerequisite for this is the dismantling of the foreign military bases that exist there and the prevention of the establishment of new ones. It is precisely from this position that the Soviet Union approaches this idea. And it is from the same angle that we are holding consultations with the United States on certain problems relating to the Indian Ocean.
193.	An extremely important question which attracts the closest attention throughout the world is the limitation of strategic arms. The need to contain the threat of nuclear war, to achieve progress in other areas of the struggle to end the arms race and for disarmament, the strengthening of international security and the further development of the process of detente call for the speediest solution of this pressing issue. And the United Nations has every right to expect from the countries participating in the talks on the limitation of strategic arms more intensive efforts for their speedy and effective completion and also to call on those States to come to a common agreement on the renunciation of the development of even more destructive systems of such weapons.
194.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, its stand is well known. The USSR has invariably sought to achieve an agreement on the limitation of strategic arms and has done and is doing everything in its power to that end. We are prepared to go even further and to proceed to negotiations on the reduction of existing stockpiled arsenals of strategic weapons.
195.	What is the state of affairs in this respect'?
196.	It is an open secret today that the USSR and the United States were able some time ago to agree to a considerable extent on a new Soviet-American agreement on the limitation of strategic offensive arms on the basis of the well-known Vladivostok agreements. Yet subsequently much of what was agreed upon has been called into question-not by us.
197.	What is the reason for this? The reason is clear. What is involved here above all is the decision of the United States to begin deploying a new type of strategic weapon, the so-called cruise missiles. Thus yet another channel has been opened for the strategic arms race and of course it would be naive to think that the other side would be a passive onlooker.
198.	So what will happen in the long run? Certainly not the strengthening of security-this is openly admitted even in the United States-and certainly not a reduction in military expenditures. The result will be greater rivalry, more billions which could be used far more sensibly thrown into the bottomless pit of the arms race, and consequently greater dangers for peace.
199.	Even now it is not easy to reach an agreement in the field of limiting strategic arms, but the situation would become a more complicated if we had to deal with weapons whose limitation hardly lends itself or does not lend itself at all to verification by the other side. And this could spell extreme danger in the military and political fields. In this really what the USSR and the United States should strive for?
200.	No, it certainly is not. It may be said with confidence that a positive conclusion of the Soviet-American talks on the limitation of strategic arms is extremely important for the peoples of our two countries, for the peoples of the entire world. As-a result of recent meetings in .Washington some progress has been achieved in bringing closer together the positions of the two sides, and this is all to the good. However, there still remain issues to be agreed upon. It is important now to ensure the prompt successful completion of the talks. I repeat that we are doing everything possible to that end in the firm belief that a mutually acceptable agreement at the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks is quite feasible, of course on the basis of strict observance of the principle of the equality and equal security of the sides. We cannot back-track from this unchallengeable position.
201.	While speaking of nuclear missiles, we should not forget that there may emerge new and terrifying means of the annihilation of people. Is it not true that the threat of war will increase many fold if ever more new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction are developed? Two years have elapsed since the Soviet Union proposed the conclusion of an international agreement which would ban their emergence. Negotiations are under way and this of course is a positive factor, but progress has been rather slow.
202.	In the meantime, ever more sophisticated means of killing people go into production from laboratories and experimental facilities. It is the duty of the United Nations to call upon all States to put a dependable road-block in the way of the emergence of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction.
203.	Today the problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons is most acute. It is a fact that many States have not yet become parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and some of those countries are near-nuclear States or have already attained the capability of manufacturing such weapons. Is it really necessary, for example, to speak of the grave consequences for the security of the peoples of Africa and for universal peace which might result from actions of the Republic of South Africa taken in order to get hold of nuclear weapons? We believe that urgent and effective efforts on the part of all Member States of the United Nations are required to prevent the development of such weapons in the Republic of South Africa. We must not wait for the potential threat inherent in the spread of nuclear weapons all over the world to become a reality.
204.	The Soviet Union is a convinced advocate of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Our country is already co-operating in this field with many States and we are prepared to expand that co-operation. However, we are categorically opposed to a state of affairs in which the peaceful uses of the atom would become a channel for the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and yet this is a real danger which is growing. What is required here is co-ordination of the efforts of many States and an elaborate international system of safeguards and controls. We intend to co-operate constructively in this area.
205.	The prohibition of all nuclear-weapon tests would be a major step towards lessening the threat of a nuclear war and deepening detente. As is well known, the Soviet Union has proposed that a treaty be concluded to this effect. Moreover, to meet the wishes of some countries we have expressed our willingness to take part in the search for a generally acceptable agreement on the question of verification. Today we are taking yet one more step forward: under an arrangement with the United States and the United Kingdom we have consented to suspend underground nuclear-weapon tests for a certain period of time even before the other nuclear Powers accede to the future treaty.
206.	It is also important that the countries which have not yet acceded to the treaties on the nuclear weapon test ban in three environments, on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and on the non-emplacement of nuclear weapons on the sea-bed and in outer space /see resolution 2660(XXV)j become parties to them and, pending their accession, strictly observe the provisions of those treaties.
207.	Such are the ideas regarding the key international problems-making detente stable and preventing nuclear war-which the Soviet Union deems it necessary to set forth at the current stage of the development of the international situation from the high rostrum of the United Nations.
208.	Guided by these considerations, the Government of the USSR proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the thirty-second session of the United Nations General Assembly, as an important and urgent question, an item entitled  Deepening and consolidation of international detente and prevention of the danger of nuclear war .
209.	At the same time, the Soviet Union is submitting for consideration by the General Assembly two draft documents: a draft declaration on the deepening and consolidation of international detente and a draft resolution on the prevention of the danger of nuclear war .
210.	We should like to express the hope that the Assembly 'at this session will give thorough consideration to those documents and address a corresponding appeal to all States of the world. In the current situation in the international arena this would no doubt facilitate greater and broader efforts in favour of the security of peoples.
211.	Increasingly broad opportunities to work for the benefit of peace are opening up before the United Nations in conditions of detente. The key to the success of this noble mission is the strict adherence of all the Members of tills body to the United Nations Charter. The Charter contains all that is essential for preserving and strengthening peace on earth.
212.	Our country will work tirelessly for the benefit of peace, hand in hand with fraternal socialist States, together with all our allies and friends, and with the realistically minded forces which put the ensuring of peace and the prevention of the risks of war above transitory considerations. Our country will constantly labour for peace.
213.	The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, recently said:
 The Soviet Union will always be an active participant in any negotiations or any international action aimed at developing peaceful co-operation and strengthening the security of the peoples.
 It is our belief-it is our firm belief—that realism in politics and the will for detente and progress will ultimately prevail and that mankind will be able to step into the twenty-first century in conditions of peace, secure as never before. And we shall do all in our power to make this a reality. 
214.	I trust that this appeal of the Soviet State will evoke a grateful response from those who cherish peace.

﻿1.	 Mr. President, I wish to offer you my congratulations on your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly. It gives my own Government particular satisfaction to work under the leadership of a representative of Yugoslavia, a nation with which the United States enjoys close and valued relations. We pledge our co-operation and we will depend heavily on your experience and skill in guiding these discussions which we are beginning.
2.	I should like also to express again the high esteem in which we hold Secretary-General Waldheim. We continue to benefit greatly from our close consultations with him and we place great trust in his leadership of this Organization.
3.	Thirty-two years ago, in the cold dawn of the atomic age, this Organization came into being. Its first and most urgent purpose has been to tenure peace for an exhausted and ravaged world.
4.	Present conditions in some respects appear quite hopeful, yet the assurance of peace continues to elude us. Before the end of this century a score of nations could possess nuclear weapons. If this should happen the world we leave our children will mock our own hopes for peace.
5.	The level of nuclear armaments could grow by tens of thousands and the same situation could well occur with advanced conventional weapons, The temptation to use those weapons, or fear that someone else might do it first, would be almost irresistible. The ever-growing trade in conventional arms subverts international commerce from a force for peace to a caterer for war.
6.	Violence, terrorism, assassination and undeclared wars all threaten to destroy the restraint and the moderation that must become the dominant characteristic of our age. Unless we establish a code of international behaviour in which the resort to violence becomes increasingly irrelevant to the pursuit of national interests we will crush the world's dreams for human development and the full flowering of human freedom.
7.	We have already become a global community, but only in the sense that we face common problems and share, for good or evil, a common future. In this community, the power to solve the world's problems, particularly economic and political power, no longer lies solely in the hands of a few nations. Power is now widely shared among many nations with different cultures, different histories and different aspirations. The question is whether we will allow our differences to defeat us or whether we will work together to realize our common hopes for peace.
8.	Today I want to address the major dimensions of peace and the role the United States intends to play in limiting and reducing all armaments, controlling nuclear technology, restricting the arms trade and settling disputes by peaceful means.
9.	When atomic weapons were used for the first time Winston Churchill described the power of the atom as  a revelation long mercifully withheld from man . Since then we have learned, in Durrenmatt’s chilling words, that  what has once been thought can never be unthought .
10.	If we are to have any assurance that our children will live out their lives in a world which satisfies our hope—or that they will have a chance to live at all-we must finally come to terms with this enormous nuclear force and turn it to exclusively beneficial ends. Peace will not be assured until the weapons of war are finally put away. While we work towards that goal nations will want sufficient arms to preserve their security. The United States purpose is to ensure peace. It is for that reason that our military posture and our alliances will remain as strong as necessary to deter attack.
11.	However, the security of the global community cannot for ever rest on a balance of terror. In the past, war has been accepted as the ultimate arbiter of disputes among nations, but in the nuclear era we can no longer think of war as merely a continuation of diplomacy by other means. Nuclear war cannot be  measured by the archaic standards of  victory  or  defeat . This stark reality imposes on the 

United States and the Soviet Union an awesome and special responsibility.
12.	The United States is engaged along with other nations in a broad range of negotiations. In Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT], we and the Soviets are within sight of a significant agreement in limiting the total numbers of weapons and in restricting certain categories of weapons of special concern to each of us. We can also start the crucial process of curbing the relentless march of technological development which makes nuclear weapons ever more difficult to control.
13.	We must look beyond the present, and work to prevent the critical threats and instabilities of the future. If the principles of self-restraint, reciprocity and mutual accommodation of interests are observed, then the United States and the Soviet Union not only will succeed in limiting weapons but also will create r foundation for better relations in other spheres of interest.
14.	The United States is willing to go as far as possible, consistent with our security interests, in limiting and reducing our nuclear weapons. On a reciprocal basis we are willing now to reduce them by 10 per cent, 20 percent or even 50 per cent, Then we will work for further reductions with a view to a world truly free of nuclear weapons.
15.	The United States also recognize the threat of continued testing of nuclear explosives.
16.	Negotiations for a comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions are now being conducted by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. As in other areas where vital nation J security interests are engaged, agreements must be verifiable and fair. They must be seen by all the parties as serving a longer-term interest that justifies the restraints of the moment. The longer-term interest in this instance is to close one more avenue of nuclear competition and thereby demonstrate to all the world that the major nuclear Powers take seriously our obligations to reduce the threat of nuclear catastrophe.
17.	My country believes that the time has come to end all explosions of nuclear devices, no matter what their claimed justification—peaceful or military-and we appreciate the efforts of other nations to reach this same goal.
18.	During the past nine months, I have expressed the special importance we attach to controlling nuclear proliferation; but I fear that many do not understand why the United States feels as it does. Why is it so important to avoid the chance that one or two or 10 other nations might acquire one or two or 10 nuclear weapons of their own? Let me try to explain, for I deeply believe that this is one of the greatest challenges that we face in the next quarter of a century.
19.	It is a truism that nuclear weapons are a powerful deterrent. They are a deterrent because they threaten. They could be used for terrorism or blackmail as well as for war. But they threaten not just the intended enemy; they threaten every nation—combatant and non-combatant alike. That is why all of us must be concerned.
20.	Let me be frank. The existence of nuclear weapons in the United States and the Soviet Union, and in the United Kingdom, France and China, is something we cannot undo except by the painstaking process of negotiation. But the existence of these weapons does not mean that other nations need to develop their own weapons, any more than it provides a reason for those of us who have them to share them with others. Rather it imposes two solemn obligations on the nations which have the capacity to export nuclear fuels and nuclear technologies-the obligation to meet legitimate energy needs and, in doing so, the obligation to ensure that nothing we export contributes, directly or indirectly, to the production of nuclear explosives. That is why the supplier nations arc seeking a common policy, and that is why the United States and the Soviet Unions even as we struggle to find common ground in the SALT talks, have already moved closer towards agreement and co-operation in our efforts to limit nuclear proliferation.
22. I believe that the London suppliers group must conclude its work as it is presently constituted, so that world security will be safeguarded from the pressures of commercial competition. We have learned that it is not enough to safeguard just some facilities or some materials. Full-scope, comprehensive safeguard ire necessary.
23 . Two weeks from now, in our own country, more than SO supplier and consuming nations will convene in Washington for the Conference on International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation which we proposed last spring. For the next several years experts will work together on every facet of the nuclear fuel cycle. The scientists and the policy-makers of these nations will face a tremendous challenge.  We know that, by the year 2000, nuclear power reactors could be producing enough plutonium to make tens of thousands of bombs every year. I believe, from my own personal knowledge of this issue, that there are ways to solve the problems we face. I believe that there are alternative fuel cycles that can be managed safely on global basis. I hope, therefore, that the Conference on the international Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation will have the support and encouragement of every nation.
24.	I have heard it said that efforts to control nuclear proliferation are facile  that thing is already out of the bottle. I do not believe this to be true. It should not be forgotten that for 25 years the nuclear club did not expand its membership., By genuine co-operation we can make certain that this terrible club expands no further.
25.	I have talked about the special problems of nuclear arms control' and nuclear proliferation at length. Let me turn to the problem of conventional arms control, which affects potentially or directly every nation represented in this great hall. This is not a matter for the future-even the near future-but one for the immediate present. World-wide military expenditures are. now in the neighborhood of $300 billion a year. Last year the nations of the world spent more than 60 times as much equipping each soldier as we spent educating each child. The industrialized nations spend the most money, but the rate of growth in military spending is faster in the developing world. While only a handful of states produce sophisticated weapons, the number of nations which seek to purchase these weapons is increasing rapidly.
26.	The conventional arms race both causes and feeds on the threat of larger and more deadly wars. It levies an enormous burden on an already troubled world economy.
27.	.For its part, the United States has now begun to reduce its arms exports. Our aim is to reduce both the quantity and the deadliness of the weapons we sell. We have already taken the first few steps, but we cannot go very far alone. Nations whose neighbours are purchasing large quantities of arms feel constrained to do the same. Supplier nations that practise restraint in arms sales sometimes find that they simply lose valuable commercial markets to other suppliers.
28.	We hope to work with other supplier nations to cut back on the flow of arms and to reduce the rate at which the most advanced and sophisticated weapon technologies spread around the world. We do not expect this task to be easy or to produce instant results. But we are committed to stop the spiral of the increasing sale of weapons.
29.	Equally important, we hope that purchaser nations, individually and through regional organizations, will limit their arms imports. We are ready to provide to some nations the necessary means for legitimate self-defence, but we are also eager to work with any nation or region in order to decrease the need for more numerous, more deadly and ever more expensive weapons.
30.	Fourteen years ago, one of my predecessors spoke in this hall under circumstances that in certain ways resembled these. It was a time, he said, of comparative calm and there was art atmosphere of rising hope about the prospect of controlling nuclear energy. The first specific step had been taken to limit the nuclear arms race-a test-ban treaty signed by nearly a hundred nations.
31.	But the succeeding years did not live up to the optimistic prospect John F. Kennedy placed before this Assembly because, as a community of nations, we failed to address the deepest sources of potential conflict among us.
32.	As we seek to establish the principles of detente among the major nuclear Powers, we believe that these principles must also apply in regional conflicts. The United States is committed to the peaceful settlement of differences. We are committed to the strengthening of the peace-making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American States.
33.	The United States supports the United Kingdom's efforts to bring about a peaceful, rapid transition to majority rule and independence in Zimbabwe. We joined .other members of the Security Council last week and also the Secretary-General in efforts to bring about independence and democratic rule in Namibia. We are pleased with the level of co-operation we have achieved with the leaders of the nations in the area, as well as with those peoples who are struggling for independence. We urge South Africa and other nations to support the proposed solution to the problems in Zimbabwe, and to co-operate still more closely in providing for a smooth and prompt transition in Namibia.
34.	But it is essential that all outside nations exercise restraint in their actions in Zimbabwe and Namibia, so that we can bring about that majority rule and avoid a widening war that could engulf the southern half of the African continent.
35.	Of all the regional conflicts in the world, none holds more menace than the Middle East. War there has already carried the world to the edge of nuclear confrontation. It has already disrupted the world economy and imposed severe hardships on the people in the developed and the developing nations alike. So true peace-peace embodied in binding treaties—is essential. It will be in the interest of the Israelis and the Arabs. It is in the interest of the American people. It is in the interest of the entire world.
36.	The United Nations Security Council has provided the basis for peace in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), but negotiations in good faith by all parties is needed to give substance to peace.
37.	Such negotiations in good faith must be inspired by a recognition that all nations in the area-Israel and the Arab countries-have a right to exist in peace, with the early establishment of economic and cultural exchanges and of normal diplomatic relations. Peace must include a process in which the bitter divisions o: generations, even centuries- hatreds and suspicions—can be overcome. Negotiations cannot be successful if any of the parties harbours the deceitful view that peace is simply an interlude in which to prepare for war.
38.	Negotiations in good faith will also require acceptance by all sides of the fundamental rights and interest of everyone involved.
39.	For Israel, this means borders that are recognized and secure. Security arrangements are crucial to a nation that has fought for its survival in each of the last four decades. The commitment of the United States to Israel's security is unquestionable.
40.	For the Arabs, the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people must be recognized. One of the things that binds the American people to Israel is our shared respect for human rights and the courage with which Israel has defended such rights. It is clear that a true and lasting peace in the Middle East must also respect the rights of all the peoples of the area. How these rights are to be defined and implemented is, of course; for the interested parties to decide in detailed negotiations, and not for us to dictate.
41.	We do not intend to impose from the outside a settlement on the nations of the Middle East.
42.	The United States has been meeting with the Foreign Ministers of Israel and the Arab nations involved in the search for peace. We are staying in close contact with the Soviet Union, with which we share responsibility for reconvening the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. As a result of these consultations, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed to call for the resumption of the Geneva Conference before the end of this year. While a number of procedural questions remain, if the parties continue to act in good faith, I believe that these questions can be answered.
310
43.	The major Powers have a special responsibility to act with restraint in areas of the world where they have competing interests because the association of these interests with local rivalries and conflicts can lead to serious confrontation. In the Indian Ocean area neither we nor the Soviet Union has a large military presence, nor is there a rapidly mounting competition between us. Restraint in the area may well begin with a mutual effort to stabilize our presence and to avoid an escalation in military competition. Then both sides can consider how our military activities in the Indian Ocean area might be even further-reduced.
44.	The peaceful settlement of differences is, of course, essential. The United States is willing to abide by that principle, as in the case of the recently signed Panama Canal treaties. Once ratified, these treaties can transform the United States-Panama relationship into one that permanently protects the interests and respects the sovereignty of both our countries.
45.	We have all survived and surmounted major challenges since the United Nations was founded, but we can accelerate progress even in a world of ever-increasing diversity. A commitment to strengthen international institutions is vital, but progress lies also in our own national policies. We can work together to form a community of peace if we accept the kind of obligations that I have suggested today.
46.	To summarize: first, there is an obligation to remove the threat of nuclear weaponry, to reverse the build-up of armaments and the trade in them, and to conclude bilateral and multilateral arms control agreements that can bring security to all of us.
47.	In order to reduce the reliance of nations on nuclear weaponry, 1 hereby solemnly declare, on behalf of the United States, that we will not use nuclear weapons except in self-defence; that is, in circumstances of an actual nuclear or conventional attack on the United States, our territories or armed forces, or such an attack on our allies.
48.	In addition, we hope that initiatives by the Western nations to secure mutual and balanced force reductions in Europe will be met by equal response from the Warsaw Pact countries.
49.	Secondly, an obligation to show restraint in areas of tension, to negotiate disputes and settle them peacefully, and to strengthen the peace-making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations.
50.	And, finally, an effort by all nations, East as well as West, North as well as South, to fulfil mankind's aspirations for human development and human freedom. It is to meet these basic demands that we build Governments and seek peace.
51.	We must share these obligations for our own mutual survival and our own mutual prosperity.
52.	We can see a world at peace. We can work for a world without want. We can build a global community dedicated to these purposes and to human dignity.
53.	The view that I have sketched for you today is that of only one leader in only one nation. However wealthy and powerful the United States may be, however capable of leadership, this power is increasingly only relative. The leadership increasingly is in need of being shared. No nation has a monopoly of vision, of creativity or of ideas. Bringing these together from many nations is our common responsibility and our common challenge. For only in these ways can the idea of a peaceful global community grow and prosper.
 

	

﻿94.	 Mr. President, I would like to begin my speech by congratulating you, Mr. Lazar Mojsov, on your election as President of the current session of the General Assembly. I would also like to take this opportunity to extend warm congratulations to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has made a major contribution to the anti-imperialist cause of the people of the world, and to the Republic of Djibouti, which has won independence after waging a protracted struggle, on their admission to membership in the United Nations, and sincerely to wish them new successes along their road of advance.
95.	The delegation of the People's Republic of China has come to attend this session of the General Assembly shortly after the successful Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China. Our country is now at an important juncture in history, when we are carrying forward the revolutionary cause pioneered by our predecessors and forging ahead into the future. Here I would like first of all to speak on developments in China.
96.	The year 1976 was no ordinary one for China. We lost our great leader and teacher Chairman Mao Tsedung and his long-tested, close comrades-in-arms, our respected and beloved Premier Chou En-lai and Chairman Chu Teh of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. Their passing away was a loss beyond measure to our Party and country, and our entire people was plunged in immense grief. In the same year, our country was hit by earthquakes and other severe natural calamities. Just when our people were faced with these grave difficulties, the counterrevolutionary  gang of four  of Wang Hungwen, Chang Chun-chiao, Chiang Ching and Yao Wen-yuan frenziedly stepped up their conspiratorial activities in a vain attempt to usurp supreme leadership in our Party and State. For a time dark clouds hung heavily over China. The Chinese people were worried about the fate of our Party and country, about whether we could continue to advance along the course charted by Chairman Mao. Our friends abroad also felt anxiety for us. A handful of enemies at home and abroad, however, gloated over our difficulties and hoped that our country would henceforth be thrown into a state of chaos and division and that Chairman Mao's revolutionary line and policies would no longer be followed. When Chairman Mao was still with us, he had been aware of die gang of four  problem. He waged repeated struggles against those persons and personally chose Chairman Hua Kuo-feng to be his successor so as to forestall their usurpation of Party and state power. After he passed away and at the critical moment when the  gang of four  attempted to seize the chance to take action, the Party Central Committee headed by Chairman Hua followed Chairman Mao's behest, acted on his directives and decisions and smashed this cabal at one blow, thus saving our country from a blood-bath and a major retrogression. The long-steeled Communist Party and people of China stood the rigorous test and won a great victory. The Chinese people rejoiced, and our foreign friends were happy for our
S3K6.
97.	At present, the situation in China is excellent We again have a wise leader in Chairman Hua Kuo-feng Our Party is more united, more unified and stronger than ever. People s democracy in China is being given full play. Our people s enthusiasm for socialism has never been so high the dictatorship of the proletariat is more firmly consolidated The mass movement to expose and criticize the
gang of four has speeded up the rehabilitation and expansion of industrial and agricultural production. A new leap forward is taking shape in the national economy
98.	The Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China was a great milestone in the history of our Party, and it was a congress of great, historic significance and far-reaching influence. The Congress stressed that the banner of Chairman Mao is the banner of victory of the Chinese people's revolution. The Chinese people are determined to rally closely around the Party Central Committee headed by Chairman Hua, forever hold aloft the great banner of Chairman Mao, adhere to his theory of continuing the revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat, and steadfastly implement his revolutionary line in domestic and external work. We are determined to work hard for the realization of the strategic decision of grasping the key link of class struggle and bringing about great order across the land, turn China into a powerful modern socialist country by the end of the century and make a greater contribution to humanity. We are confident of surmounting all difficulties and obstacles on our road of advance. Our cause is just. Our line is correct. Our goal must be attained. Our goal can unquestionably be attained.
99.	We are happy to see that the international situation is also excellent. All the basic contradictions in the world are sharpening, and the factors for revolution continue to grow. Countries want independence, nations want liberation, and the people want revolution-this has become the irresistible historical trend. The international united front against hegemonism, against the super-Power policies of aggression and war, is broadening.
100.	Over the past year, the revolutionary struggle of the international proletariat, the liberation struggles of the oppressed people and nations and the revolutionary mass movements in many countries have continued to surge forward. The Korean people's struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their country has won more popular support. The people of Democratic Kampuchea, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the Lao People's Democratic Republic, after winning great victories in their war against United States aggression and for national salvation, are actively consolidating their victorious gains and working hard for their countries' reconstruction. The people of the South-East Asian and South Asian countries, upholding independence and sovereignty, have repeatedly frustrated super-Power schemes of interference, control and expansion. The  Asian collective security system  so energetically hawked by a super-Power has been rejected or opposed by virtually all Asian countries. The Arab and Palestinian people's struggle against Israeli Zionism and super-Power hegemonism is deepening. The people in southern Africa have risen in a new upsurge of the struggle against colonialism and racism. The people of Panama, with the support of the people in other Latin American countries, have achieved important results in their struggle for the recovery of the Panama canal. The people of the countries of Asia, Africa, Latin America and Oceania have won a number of new victories in their struggle to win or safeguard national independence and defend state sovereignty. The numerous developing countries have carried on an unremitting struggle against the super-Powers in order to establish a new international economic order and defend their national economic rights and interests and their maritime rights. The third-world countries and people, who support and encourage one another and fight in unity and co-operation, have played an increasingly remarkable role as the main force in the struggle against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. Faced with the growing superpower menace, the countries of the second world in Western Europe and other regions have shown a stronger tendency towards unity against hegemonism. The mass movement of the Japanese people for the recovery of the four northern islands is sweeping across the land. The two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, which stand opposed to the people of the world, are beset with difficulties and crises at home and abroad. They find the going tougher and tougher. Social-imperialism, in particular, has suffered heavy blows one after another as its aggressive and expansionist features are further revealed. The international situation as a whole continues to develop in a direction favourable to the people of all countries and unfavourable to the super-Powers.
101.	The situation in the Middle East is a question of concern to the entire world. During the past year, the Arab and Palestinian' people have more closely combined their struggle against Zionism with the struggle against superpower hegemonism. Social-imperialism's despicable practice of betrayal and control, under the camouflage of support and aid has been opposed by a growing number of Arab countries and peoples.
102.	The Egyptian Government and people have resolutely resisted social-imperialism's political blackmail and economic pressure and safeguarded their state sovereignty and national dignity. The eighth meeting of the Kings and Presidents of the Arab League, held at Cairo on 25 and 26 October 1976, reached agreement on ending the civil war in Lebanon and strengthening Arab unity, thus frustrating another attempt of the super-Powers to sow discord and split the Arab ranks. While each super-Power tries to out-clamour the other for an over-all settlement of the Middle East question, both of them are in fact still attempting to maintain the unsettled state of  no war, no peace  in the Middle East. They are afraid of the emergence of a strong and united Arab world, of a stable and prosperous Middle East. Driven by the needs of their respective global strategies, they both seek to control the Middle East. Using different ways and tactics, both of them are supporting and abetting the Israeli Zionists and bringing all kinds of pressure to bear on the Arab countries and the Palestinian people. That is why the Israeli Zionists are so obdurate and so insolent. The situation in the Middle East will remain tense and complicated, pregnant with the danger of new military conflicts. But no one can shake the resolve of the Arab and Palestinian people to recover their sacred territories and regain their national rights. Supported by the people of the whole world, the just struggle of the Arab and Palestinian people will be crowned with final victory.
102. The developments in Africa are particularly encouraging. New victories have been won steadily by the great African people in their struggle against imperialism, colonialism, racism and hegemonism. The Government and people of the Sudan foiled the subversive plots engineered by social-imperialism and expelled its military experts, dealing a heavy blow to its ambition of aggression and expansion. The people of Zaire, who are united as one against the common enemy and are supported by fraternal African peoples, crushed the invasion of mercenary troops instigated by social-imperialism and safeguarded the independence and territorial integrity of their country. This victory, which greatly raised the morale of the African people and deflated the arrogance of the aggressors, sets an example of mutual support and joint resistance of African peoples against super-Power aggression. In southern Africa, the people of Zimbabwe and Namibia have persisted in armed struggle against racism and for national liberation under arduous and complex conditions. The people of Azania have fought resolutely against apartheid despite brutal repression, and the mass movement there keeps surging forward. People across the African continent voice strong solidarity for their brothers in southern Africa, whose heroic struggle also enjoys support from the people the world over. The reactionary Vorster and Smith regimes are besieged on all sides and completely isolated.
103.	In their protracted struggle, the African countries and people have come to appreciate more and more the importance of unity against the enemy. Although there exist differences of one kind or another between African countries, yet confronted with the enemy they have sought common ground on major issues, while putting aside their minor differences, and have directed the main thrust of their attack against imperialism, colonialism and racism, and super-Power hegemonism in particular. This has been and will continue to be an important guarantee for the victories of the African people. The first Afro-Arab summit conference and the fourteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity stressed mutual aid and co-operation and the need to oppose foreign interference. These Conferences were a significant testimony to the strength and unity of the 61 African and Arab countries with their more than 400 million people in lighting the common enemy. They were a positive contribution to the struggle of the African and Arab people and of the entire third world against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism.
104.	The struggle of the African people will yet be protracted and arduous. Colonialism and racism are still putting up a last-ditch struggle. What is more serious is that both super-Powers have intensified their interference in African affairs. Owing to the importance of Africa's strategic location and its rich natural resources, each of them regards the control of this continent as an important part of its global strategy of gaining sway in Europe and dominating the world. Super-Power rivalry in Africa is becoming fiercer. One super-Power seeks to preserve and expand its vested interests and influence in Africa. It obdurately supports the forces of colonialism and racism in southern Africa and tries to undermine the liberation struggles of the people there. The other super-Power, flaunting the banner of opposing imperialism and colonialism and supporting the national liberation movement to fool people, has stepped up its infiltration and expansion in Africa. It is exploiting some differences between African countries and between liberation organizations and utilizing some problems left over from the days of colonial rule to sow discord, incite trouble and fish in troubled waters. Against those African countries which dare to resist and oppose its hegemonic behaviour, this super-Power has resorted to brazen and unscrupulous subversion and interference and gone so far as to organize and send mercenary troops for outright military invasion, which poses a grave threat to the security and independence of these countries. Many African countries are worried lest what happened in Angola and Zaire yesterday may befall themselves tomorrow. Facts eloquently show that the rivalry between the super-Powers is the main source of unrest and turbulence in Africa, and that the super-Power which styles itself a  natural ally  of the African people has become their most sinister and ferocious enemy. The African countries and people are indeed faced with the trying task of rebuffing the tiger at the back door while repelling the wolf at the front gate . However, a great change has taken place in Africa. The great African people have stood up; they will never tolerate any foreign force of aggression lording it over them again. It is our conviction that the African people, persisting in unity and struggle against the common enemy, will frustrate all super-Power schemes and demolish the last bastions of colonialism and racism in Africa, thereby winning complete independence and liberation for the whole of Africa.
105.	A question the people of the world are interested in and think about today is whether the world situation is more tense or more relaxed, whether the danger of war is greater or less. A super-Power claims that the danger of war has been  considerably reduced . This is sheer deceptive talk. The stark reality is that the situation in the world has not relaxed, and that the factors for war are visibly growing. In their scramble for hegemony, both superpowers are intensifying their arms expansion and war preparations. Their rivalry extends to every corner of the world. They are carrying out aggression and expansion far and wide, each cutting the ground from under the other's feet and striving to weaken and gain advantage over the other. Because of its political, economic and strategic importance, Europe is strategically the focus of rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers and the arena where they are locked in acute military confrontation. The two antagonistic military blocs keep increasing their troops and armaments and redeploying their forces and frequently conducting large-scale military exercises. The war machine of each super-Power has expanded to unprecedented proportions. The super-Powers are the source of a new world war. This is an ironclad fact which no one can cover up.
106.	It must be pointed out in particular that social- imperialism presents the greater danger. Judging from the current over-all picture of the rivalry between the two hegemonic Powers, the United States is on the defensive, while the Soviet Union is on the offensive. Social- imperialism is exerting its utmost to carry out all-round arms expansion. It surpassed the United States in conventional armed forces long ago and is striving for over-all supremacy in nuclear weapons as well. It has expanded its navy on a massive scale, and its fleets are active on all seas. It wants to grab the whole of Europe, Asia and Africa. It not only maintains a posture of readiness to break through at the centre in Europe, but strives to create a situation in which it can outflank Europe from the north and the south. It is accelerating its plunder of strategic resources and control of strategic areas in Africa and the Middle East and seeks to seize the Persian Gulf in the east, block the strategic routes of the Atlantic Ocean in the west and thrust round the Cape of Good Hope in the south. The ambitions of the new tsars far exceed those of the old tsars.
107.	There are profound political and economic reasons why social-imperialism has become the most dangerous source of war. Being a latecomer among the imperialist Powers, it is more aggressive and adventurous. Owing to its relatively inadequate economic strength, it cannot but rely to a greater extent on military strength and threats of war in pursuing expansion. Its highly concentrated State- monopoly capitalist economy and its political regime of Fascist dictatorship make it easier to militarize its national economy and state apparatus. Besides, it flaunts the banner of  socialism , which can deceive people to a certain extent, and this also makes it more dangerous.
108.	Lenin said:  An essential feature of imperialism is the rivalry between several great Powers in the striving for hegemony. 
109.	Chairman Mao said:
 The United States wants to protect its interests in the world and the Soviet Union wants to expand; this can in no way be changed. In the era in which classes exist, war is an interval between one peace and another. War is a continuation of politics, that is to say, a continuation of peace. Peace itself is politics. 
The continuation of fierce contention between the two super-Powers is bound to lead to a world war some day. This is independent of man's will.
110.	More and more people have recognized that the factors for war are visibly growing and that social- imperialism is the most dangerous source of war. They advocate the strengthening of unity, of defence capabilities and of preparedness against war. But it must not be overlooked that there is still a strong trend towards appeasement in the West. Some people hope that .temporary ease can be gained by making compromises and concessions. They imagine that they can restrain social- imperialism by signing agreements and expanding economic exchanges with it and by giving it loans. Some even seek to divert this peril towards the east in order to preserve themselves at the expense of others. Historical experience tells us that all aggressors bully the soft and fear the tough and always reach out for a yard after taking an inch. Like rearing a tiger to one's ultimate detriment, a policy of appeasement will simply encourage aggression and hasten the outbreak of war. To follow in Neville Chamberlain's footsteps means courting self-destruction. We must not forget the tragic lesson of Munich.
111.	It is understandable that people are interested in the question of disarmament when the super-Powers are stepping up their rivalry and their arms expansion and war preparations and when the danger of a world war is growing. But the super-Powers are playing up disarmament as something miraculous. In particular, the super-Power that most vociferously preaches  peace  dishes up some sort of disarmament proposal every year and describes disarmament virtually as a panacea which will dispel the danger of war, ensure a lasting peace and rid the world of poverty. This is sheer deception. Since the super-Powers are bent on aggression and expansion and are scrambling for world hegemony, they are bound to expand their armaments and go to war. They will never lay down their knives, nor beat their swords into ploughshares. The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva has been going on for 16 years, yet neither super-Power has reduced its armaments by a single gun. The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks have been going on for 8 years, yet strategic arms have kept growing in number. The negotiations on mutual and balanced reduction of forces in Central Europe has entered its fourth year, yet the armaments deployed by the super-Powers in central Europe have continued to increase, and there are endless wrangling and differences even over the exact number of troops maintained by the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty in this region. It is very clear that the super-Powers are prating about disarmament and peace only to cover up their arms expansion and war preparations. They are just using people's desire for peace to lull the people with false hopes so that it may be easier for them to launch a war some day and realize their wild ambition of conquering the world.
112. Our attitude with regard to a world war is,  First, we are against it; second, we are not afraid of it . The people of the world want peace, and the Chinese people also want a peaceful international environment in which they may better build up their country. It is the super-Powers and not the Chinese people and the people of the world who want war. Some people say that in repeatedly stressing the danger of a world war, China is raising a false alarm and that it is warlike and wants to provoke a world war. This is vile slander. All we have done is to call a spade a spade so that the people will be on the alert and oppose the unleashing of a new world war by the super-Powers. And when we say we are not afraid of war, it means still less that we like it, but because to be afraid gets us nowhere. The super-Powers are bent on fighting a war. What is the use of being afraid? Actually, the super-Powers are not so terrifying. They look strong like real tigers. But, as Chairman Mao pointed out:
 ... imperialism and all reactionaries, looked at in essence, from a long-term point of view, from a strategic point of view, must be seen for what they are—paper tigers.   s
Social-imperialism has wild ambitions. But it finds little political support, and its economy is lop-sided. There is a sharpening contradiction between its ruling clique and the broad masses as well as mounting discontent among the oppressed minority nationalities at home. Its  community , which is a colonial set-up, is very unstable and shows a growing centrifugal tendency. Pursuing aggression and expansion everywhere, social-imperialism has set itself against the people of all countries, and this in itself dooms it to defeat. So long as the people of all countries unite and form themselves into a mighty army against hegemonism, heighten their vigilance, get prepared and persevere in struggle, they may be able to put off the war; and in case it does break out, they will find themselves in a favourable
position to abolish unjust war by means of a just war against aggression and win genuine peace. We are revolutionary optimists. We are convinced that the human race will abolish war and not be destroyed by it.
113. Developments on the international scene have proved that Chairman Mao's thesis differentiating the three worlds, which he set forth in 1974, conforms to the political realities of the contemporary world and is in the fundamental interests of the people the world over. Back in 1926 he stressed,
 Who are our enemies? Who are our friends? This is a question of the first importance for the revolution. 
Chairman Mao advanced his thesis differentiating the three worlds after he had observed and studied for years the development and changes of the basic contradictions and the division and realignment of the political forces in the world since the 1960s, as well as the political and economic position of each country internationally. The great significance of this thesis lies in the fact that it provides the people of the world with a powerful ideological instrument with which to identify the main revolutionary forces, the chief enemies, and the middle forces that can be won over and united within the international struggle of today. It thus enables the people of all countries to mobilize better all positive factors, unite with all the forces that can be united and isolate the main common enemy to the maximum and deal it the heaviest blows. At present, the steady reinforcement of the unity and co-operation of the third world, the growing tendency in the second world to unity against hegemonism and the broadening of the international united front against super-Power hegemonism, in which the third world is the main force-all this testifies to the validity of Chairman Mao's thesis. Obviously, the broader the international united front against hegemonism and the more isolated the super-Powers, the more that situation will favour the struggle of the oppressed people and nations for liberation and of the people of all countries, particularly the third-world countries, to win or safeguard national independence, defend State sovereignty and develop their national economy. On the other hand, every victory in the revolutionary struggle of the people of all countries helps to weaken the super-Powers, thwart their aggressive and expansionist ambitions, upset their war plans and deployments, and put off the outbreak of a new world war.
114. Chairman Mao's theory of the three worlds is diametrically opposed to the super-Powers' views on international relations. One super-Power spreads the view that there is only one world, a so-called  interdependent  world. But in fact the different parts of the world are mutually contradictory as well as interrelated. The  interdependence  this super-Power emphasizes has nothing in common with the international co-operation on an equal footing demanded by the many small and medium-sized countries. This super-Power wants to obliterate the actual contradiction between exploiter and exploited, between oppressor and oppressed and between aggressor and victim of aggression. It attempts thereby to preserve the outdated world order and wants all countries to be  dependent  on it. The other super-Power ignores the fact that the socialist camp ceased to exist and the imperialist camp disintegrated long ago, and asserts that the two camps still exist. Evidently, it wants even more to obliterate its acute contradiction with the people of the world, and with the people of the third-world countries, in particular. By continuing to use the signboard  the socialist camp , it attempts to disguise its true nature of social-imperialism, enforce the doctrines of  limited sovereignty  and  international dictatorship  in its  community  so as to preserve its neo-colonial set-up, and at the same time to hoodwink the people and to push its policies of aggression and expansion in the whole world. There is an essential similarity between the two views advanced by the two super-Powers. Both want to prevent us the people of the world from distinguishing between our enemies, our friends and ourselves, so as to strengthen their positions in the rivalry for world hegemony and to undermine the struggle of the world people against hegemonism.
115.	Chairman Mao's strategic concept differentiating the three worlds explodes the fallacies spread by the superpowers and gives a correct orientation to the contemporary international struggle. This brilliant concept will demonstrate greater vitality with the passage of time.
116.	The revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs which were formulated by the Chinese people's great leader and teacher Chairman Mao Tsetung and creatively implemented by our esteemed and beloved Premier Chou En-lai have been and will continue to be the guideline for China's external work. At the Eleventh National Congress of the Communist Party of China, Chairman Hua Kuo-feng solemnly declared that we will hold high the great banner of Chairman Mao, adhere to proletarian internationalism and continue to carry out Chairman Mao's revolutionary line in foreign affairs. We will strengthen our unity with the other socialist countries and with the proletariat and the oppressed people and nations throughout the world, strengthen our unity with the other third-world countries and ally with all countries subjected to the aggression, interference or threats of super-Power hegemonism so as to form the broadest possible united front against the hegemonism of the two super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States. We will establish and develop relations with other countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. We will strengthen our unity with all other genuine Marxist-Leninist parties and organizations and carry through to the end the struggle against modern revisionism with the Soviet revisionist renegade clique as its centre.
117.	We have always held that all countries, big and small, should be equal. We are resolutely against big nations bullying small ones and strong nations oppressing weak ones. The affairs of a country should be managed by its own people; the affairs of a region should be managed by the countries in that region; the affairs of the whole world should be managed jointly by all countries.
118.	China is a socialist country. China and the other third-world countries share a common experience and face common fighting tasks. China belongs to the third world. We stand firmly together with the other developing countries and people in Asia, Africa, Latin America and other regions. We firmly support these countries in their struggle to combat imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism and to win or safeguard national independence, defend State sovereignty and develop their national economy. The non-aligned movement, an important force, has developed steadily and become stronger, and together with the other third-world countries, it is playing a role of growing importance in international affairs. We firmly support the non-aligned countries in pursuing their non- aligned policy of independence, peace and neutrality and support them in opposing all foreign aggression and interference.
119.	We firmly support the Korean people in their just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their country. The United Nations Command must be dissolved. The armed forces of the United States and their equipment must be withdrawn immediately and totally from South Korea. The Chung Hee Park clique in South Korea must stop all its provocations which create tensions. The Korean question should be resolved by the Korean people themselves free from any outside interference. Any act to delay and obstruct the reunification of Korea in the hope of perpetuating the division of Korea and creating  two Koreas  runs counter to the aspirations of the entire Korean people and will not be tolerated. The resolution for promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session should be implemented in earnest.
120.	We firmly support the Arab and Palestinian people in their just struggle to recover their lost territories and regain their national rights. We are firmly opposed to the rivalry for hegemony between the two super-Powers in the Middle East and to Israel's policy of aggression. The provocative action of the present administration of Israel in establishing settlements on the West Bank of the Jordan River with a view to permanently occupying Arab territories must be strongly condemned. We reaffirm that we will have no dealings whatsoever with the Israeli Zionists.
121.	We firmly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania in their just struggle against white racism and for national independence and liberation. We reaffirm that we will have no dealings whatsoever with the South African and Rhodesian racist regimes.
122.	We firmly support the Latin American countries in their struggle to strengthen unity and co-operation and combat super-Power hegemonism. We firmly support the Panamanian people in their valiant and protracted struggle for the recovery of the Panama Canal.
123.	We firmly support the third-world countries and people in their struggle against imperialist or social- imperialist exploitation and plunder, for the establishment of a new international economic order and in defence of their national economic rights and interests. The correct principles in the Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order and the Programme of Action adopted at the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly must be carried out. We support the series of reasonable proposals advanced by the developing countries, such as the establishment of an integrated programme for commodities and its common fund, the demand for a moratorium on and the reduction or cancellation of debt burdens, etc.
124.	We support the second-world countries and people in their struggle to oppose super-Power control, intimidation and bullying and to defend their security and national independence. We support their efforts to improve relations with third-world countries on the basis of equality. We appreciate the efforts of the Western European countries for unity against hegemonism. We firmly support the Japanese people in their struggle for the recovery of the four northern islands.
125.	We are for genuine disarmament and against sham disarmament. We have consistently stood for the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. As the first step, all nuclear countries, and particularly the two nuclear super-Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, must first of all undertake the unequivocal obligation that they will not be the first to use nuclear weapons at any time or in any circumstances, and in particular will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries and nuclear-free zones, and that they must dismantle all their nuclear bases on the territories of other countries and withdraw from abroad all their nuclear armed forces and nuclear weapons. We support the demands of the countries and people in the regions of the Indian Ocean, the  Mediterranean and the Red Sea and in South-East Asia, South Asia and Latin America for the establishment of peace zones, security zones and nuclear-free zones. We are strongly opposed to the super-Powers' policies of nuclear blackmail and nuclear monopoly and to their disarmament fraud.
126.	The Shanghai communiqué of 27 February 1972 is the basis for the relations between China and the United States at present. According to the spirit of the communiqué, if relations between the two countries are to be normalized, the United States must sever its so-called diplomatic relations with the Chiang clique, withdraw all its armed forces and military installations from Taiwan and the Taiwan Strait area and abrogate its so-called  mutual defence treaty  with the Chiang clique. Taiwan is China's sacred territory. The Chinese people are determined to liberate Taiwan and accomplish the great undertaking of unifying our motherland. When and how to liberate Taiwan is entirely China's internal affair, which brooks no foreign interference whatsoever. The above is the unalterable stand of the Chinese Government.
127.	Our controversy with the Soviet leading clique on matters of principle will go on for a long time. We will persevere in our tit-for-tat struggle against its hegemonism. At the same time, we have always held that China and the Soviet Union should maintain normal State relations on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. It is none other than the Soviet leading clique that has worsened the State relations between China and the Soviet Union. If the Soviet leaders really want to improve the State relations between the two countries, they should prove this by deeds.
128.	We will always bear in mind Chairman Mao's teaching,  Dig tunnels deep, store grain everywhere, and never seek hegemony , and be ready at all times to wipe out any enemy that dares to invade China. Our policy is:  We will not attack unless we are attacked; if we are attacked, we will certainly counterattack. 
129.	We will always bear in mind Chairman Mao's teaching that in our external work we should  get rid of great-power chauvinism resolutely, thoroughly, wholly and completely  We will never seek hegemony or be superpower. We will always stand by the oppressed people and nations throughout the world. On behalf of the Chinese Government, Vice-Premier Teng Hsiao-ping solemnly declared from this rostrum in April 1974:
 If one day China should change its [political] colour and turn into a super-Power, if it too, should play the tyrant in the world, and everywhere subject others to its bullying, aggression and exploitation, then the people of the world should identify it as social imperialism, expose it, oppose it and work together with the Chinese people to overthrow it. 
Here, we the Chinese delegation, would like to reaffirm this stand.
130.	The world is advancing amidst turmoil; the people are awakening in the course of struggle. We are now in a new historical period-a period of struggle against superpower hegemonism. The struggle will be hard and the road tortuous, but the future is bright.  The people, and the people alone, are the motive force in the making of world history. The people of the world have been tempered in great storms of struggle. They have gained experience, strengthened their unity and grown stronger. It is not the one or two super-Powers but the people of the world that decide the destiny of mankind. Victory unquestionably belongs to the people of the world.
 ﻿91.	 Mr. President, I should like first on behalf of the Federal Government to congratulate you on your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and at the same time I should like to express our pleasure that you, an outstanding political personality and diplomat, representing one of the leading countries of the non-aligned movement, are presiding over this Assembly.
92.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany I welcome in our midst the two new Members, the Republic of Djibouti and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. This is an important step towards bringing our Organization nearer to the goal of universality.
93.	We have assembled here to try and bring the world-a world divided by conflicting ideologies, separated by a gulf between poor, and rich nations, torn by various conflicts- further along the long road to our objective: a world of peace, of economic and social progress, a world in which the dignity of man is respected. In fulfilling this task, central importance attaches to the United Nations, the only universal organization.
94.	Our age is one of far-reaching change. New thinking and new action are required. Only a generation ago the course of the world was determined by a few big Powers. Since then a hundred new States have emerged and have entered world politics with their own ideas and their own claims. For the first time in history the nations of the world are aware of their dependence on one another worldwide.
95.	There is a growing recognition of the fact that through co-operation we must transform our period of transition into an era of joint progress, in order to prevent it from becoming, through confrontation; an era of joint decline The world is looking for a just order of co-operation. In the past the system between States was often understood as a relationship of supremacy and subordination, politically, militarily and economically. This policy of supremacy no longer has a future. True, the idea of safeguarding one's own interests through power politics is by no means extinct. But it is confronted by the strongest force of this era: the will of nations for self-determination and independence.
96.	That will is strong particularly in the nations of Africa, Asia and Latin America. It has led to the dissolution of the huge colonial empires, and it will doom to failure any endeavour to establish new dependencies. This also applies to any attempt to establish supremacy by ideological means through ideological colonialism.
97.	Under the conditions prevailing in today's world, a country's interests can be safeguarded on a durable basis only through a policy of co-operation and fair reconciliation of interests. The world order of the future can only be an order based on equality.
98.	The Federal Republic of Germany has from the very outset built its foreign policy on respect for the self-determination and equal rights of all nations. We want self- determination for the indivisible German nation. We are helping to build the European Community, a Community in which all members have equal status and equal rights.
99.	We are also helping to shape the North Atlantic Alliance, an alliance which is a union of equal member States.
100.	With our policy of detente we are seeking co-operation with our Eastern neighbours on the basis of equal rights and mutual benefit.
101.	We seek equal and balanced partnership with the nations of Africa, Asia and Latin America, and we fully support them in their claim to independence and the right to develop as they see fit.
102.	In a nutshell, we want a world devoid of supremacy. We do not want to establish spheres of influence; we do not want to export ideologies. Rather we want a world in which all nations will determine their own way of life politically, economically and culturally and in which they will cooperate as partners, as equals.
103.	The movement of the non-aligned has become a major force in the quest for such a world of independence and equality of nations. Regional groupings as well, based on equality, can also make an essential contribution in Asia, in Africa and in Latin America.
104.	Our aim is a world of partnership. This means we must achieve the following goals. First, in order to safeguard peace, we must bring about constructive co-operation between Western and Eastern industrialized countries, beyond all ideological differences. Secondly, we must stop the arms race, which threatens peace and wastes resources. Thirdly, we must settle the smouldering conflicts in many regions of the world by peaceful means. Fourthly, we must constantly reduce the gap between rich and poor nations. We must overcome hunger and need and misery everywhere in the world. Fifthly, we must make respect for the rights and the dignity of man the foundation of justice and stability in the world.
105.	In a world of nuclear weapons, the policy of safeguarding peace determines the destiny of mankind. Safeguarding peace is the common goal of all democratic forces in my country. Safeguarding peace is more than avoiding war. Through the renunciation of force and the peaceful settlement of conflicts we must build a world of partnership. The member countries of' the European Community have embarked upon that path. Twice in this century they have been embroiled in war. Today, the Europe of the nine countries has become a force for peace in the world. In the North Atlantic Alliance the democracies of Europe and North America have united to secure peace. The European Community and the North Atlantic Alliance, in turn, provided the firm foundations from which it became possible to launch the process of East-West detente.
106.	The Federal Republic of Germany has made a substantial contribution to make detente in Europe possible. By means of the treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague, it has opened the way to normal relations with its Eastern neighbours. Within that context, relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union will also in future be of fundamental importance for detente in Europe. We want to develop these relations further.
107.	The treaty with the German Democratic Republic on the basis of relations has laid a foundation on which the two German States can live together. Part and parcel of that policy pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany is its declared aim to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination. We are certain that, here again, history will show that a nation's will for unity will assert itself. Nobody can elude the logic of history by using ideology as a subterfuge.
108.	The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has carried forward and developed among the 35 participating countries the process of detente that had been initiated bilaterally. The Final Act of Helsinki is a clear rejection of concepts of supremacy. Relations in the whole of Europe are to be based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all States.
109.	My Polish colleague, the previous speaker, was right in pointing out that the Federal Republic of Germany and the Polish People's Republic have made progress along the road to normalization. The meeting of Federal Chancellor Helmut Schmidt with the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers' Party, Mr. Gierek, in Helsinki has given an important impetus to this development.
110.	At the forthcoming follow-up Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to be held in Belgrade a sober balance-sheet will have to be drawn up as to whether and to what extent the general principles and the specific declarations of intent on economic and humanitarian matters in the Final Act have been put into practice, and what still has to be done.
111.	The Federal Government will do its best to ensure that the follow-up Conference will give fresh impetus to detente. The Belgrade Conference must become not the end of the road, but rather a point along the road in the long-term process of detente. There must be no relapse into cold war. That would render further progress impossible and jeopardize what has been achieved so far.
112.	Detente in Europe starts from the existing realities. Among those realities are the ties between West Berlin and the Federal Republic of Germany. We shall do everything to secure the viability of West Berlin. West Berlin must fully participate in the process of detente and its progress. In this context the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin of 3 September 1971 is of decisive importance. It must be strictly observed and fully implemented. Berlin is both a symbol and a yardstick of the will for detente and co-operation between East and West.
113.	We know that ideological differences will continue to exist between East and West. We are ready for a competition of ideas and achievements. However, detente means that neither side should attempt to impose its system on the other.
114.	Beyond their ideological rivalry, East and West have a common interest in safeguarding world peace, in developing mutually beneficial co-operation, and in resolving the problems of the developing countries. The latter need the contributions of the Western and the Eastern industrialized countries in order to master their problems. The developing countries need least of all a transfer of the East-West conflict to their regions.
115.	President Carter, in his recent speech in Charleston, defined the goal as follows:
 Our goal is not to encourage dissension or to re-divide the world into two opposing ideological camps, but to expand the realm of independent, economically self- reliant nations. 
116.	A world of partnership can thrive only in a climate of international trust. Such trust presupposes that nations and individuals can live free from fear. They have a right to be secure from the threat or use of force, be it force in the form of political or economic subjugation or be it force of weapons of whatever kind.
117.	In 1976 the Western defence alliance demanded that no country build up a higher level of armaments than was required for its defence.
118.	The Federal Republic of Germany has from its beginning taken the position that force cannot be a means to settle problems. That is why it actively advocates balanced and controlled disarmament on a world-wide scale. There must be an end to the arms race.
119.	We take seriously the task which we assumed when we became a member of the Geneva Conference of the Committee on Disarmament of the United Nations. From the beginning, we endorsed the initiative to convene a special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on disarmament. Even before the non-proliferation Treaty came into being we had renounced nuclear weapons. We consider the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons to be an essential prerequisite for safeguarding peace. As a party to the non-proliferation Treaty, we appeal once more to all States which are still standing aside to accede to the Treaty.
120.	The arms race is an enormous waste of resources in a world which ought to concentrate its efforts on the elimination of hunger and distress. Expenditure on armaments amounting to roughly $330 billion in 1976 is a challenge to the common sense and moral conviction of all States.
121.	The forthcoming special session of the General Assembly on disarmament must clearly show how we can live up to this challenge. It must not bog down in generalities.
122.	Besides world-wide endeavours for disarmament, regional efforts are required, especially where the size of the existing military potential makes such action particularly urgent. It is for that reason that the Federal Republic of Germany is actively participating in the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions. Our aims are clear and straightforward: first, we want parity of forces in Central Europe—neither side should have more forces than the other; and, secondly, we want such parity at a lower level. If those aims were to materialize, this would be a step towards greater stability. It could give fresh and strong impetus to the process of detente.
123.	In all efforts for disarmament and arms control- world wide and regional—we are conscious of the importance attaching to the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks between the United States and the Soviet Union. We welcome the efforts made in those negotiations. The progress achieved in the course of those negotiations will have a favourable effect on detente in general and on other endeavours for disarmament and arms control.
124.	Developing a world based on partnership presupposes that we settle conflicts by peaceful means. Three conflicts have been on the General Assembly's agenda for a good number of years—those in the Middle East, Cyprus and southern Africa.
125.	In the Middle East, a region neighbouring on and closely linked with the members of the European Community, we were relieved to witness the termination of the civil war in the greater part of Lebanon. But there is no peace yet. We appeal to all who are involved in the constant outbursts of fighting in southern Lebanon to lay down their arms at last. This is essential not only for Lebanon itself but also for stability and peace in the whole region.
126.	A settlement of the Middle East conflict is of vital importance also to Europe and the world as a whole. Together with its partners in the European Community the Federal Republic of Germany reaffirmed the principles for a solution in the statement on the Middle East made by the European Council in London on 29 June 1977. A just and lasting peace settlement must, starting from Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), give effect to the following principles: it must implement the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force; it must respect the right of all States in the region—and that means the right of Israel as well—to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries; it must end the territorial occupation which Israel has maintained since 1967; it must take into account the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. In the view of the Federal Republic of Germany, those legitimate rights of the Palestinian people include its rights to self-determination and to give effective expression to its national identity. A solution must therefore take into account the need for a homeland for the Palestinian people.
127.	The States members of the European Community have urgently appealed to all parties involved to begin peace negotiations as soon as possible. The Palestinians must participate in those negotiations. The road to negotiations must not be blocked by the unilateral creation of faits accomplis. That is why the Federal Government, in this forum too, comes out against the establishment of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories.
128.	The Federal Republic of Germany has friendly relations with all States in that region and uses them in its efforts to help to bring about a peaceful settlement. Advantage must be taken of the promising signs which emerged at the beginning of the year. This requires all concerned to show respect for the inalienable rights of the other side. I urgently appeal to all parties to the conflict to be aware of their responsibility for maintaining world peace and to make possible a peace settlement through realism and a spirit of compromise.
129.	Stagnation will also have to be overcome at last in the search for a solution of the Cyprus conflict. Any settlement must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. The aim of giving the independent Republic of Cyprus a bicommunal and federative structure must and can be attained only through direct negotiations between the two ethnic groups. The Federal Republic of Germany supports the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to bring those negotiations to a successful conclusion under his auspices.
130.	In recent years African problems have moved more and more into the forefront of international politics. The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany is unequivocal. We support the independence of the African States; we support racial equality; we are against colonialism, against any kind of racial discrimination and against any attempt to establish, by pursuing power politics from outside, new dependencies in Africa. Having in mind the continuing suppression of the black majorities in southern Africa, President Nyerere once said:
 Man is so constituted that he will not rest until he feels that he has freedom and the human dignity which goes with it. Otherwise, he will sooner or later fight for his own freedom within his society and for the freedom of his society from outside domination. 
131.	The Federal Republic of Germany therefore presses for a peaceful solution of the problems in southern Africa before it is too late—a peaceful change designed to lead all races into a common future of independence and of coexistence based on equality. It is for the community of States which, at the Conferences of Maputo and Lagos, so impressively demonstrated their determination, to eliminate the vestiges of colonialism and racial discrimination in southern Africa. The Federal Republic of Germany shares the objectives of all those who, in liberation movements and elsewhere, champion the cause of self- determination and human rights by peaceful means.
132.	As regards Rhodesia, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany supports all international efforts—in particular the Anglo-American initiative—to replace the illegal minority regime and to bring about a speedy and peaceful transfer of power to the black majority.
133.	As regards the problem of Namibia, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is actively involved in the initiative of the five Western members of the Security Council designed to prepare the way for Namibia's independence on the basis of Security Council resolution 385 (1976). The citizens of Namibia are to determine their future in general and free elections in which SWAPO is to participate. In this the United Nations has to play an important role. We expect the United Nations to appoint a special representative for the transition of Namibia to independence, and to contribute during the transitional period to the protection of Namibia's internal security and territorial integrity by providing peace-keeping forces. After achieving political independence, Namibia will be faced with the huge task of building up its own economy. In doing so it will need the help of its friends. The Federal Republic of Germany considers this to be an important task.
134.	With all the emphasis at its command the Federal Republic of Germany calls for the ending of racial discrimination in the Republic of South Africa. We call for an end to the policy of apartheid, and the policy of  bantustanization  and for the establishment of social, economic and political equality for all sections of the population. That includes the safeguarding of the rights of the minorities.
135.	The States members of the European Community have drawn up a code of conduct for European firms in South Africa  designed to give effect to the principle of equal treatment for black and white workers. That is an important step towards the establishment of the economic and social equality of races, wherever we have an opportunity to do so.
136.	The Federal Government has reacted with concern to indications that South Africa may plan a nuclear weapons test. We take it that the Government of South Africa will keep to the declarations it has made in the meantime. However, we appeal to it once more to accede to the non-proliferation Treaty in order to dispel any doubt concerning its position.
137.	The time for peaceful reform through a constructive dialogue between the races is running out. Further delay, further hesitation, would be bound to result in a racial war which could bring chaos to the whole of southern Africa. We express our sympathy and sorrow for all those who have already become the victims of racial conflict. South Africa can find peace only if it implements human rights for all races.
138.	Besides the Middle East, Cyprus, and southern Africa, there are further sources of serious conflict. At present we all think of the fighting and bloodshed in the Horn of Africa. We must make every effort to settle all these other conflicts peacefully, too.
139.	A world of peace and partnership is inconceivable if we do not overcome the gap which divides today's world more deeply than any ideological differences—the gap between rich and poor. The challenge for us is to create a new international economic order which will make it possible for all men in all countries to lead a life free from hunger or need. There is also the question of implementing human rights in the social and economic fields.
140.	We cannot achieve this new order by discarding existing and proven structures. Such structures must, rather, be steadily developed and in a flexible way adjusted to ever new requirements and conditions. We must preserve the effectiveness of the steering mechanism of the market economy and at the same time ensure for the developing countries both equal participation in world economy and a more than proportionate rate of growth.
141.	The search for a new order must be based on the recognition that neither side-neither developing nor industrialized countries—can reach their economic goal alone. The developing countries can step to, their own progress only in a climate of world-wide economic growth. Commodity prices of greater stability, rising exports of finished goods from the developing countries, a larger transfer of resources—all this presupposes that the industrialized countries will return to stable growth. In turn, the industrialized countries also need the impetus of accelerated development to regain stable growth.
142.	The international economic order must therefore serve the twofold aim of providing more than proportionate growth rates in the developing countries and stable growth in the industrialized countries. It must be an order based on equality and mutual commitment, in which each group of countries assumes responsibility for the realization of both aims in the awareness that only thus will it be able to attain its own goal.
143.	What, specifically, needs to be done? First, all countries must stimulate the growth of the world economy by common effort, without refuelling inflation. There must be no backslide into recession. Following an agreed strategy, the Western industrialized countries should exert every effort to promote continuous non-inflationary growth.
144.	Let me point out for the Federal Republic of Germany that the considerable increase in our imports during the past few years has given a strong impetus to the international economy. At the same time, we have also exported stability in terms of our relatively high, stable prices. We will make further determined efforts to stimulate economic activity in our own country.
145.	Secondly, we must keep the markets of the industrialized countries open and provide them with further finished goods from the developing countries.
146.	The exchange of industrial goods is the most dynamic sector of world trade. It has always offered the best chance for an increase in the export earnings of the developing countries, and will continue to do so.
147.	Only a steady increase in exports of finished goods from the developing countries will make it possible for us to overcome the traditional pattern of exchange in which commodities are supplied mainly by the developing countries. In other words, that is the only way in which we can create a structure of equal rights and opportunities.
148.	A steady change in the structure of world trade is also in the interests of the industrialized countries. Free trade and world-wide structural reform, instead of economic controls and protectionism, are indispensable elements of progress.
149.	The Federal Government cautions against the growing trend towards protectionism, which it considers to be a serious danger for international economic co-operation, in particular the co-operation between industrialized and developing countries.
150.	In all organizations to which it belongs, the Federal Republic of Germany therefore speaks out explicitly in favour of free world trade and of unimpeded and growing access to markets. We continue to be staunch supporters of free world trader even though this implies difficult processes of adjustment for some sectors of our own economy.
151.	Even during the recession of 1975, we increased our imports of industrial goods from developing countries by 24 per cent and in 1976 by as much as 32 per cent. That trend has continued during the current year.
152.	The Federal Republic of Germany ranks first in the world in per capita imports of semi-manufacturers and finished goods from the developing countries. It has also accumulated a foreign trade deficit in its dealings with the developing countries which do not export oil and has thus substantially stimulated their economic growth during the past few years.
153.	Thirdly, we must attain more stable commodity prices. The heavy price fluctuations typical of many commodities are harmful to both sides, raw material exporters as well as raw material consumers. In many developing countries such fluctuations prevent a systematic implementation of development plans, while at the same time they cause an increase in cyclical fluctuations in the industrialized countries, thereby leading to slower growth.
154.	In concert with its partners in the European Community, and in close consultation with the other Western industrialized countries, the Federal Government actively participates in UNCTAD negotiations on the Integrated Programme for Commodities. It advocates the conclusion of commodity agreements where suitable. It also supports the establishment of a common fund as a key instrument in attaining the agreed objectives of the Integrated Programme.
155.	Apart from price stabilization, the Federal Government also advocates measures for the stabilization of export earnings. Such measures are of particular importance for the poorest among the developing countries.
156.	We must promote the transfer of technology to the developing countries. Technology must be accessible to all countries without discrimination. This applies equally to the peaceful use of atomic energy.
157.	The Federal Republic of Germany is trying to co-operate, on the basis of partnership, in strengthening the capacity of the developing countries to absorb technology. It promotes private investment in developing countries as an important vehicle for the transfer of technology. We must step up the transfer of resources to the developing countries.
158.	In 1976 the net capital influx from official and private sources into the non-oil-exporting developing countries reached a total of almost $71 billion, which is double the amount of 1973. This large increase has helped considerably to ease the impact of world recession on the developing countries.
159.	During the past few years the Western industrialized countries have reached the target of a total capital transfer of 1 per cent of their national product; the Federal Republic of Germany has exceeded this target with a capital transfer of 1.18 per cent in 1975 and of 1.19 per cent in 1976.
160.	It must now be our first priority to increase official assistance. The developing countries and especially the poorest among them are increasingly in need of non-repayable grants and credits on concessional terms. Despite budgetary constraints, the Federal Government has therefore raised, by more than 20 per cent its appropriation for development assistance for the 1978 budget. This rate of growth is twice that of the total budget.
161.	The Federal Government takes an active part also in the endeavours to solve the problem of indebtedness of the developing countries. This problem affects some of them in particular. We therefore intend to provide, as before, assistance on a case-by-case basis.
162.	Overcoming hunger and need in the developing countries is the great task of our times, and it can be fulfilled only if all countries which are in a position to do so contribute their share to this. At the Downing Street Summit Conference, held in London on 7 and 8 May, the seven major industrialized countries of the West therefore called upon the industrialized socialist countries to contribute to the necessary increase in the transfer of resources to the developing countries. In 1976 development assistance from member States of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance amounted to less than 25 per cent of the assistance provided by the Federal Republic alone.
163.	Access to markets of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance presents a similar picture. Only 4 per cent of the exports from developing countries go to industrialized socialist countries as against close to 75 per cent to member States of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
164.	The industrialized socialist countries have long been integrated in world economy. They should therefore accept responsibility for a stable and developing world economy. This is also in their own interest.
165.	A substantial contribution to the development process can also be made by foreign private investment in providing capital, technology, modern management methods and channels to world markets. This potential can only be used, however, if industrialized and developing countries jointly commit themselves to creating a climate of mutual confidence which will encourage a smooth and continuous flow of foreign investment.
166.	This does not only imply legal security for investors. It also means that the companies established with foreign participation are ready to act in harmony with development plans and to refrain from trying to exert any political influence. In this respect, too, the Federal Republic, of Germany is committed to the principle of the sovereignty and independence of all countries.
167.	In order to feed a growing world population and to supply an expanding world economy with raw materials, it is imperative that the production of food-stuffs and raw materials should grow at a sufficient and steady pace. The bulk of grain and raw material production is currently concentrated in industrialized countries. On a long-term basis, however, we shall not be able to meet the growing demand unless the developing countries themselves can steadily increase their own production. This is another significant field of co-operation.
168.	One of the greatest challenges for us is the energy issue. In the remaining years of this century, the world must manage to switch from oil to new forms of energy. During the transitional period the oil-producing countries bear a special responsibility. The industrialized countries, for their part, must be prepared to exercise the necessary degree of self-discipline without which the task of restricting fuel consumption and of developing alternative sources of energy can never be accomplished.
169.	Of key importance for the future of the world economy is the successful conclusion of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The exploitation of the mineral resources of the high seas and the sea-bed has become the critical issue of the negotiations. We must establish an international sea-bed regime and we must do so quickly in view of the long lead-time for investments in deep sea mining. This regime must permit rational exploitation of raw materials and meet the interests of all countries-raw material consumers and raw material producers alike. It must not be monopolistic in character and must, give all interested States unqualified access to the mineral resources of the high seas.
170.	Development policy must focus on man. Its first priority must therefore be to satisfy basic needs of all men. Not only must growth be accelerated; it must also be appropriately structured. It must focus on such areas where the poor live and seek a living.
171.	The assumption that somehow growth also reaches the poor has proved false. Poverty must be fought directly, and we must provide the poor with the ability and the means of working productively.
172.	I have singled out a few areas in which we must make real and rapid progress in our search for a new international economic order based on joint responsibility. The Federal Government will strive with all its vigour to achieve such progress.
173.	We hope that our efforts will gain additional momentum from the recently established Independent Commission on International Development Issues. We are pleased that a personality of such international renown and broad political experience as Willy Brandt has agreed to head the Commission.
174.	A world of partnership must also be a world of respect for human rights and their implementation. In our endeavours to make the world a more human place we must put a halt with all our vigour to the ever multiplying forms of violence. The taking of hostages has become an urgent problem for all mankind.
175.	During the last session of the General Assembly the Federal Government therefore proposed an international convention against the taking of hostages.'1 Early deliberations in the Committee which has been requested to prepare the text of a draft convention have confirmed the will for objective co-operation in accomplishing this task.
176.	We must continue the work we have begun with all our vigour. I request the General Assembly to extend the Committee's mandate in accordance with its recommendations. We must also make progress in the solution of the complex problem of terrorism. Terrorism in its national and international forms has become a grave danger for all who want to live in peace and freedom. We must jointly fight this danger.
177.	During the past year the International Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on Civil and Political Rights have entered into force. These Covenants are inseparably linked. Freedom from want is no less significant a human right than freedom from fear.
178.	It is now a question of applying human rights world-wide. Here again the United Nations must continue to act as a champion. World-wide independent bodies are required. 1 reaffirm what I said last year concerning the tasks of an international court for human rights.
179.	Let us always remember that the concept of human rights is the irresistible force of the modern world to which the future belongs. The implementation of human rights alone will be the yardstick by which progress in the world is measured.
 ﻿154.	 Mr. President, there are many reasons why my delegation welcomes your accession to the office of President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly. Allow me first of all to greet you as a former colleague, since you were the Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia when I was head of France's Permanent Mission in New York. Your strength of character and sound political instincts, your acknowledged competence and the esteem in which you are held make me certain that you will conduct our work here with unchallenged authority.
155.	Yugoslavia has created a special place for itself on the international scene: as a founder and leading member of the group of non-aligned countries, an active member of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, as well as of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation, and the initiator of the special session on disarmament to be held next year. Your country clearly perceives the problems of the day, whether in the context of East-West relations or the North-South dialogue. France is especially pleased with the fresh opportunity our two Heads of State will soon have to strengthen still further the ties of friendship and co-operation which link our countries.
156.	I am equally pleased with the brilliant re-election of our Secretary-General, whose outstanding qualifications have been rightly endorsed by that renewed expression of our confidence.
157.	The current world situation is neither good nor reassuring. With the exception of the positive outcome of the lengthy Panama Canal negotiations, none of the major disputes under consideration in our Organization has made genuine progress towards a settlement. Human rights continue to be violated in several countries, including countries which were once proud of their liberal and humanistic traditions. It is high time that the texts formally adopted in this area guide the conduct of Governments.
158.	Moreover, the difficulties that our economies have been experiencing in recent years may well lead too many nations to look inwardly in the vain hope of evading the rule that governs today's world-the rule of interdependence.
159.	In the face of these persisting tensions, threats and uncertainties, it is more necessary than ever to turn away from fatalistic philosophies. For France, detente arid dialogue cannot be mere slogans.
160.	France initiated the policy of detente in Europe convinced of the merits of that policy, and we will not give it up. We will pursue it without yielding an inch on the most basic points, which are our country's security and independence, and respect for human rights. We will follow it without falling prey to doubts, even understandable ones, which could undermine the foundations of detente.
161.	These are the principles of the joint declaration signed on 22 June of this year at Rambouillet by the President of the French Republic, Mr. Valery Giscard d'Estaing, and the President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, during his state visit to France. These are also the principles that will determine our attitude at the forthcoming Belgrade conference.
162.	With regard to the North-South dialogue which France initiated in the form of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, we believe that the results of this unprecedented meeting are far from negative. Differences did of course appear in the reactions it elicited. This is only natural at the preliminary stages of so vast an undertaking. The final report  drawn up by the experts, however, shows that the Conference made real progress over previous talks in several areas; this was true in the area of raw materials, for one, where the principle of establishing a common fund represents an important step; and also on the subject of the transfer of resources, thanks to new financial commitments by the industrialized nations; and in the area of African development, especially in the context of the 10-year programme to develop transport and telecommunications which will have the backing of the developed countries. Useful talks were held on other important issues such as indebtedness, export earnings, investment and energy.
163.	It is now up to us to continue our efforts according to procedures on which we agree. The new world economic order cannot simply be decreed; we will have to build it step by step. By the same token, the dialogue between North and South, which is so important for the world, must be a continuing process that takes into account the interests of everyone, and therefore implies a commitment by one and all.
164.	At this point I will reiterate that it is up to the socialist countries to make their contribution to this ambitious undertaking. The difference between our philosophies and systems should not veil the interdependence which has become the law of our planet.
165.	We are all experiencing this interdependence with growing awareness in the area of our planet's natural resources, especially energy resources. Those who have these resources have the right to a fair price for them, without, however, exposing the world economy to disorders of which they, too, would be victims. It is the imperative duty of those who live in affluence to eliminate waste. The future of our entire community requires us to manage our energy resources in common, whether they are oil, other fossil fuels, new energy sources—which have yet to be fully explored-or nuclear energy, which we must put to the service of a peaceful future.
166.	Growing energy needs and a desire to diversify energy-supply sources have forced many countries to turn to nuclear means. The price we pay for this must not be proliferation of nuclear weapons, which would put humanity in mortal danger, it is in this light that we should view the international co-operation which has already been started by my country, for one, and which is aimed at reconciling the requirements of non-proliferation with the need to use more nuclear energy.
167.	The negotiations under way on the law of the sea will be a decisive test of whether we are capable of using our scientific know-how and adapting our laws to a higher level of organization. We are not simply dealing with exploitation, however more rational and equitable it may be; we are also concerned with preserving all the sources of life at the international as well as national levels.
168.	Such major undertakings cannot be completed while States and peoples live in the shadow of threats and domination, injustice and disunity.
169.	That is why France, drawing on its experience, is continuing its co-operation with the Soviet Union and the countries of the East at the European level; that is also why France is still determined, despite the crisis, to achieve with its partners in the Community the ambitious goals of European construction. The nine members of the Community are asserting their collective identity more and more in international bodies by expressing common views on many subjects, as they did during the Conference on
International Economic Co-operation. By the same token, the day before yesterday  the Belgian Minister of Foreign Affairs, current President of the Community, explained the position of the nine countries on many items on the agenda. France is convinced that political co-operation among the members of the Community makes a significant contribution to our work.
170.	But the determination Europe has shown in overcoming its old quarrels, making detente prevail and embarking on the path of co-operation is far from being expressed in other areas of the world.
171.	The situation in the Middle East unfortunately illustrates this point. All of us, and France above all, welcomed the return to peace in Lebanon with the deepest satisfaction. President Sarkis is to be commended for his steadfast efforts to restore authority and see that the unity, integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon are restored. France, which had been set on rendering assistance to a people dear to it, believes that now more than ever the existence of an independent, united, free and prosperous Lebanon is indispensable for the equilibrium of the region. The very disturbing situation in the south of the country shows none the less that the security and stability of Lebanon depend heavily on the course of the conflict in the Middle East.
172.	We are unfortunately still far from a settlement. The desire for peace that I had noted during my visits to the region several months ago have so far not been enough to commit the parties to the path of negotiation. The entrenchment of positions may compromise the efforts under way, and thus gravely affect the stability of the States and the very future of the peoples of the Middle East. And yet the principles which must shape any settlement are not only known but are now accepted by the international community.
173.	The first principle is the evacuation by Israel of the territories occupied in 1967. Peace cannot, in fact, be founded on conquest, on the occupation of territories, or on a fait accompli.
174.	The recognition of the rights of the Palestinians to a homeland is the second fundamental principle. To refuse to grant a people which is displaced or living under an occupation regime the right to a homeland where it can fully express its national identity would be to ignore the fact that nothing lasting can be founded on irredentism. which would doom to failure all attempts at a settlement.
175.	The presence of the Palestine Liberation Organization in our meeting halls, together with our conviction that it is essential for the Palestinians to be associated with the negotiations which will decide their fate, underscores the degree to which this crucial aspect of the conflict is now recognized. It is time that the Palestinian people were granted the opportunity to live in a system and under conditions of their own choosing; it is time this opportunity was included in the terms for a global solution.
176.	I also want to repeat that recognition of the existence of all the States in the region, including Israel, within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries, is another mandatory requirement of any settlement. After so many cruel wars, a genuine peace, implying normal relations, has to be found for this region so that the resources and talents of all sides can finally be employed to promote development and prosperity.
177.	It is important, however, that no one should jeopardize the desired outcome by making gestures that lead nowhere and belie the will to negotiate which has been otherwise clearly displayed. Several measures recently taken by Israel in the occupied territories have given us cause for grave concern. Actions such as these do more than violate international law and the resolutions of the United Nations: they create a climate unconducive to negotiations to a time when the other States have expressed their readiness to seek peace agreements.
178.	At the eastern end of the Mediterranean another de facto situation persists. Efforts to find a settlement to the problem of Cyprus continue to meet with suspicion and resentment. The death of President Makarios - and I should like to pay a tribute here to the memory of that patriot and statesman-should not delay our quest for the goal to which we are still committed: namely, to bring about a reconciliation between the Greek and Turkish communities, and to preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. We hope that the Secretary-General will continue the mission entrusted to him by the Security Council two years ago, and that the bases for a comprehensive settlement will be actively explored with his assistance and that of his Special Representative without pre-conditions and without regard for the de facto situation.
179.	It is hard to imagine what other reasonable approach might be substituted for the current efforts: the present method of giving the communities themselves responsibility for drawing up the terms of a settlement corresponds to the particular nature of a dispute that could only be aggravated still further if it were extended. While the solution sought by the negotiators will have to take into account the strong individuality of the parties concerned, it will also have to contain a satisfactory answer to the important problem of the refugees and provide for a reasonable territorial settlement through significant adjustments in the present line of separation.
180.	Africa, to which France is linked by so many ties, has been the special focus of my Government's concerns this year. Our position rests on the following principles. First, it is for the African countries themselves to resolve their differences and accordingly reject any interference that would make Africa an arena for external rivalry. Secondly, the solidarity that exists between France and Africa is practiced with full respect for the sovereignty of all States. Thirdly, the security and stability of the continent, the best guarantee of its development, will not be assured so long as the questions of southern Africa remain unsolved, be it Namibia, Rhodesia or the odious system of apartheid.
181.	In the case of Namibia, first of all, my country, which is taking an active part in the efforts currently being pursued by the five Powers that are members of the Security Council, believes that free elections should be held under United Nations auspices, with the participation of all the political organizations in the Territory, including the South West Africa People's Organization.
182.	As far as Rhodesia is concerned, by stubbornly refusing to allow the black population of Zimbabwe to exercise its political rights, the rebel Government in Salisbury is bringing a growing threat to bear on the entire region and is undermining the security of Mozambique and Zambia. France supports the action taken by the United Kingdom and the United States in conjunction with the countries and liberation movements concerned.
183.	Since the South African regime is based on the unacceptable system of apartheid, the risk of worsening tension which may disintegrate into racial war continues to grow. These grave perils were reason enough for the Conferences in Maputo  and Lagos,  at which apartheid was unanimously condemned.
184.	If decisive progress is not achieved in solving these questions and if the necessary changes are not made, South Africa may well become increasingly isolated in our community, with the consequences that would inevitably result from this. In addition to the voluntary ban on arms sales which our countries, including France, have successively imposed, a code of conduct for companies with subsidiaries, branches or representation in South Africa was recently adopted by the nine countries of the European Community.
185.	South Africa was allegedly planning a nuclear explosion. The South African Prime Minister made a statement in which he said that his Government did not plan to acquire nuclear weapons. I have taken note of this. As I said last month, if that were not the case, it could jeopardize all the current peace efforts, and we would be obliged to react.
186.	At this point I should like once again to dispose of a ridiculous allegation to the effect that a very common type of electronuclear plant, which has not even been built yet, has supposedly served or could have served in the manufacture of atomic weapons by the Pretoria regime. France and several other industrialized countries are building and exporting dozens of reactors for the peaceful production of nuclear energy which is needed throughout the world. As far as South Africa is concerned, the strictest controls are stipulated and precautions have been increased. The problems of proliferation with which we must concern ourselves are too serious to be left to malice and stupidity.
187.	In addition to these persistent sources of tension, armed conflict has flared up among African countries themselves elsewhere on the continent. It is at the conference table, in the framework of its own institutions and through the efforts of its own mediators that Africa traditionally settles its problems. We hope that this will continue to be the case. Disunity in Africa on the procedures to be followed and appeals for massive outside help, whether for troops or weapons, would soon make the Africans pawns in	struggles. The motto  Africa for the Africans  implies respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the right of these States to security in the framework of their own political options and the rejection of all outside interference.
188.	This principle has guided and still guides France in its relations with all the African countries. The process of decolonization, which we began on that continent nearly 20 years ago, was recently completed when Djibouti acceded to independence following a referendum and elections that the Organization for African Unity, the United Nations and the League of Arab States witnessed as being democratic. My country, which has already established ties of co-operation with the new State, hopes that it will avoid becoming embroiled in the ambitions and confrontations swirling dangerously around it. It is with very great pleasure that I welcome here the presence of the delegation from Djibouti, which is making its debut in the international community.
189.	France feels and shows solidarity for countries it has been closely associated with through history, and we are fully prepared to demonstrate the same solidarity in the Comoros- Misunderstandings are still evident in the interpretation of certain decisions regarding the island of Mayotte. The inhabitants of that island have opted by vote in favour of a future different from that of their neighbors. The status of the island does, however, leave them the possibility of stating their position about their future on another occasion. France will not stand in the way of any course of action, provided it is followed with mutual regard for the rights of the parties.
190.	France respects the sovereignty of each African State and has joined in the development effort of the countries of the continent, but we strongly decry the tragic fate of two French nationals killed on 1 May in Zouerate and six others kidnapped while carrying out peaceful work to benefit the economic progress of Mauritania. The taking of hostages directly contravenes international conventions; and it is to be condemned even more because so far, despite the efforts of our Secretary-General and the International Red Cross, it has been impossible for us to obtain the precise information needed to reassure fully their families. We cannot allow men and women dedicated to peaceful work to be brought into conflicts unrelated to them. I formally request the international organizations and Governments that are in contact with those who kidnapped our compatriots to assist us in obtaining their release.
191.	In endeavoring to explain France's position on the major sources of tension today, I have been obliged to omit references to situations in other areas of the world which have been less in need of our Assembly's attention. I should like, nevertheless, to repeat here my delegation's best wishes to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has finally joined our Organization. The sponsorship France gave this country shows how important we believed it was to obtain its contribution to our work.
192.	 In spite of our commitment to the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, we cannot remain silent in the face of the news reaching us from Kampuchea. In the name of the friendship France feels for the Khmer people, I express the hope that this State
Member of our Organization will respect the fundamental rights of the human being as set forth in our Charter.
193.	I could not conclude these brief remarks about the Asian continent without praising the very good relations my country enjoys with the People's Republic of China, a country that holds a unique place in world affairs commensurate with its historic and human dimensions.
194.	I should now like to take up a subject that has traditionally been one of the central themes of the discussions and work of our Assembly. My Government has always believed that the arms reduction effort is vital for peace in the world, for the development of States and the prosperity of peoples. It intends to make a positive contribution to the preparation of the special session to be devoted to this subject in May 1978: first of all because for 20 years my country has constantly spoken out in favour of general, complete and controlled disarmament, and we intend to continue to work in this direction; secondly, because our defence has been organized on the basis of our profoundly peaceful policy with the sole aim of preserving our independence and guaranteeing our security; and lastly because France is located in a region of the world where, despite a manifest spirit of detente, means of destruction continue to grow and to be perfected.
195.	We cannot resign ourselves to the apparently inevitable build-up of nuclear and conventional weapons, and we cannot fail to deplore the senseless squandering of resources that could be put to better use for development. In 1976 $350 billion was spent on arms.
196.	We cannot remain indifferent to the intense competition among certain Powers, resulting in a perpetual increase in their overcapacity for mutual destruction.
197.	Lastly, we cannot observe without concern the constant perfecting of technologies and of the most sophisticated means of destruction and death.
198.	The effort to reduce arsenals is therefore one of the priorities of our era, and we must not be satisfied with mere appearances.
199.	Of course for years there have been attempts to prohibit or limit certain types of weapons. Banning means of destruction that have not yet been produced, or agreeing to phase out gradually weapons of apparently dubious or  marginal military importance, stems from praiseworthy intentions. But because measures such as these are still partial, they can only give an illusion of disarmament and do not make any substantial contribution to the reduction of weapons or to the greater safety of the international community.
200.	By the same token, the efforts of the two superpowers to ensure a balance in their strategic relationship, however desirable these efforts may be, should not in and of themselves be confused with the over-all disarmament effort.
201.	As anyone can see, the problem of verifying commitments is fundamental in the quest for arms reduction and greater safety.
202.	For there to be disarmament, there must be a genuine reduction of arsenals. The major Powers should take a part in this common effort consistent with the part they have played in the last 30 years in overarming the planet.
203.	For there to be disarmament, not only nuclear weapons but also conventional weapons must be included.
204.	Disarmament must be genuine, that is, it must produce a significant reduction in the level of weapons, both quantitatively and qualitatively, and must begin first with those countries whose arsenals pose the gravest threat in our world and are out of all proportion either with those of other Powers or with what is needed for world strategic balance.
205.	It must be general and complete; that is, it must not allow for discrimination in favour of any one State, geographic area or type of weapon.
206.	It must be gradual and balanced; that is, it must be carried out under the same safety conditions for all parties and must help reduce factors of instability.
207.	It must also comprise effective measures of control and verification. It is essential in this respect for the United Nations to be able to take a real part in this task, without which no progress can be made. In fact, there can be no disarmament without trust, and no trust without control, and no control unless it is independent, that is to say, international.
208.	How should these necessarily very general principles be applied?
209.	We will obviously have to discuss this in detail at the special session of the Assembly in May 1978. It is difficult to separate questions of procedure from questions of substance. We will therefore of necessity have to ascertain which forums are best suited to deal with the matter of disarmament. It-is not the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. All of us here are familiar with the limitations on the work that can be accomplished there. The reasons for this are well known. I will not go over them again.
210.	When the time comes, France will present its proposals on all these questions with a view to the discussions of the special session of the Assembly. As the President of the French Republic said on 24 August, the overarmament of the world  requires urgent and resolute action . The United Nations community in its entirety must come to grips with this problem.
211.	I said a moment ago that the world situation was neither good nor reassuring. There was probably little need to give examples; how many of us can say that we feel safe from the scourges of economic crisis, hunger and war? In this difficult world, no one is spared.
212.	It is also up to us to see that man is the ultimate beneficiary of all our action and that human rights are better respected. France, which has given asylum to nearly 100,000 political refugees, was one of the first nations to believe in the need to proclaim human rights. We are soon to ratify the covenants solemnly adopted on this subject by the international community. We cannot help being disturbed at seeing so many Governments retreat behind emergency legislation, establish unequal systems, or practise oppression of entire peoples. No injustice will bring us any closer to the goals of our Charter, which will remain a dead letter unless all our Members agree to move forward within the law.
213.	Interdependence is a fact in our international society, but it can also be the bas>s for great undertakings which, if mankind stands together, will lead us to greater freedom, dignity and well-being.
214.	This, must be the ambition of each of our Governments, for we know full well that our collective institutions, the principles to which we have all adhered by being here, and the noble goals which we set for our meetings and conferences, ultimately depend on the determination of sovereign States.
214. The lessons of history and loyalty to its principles have led France, while exercising its independence, to propose two important concepts for our times: detente and dialogue. One describes the relations which should be fostered between the East and the West; the other suggests fruitful negotiations between the industrialized North and the developing South. Both fall within the framework of the collective effort that brings us together and corresponds to the legitimate expectations of our peoples. France will bring to this effort all the wealth of its creativity and determination.

﻿97.	First, Mr. President, I should like to offer you my congratulations on your election. The United Kingdom delegation looks forward to working under a President so experienced in the work of the United Nations.
98.	I should like also to extend a welcome to the two new Members of this Assembly, Djibouti and Viet Nam.
99.	The constant struggle to close the gap between aspiration and performance in the United Nations was described 22 years ago by the then Secretary-General as making the difference between civilization and chaos. Today, this gap between aspiration and performance remains and the danger of chaos is ever present.
100.	The United Nations has from its inception championed all the most fundamental human rights: the right to live without hunger or disease, in peace, free from conflict and the fear of nuclear or any other kind of war.
101.	Appalling and well-documented events naturally focus great attention world wide on the abuse or absence of political, civil and legal rights; and on violations and degradations of the integrity of the person, though the sense of outrage over Chile and Uganda, to take but two examples, has not yet been matched by effective international action. But the global challenge of chronic poverty, malnutrition and disease ensures that we cannot escape our responsibility for economic and social rights.
102.	Between 1952 and 1972 the gross product of the advanced industrialized nations increased by $1.82 trillion. The aggregate product of the under-developed world in 1972 was less than a third of this increase. This statistic is shocking enough. The reality behind it is even more so. It is generally agreed that more than 400 million people have an insufficient protein supply. About 70 million of them are immediately threatened by starvation. In some of the very poorest countries there is a 50 per cent infant mortality rate, and the development of people's brains is literally stunted by protein and calorie insufficiencies. Most of the world's poor only have access to unsafe water. They are, therefore, chronically vulnerable to schistosomiasis, and to filariasis, the leading cause of blindness. In some areas of conflict the disruption of basic social and medical services poses a challenge to world health. We risk a recrudescence of smallpox in the Horn of Africa and a re-emergence of the tsetse fly in east and southern Africa.
103.	The human needs of the developing world are an inescapable challenge to us all and a central element in any foreign policy based on human rights.
104.	To establish a fairer and more rational international economic order, both developed and developing nations must work together as equal partners. The dialogue, if it is to be successful, must be seen as a long-term sequence of negotiations on specific issues. The Governments of the industrialized democracies are at present under tremendous domestic political pressures to reduce rapidly high rates of unemployment. We need a greater frankness and realism in the dialogue. The present world recession has hit both developed and developing nations. The developing nations will easily become cynical and despairing if the developed world's actions run counter to its rhetoric. Those of us who represent the industrialized democracies are not entitled to use our economic difficulties as an excuse for abdicating from the dialogue. We must all try to ensure that we develop a long-term strategy which is credible and corrects the effects of some of the short-term decisions which we may feel compelled to take. If we continue into the future the present allocation of resources, we will only perpetuate the existing imbalance between the developed and the developing world.
105.	One of the benefits we all derived from the work we did together at the Conference on International Economic Co-operation was a realization of the crucial role that collaboration with regard to energy must play for all sectors of the world economy. It is for this reason that I warmly welcome the Secretary-General's recent proposals for some institutional development within the United Nations framework for the discussion of energy. Its exact form will have to be discussed further—whether an institute, as the Secretary-General has suggested, a new agency, or some other body.
106.	The United Nations is rightly devoting a high priority—nearly 40 per cent of its net regular budget-to economic and social activities. Britain, in addition to its own European Community aid programmes, contributed in 1976 some $85 million to the United Nations work in the economic and social field.
107.	In my judgment, despite the immense problems which still face us, in the crucial areas of poverty, hunger and disease, the United Nations has shown itself to be an effective and practical instrument. The institutions of the United Nations have also made a major technical contribution towards a more orderly international environment in, for instance, the fields of labour relations, posts and telecommunications, shipping and civil aviation.
108.	But in reducing conflict in the world, in achieving peace and in restraining the armaments race, the United Nations cannot claim that its performance has anywhere near matched its aspirations. It is worth examining the distribution of the total financial effort of the United Nations.
109.	The United Nations here in New York, together with the all-important autonomous agencies, spent last financial year some $2,200 million. Of the total United Nations financial commitment, only 8 per cent went on what can be summarized briefly as political, diplomatic and peacekeeping activities. If words uttered and words written were anything to go by, those activities would occupy a far higher position in our order of priorities than any other United Nations activity. Why do we write and speak so much about this area and yet spend relatively so little on it, for the consequences of conflict are grievous for millions?
110.	It is a regrettable fact of life that in institutional terms the maintenance of world security is the most neglected activity within the United Nations. Health, hunger and poverty are issues on which Member nations are prepared to concede an institutional competence and role for the United Nations. But, with few exceptions, security is seen as the preserve of national Governments. We are prepared to see our doctors, agriculturists, sociologists and economists working together and pooling their expertise within a United Nations institutional framework. But we are reluctant to see our generals and our admirals and our strategic thinkers working within such a framework on behalf of world security.
111.	We are all familiar with our own national security problems. But there is all too little understanding of each other's security problems, fears and objectives. We are, as an international body, unable to foresee areas of dispute and to act in time to prevent open conflicts from breaking out. We are unable to act speedily to damp down a dispute in its early stages. The United Nations, if it is involved in a conflict, is usually involved late, and with reluctance.
112.	The United Nations is the only forum in which the whole international community is represented. It has the right and they duty to be involved in disputes which threaten peace and stability whether on a regional or on a global scale. But to date it has lacked the necessary authority and commitment, which can only be given to it by Member States for a truly effective security role.
113.	In the United Nations we are reluctant to make even modest commitments to international security arrangements. But it is also true that the amount of resources devoted to peace-keeping matters is only a fraction of those employed in the United Nations as a whole, and that the role of the United Nations in peace keeping has in the past received far less attention than its deserves both in speeches from this rostrum and in various committees of our Organization. These facts alone highlight the low priority we give to this area of our Organization's activity.
114.	Now, the over-all record of the United Nations in the field of world security is one which we should be prepared to analyse critically, particularly now that the cold-war era and confrontation diplomacy are over and when the super-Powers themselves now exchange detailed information on the most sensitive security issue of all, namely, strategic nuclear weapons. What is needed is for the United Nations to stimulate a specialized and constructive dialogue between Governments on every aspect of world security in a way which would improve the ability of the international community to respond quickly and effectively in situations where action by the United Nations is required. If such a dialogue had been in operation today, we would have been far better able to examine some of the detailed security problems which now confront us all in Africa.
115.	The present limitations, as well as the value of the United Nations in its peace-keeping role, are clearly demonstrated by the situation in the Middle East and Cyprus where the United Nations has made a massive, sustained, but all too frequently unappreciated, effort over the years to keep the peace.
116.	In the Middle East, the world still faces the most serious of all potential conflicts. The recent resurgence of fighting in southern Lebanon is a sad reminder both of the urgency of finding a solution to the Middle East conflict as a whole and of the difficulties which the Lebanese Government faces in restoring peace and security in that country. One might have thought that here was an obvious situation in which the United Nations could and should have played a more prominent role. For a number of reasons, which we understand, this has not so far been the case. Nevertheless, the assistance of the United Nations remains a possibility, should the present effort of those in the region fail to yield the success for which we all hope. The United Nations has been involved diplomatically in the whole question of the Middle East since 1947. Its involvement in security arrangements through UNEF and UNDOF has cost more than $269 million. In the current financial year it will cost $98 million.
117.	The United Nations presence in the Middle East has been at times controversial. But in my view there would have been even greater conflict without it.
118.	In the debate about occupied territory, security issues are of central importance and of deep and genuine concern. Hitherto nations have tended to equate security solely with the possession of territories. This is no longer the only relevant security factor. Sophisticated electronic devices can now give a military security which nations had hitherto believed could only come from the physical occupation of territory. The monitoring techniques already in place in Sinai have made possible a measure of disengagement and lessened mistrust between Israel and Egypt. Confidence-building measures, in the shape of demilitarized zones, zones of limited forces, surveillance and early warning systems, and microwave links, could all be an essential component in any final settlement. The United Nations has a role to play, either by supervising and operating these devices or, even more importantly, by promoting an informed public debate on the underlying technical security issues. Now, Mr. Simonet, speaking for the nine member countries of the European Community, has set out our views on the main ingredients of a negotiated settlement, and I do not intend to recapitulate those here this afternoon.
119.	The danger of United Nations peace-keeping involvement, initially to hold the ring, is that it can become an excuse for political inactivity or a substitute for serious negotiation. In Cyprus, as in the Middle East, the United Nations peace-keeping forces have reduced hostilities and provided time in which serious negotiations could and, in my view, should have taken place. The meetings between the late Archbishop Makarios and Mr. Denktaf, which led to the resumption of the intercommunal talks, appeared to offer the prospect of some progress. The mission undertaken by Mr. Clark Clifford to Cyprus, Greece and Turkey in February and March has also played an important part. But so far the current intercommunal talks have shown sadly little progress, and the situation has, if anything, deteriorated in recent months. The United Nations, in the person of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative Mr. Perez de Cuellar, has acted with tremendous skill between the parties. But the present United Nations commitment in Cyprus cannot be taken for granted. In the last 13 years the existence of UNFICYP has cost Member States, by way of voluntary contributions, some $200 million. Furthermore, UNFICYP is now seriously in deficit to the tune of some $50 million. The United Kingdom has contributed $45 million in men and in logistical support. This year our contingent, numbering 800 men, is the single largest contribution. The United Nations does not enjoy infinite resources, as the Secretary-General's recent appeal for further contributions to UNFICYP made plain.
120.	The United Nations cannot therefore in either Cyprus or the Middle East be used indefinitely as a cover for a stalemate in negotiations. It cannot continue to be seen as a refuge of last resort—a permanent crutch for remaining in a state of  no peace, no war . What the United Nations can do is both to establish the political framework within which negotiations between the parties can take place and, through harnessing the initiatives of its Member States and acting as a catalyst for their ideas, to help to provide the impetus needed to break out of the present stalemate.
121.	I turn to southern Africa.
122.	It has become increasingly clear that only negotiated settlements which are internationally acceptable and which have the full support of the United Nations will end the violence and achieve stable government by majority rule. This is the hope for a future Zimbabwe and Namibia. In considering how Britain could best exercise its responsibilities in Rhodesia the British Government faced up to the fact that Britain alone could not ensure a peaceful transfer to a majority rule. We also recognized that, though the Commonwealth and the Organization of African Unity [OAUJ had a legitimate and major interest in the future of Zimbabwe, neither organization had an institutional framework which could help to provide the stable climate and international recognition for free elections.
123.	It was equally clear that, while Britain has legal responsibilities—which we do not seek, and have never sought, to evade—some additional catalyst to make the transition from war to peace, from illegality to legality, was necessary for an internationally acceptable settlement.
124.	The United Nations is already deeply involved in the problem of Rhodesia through the various sanctions resolutions. So United Nations involvement is not a new issue of principle for the Security Council. It is probably a realistic constraint on the power of initiative of the United Nations that progress in the Security Council is not responsible unless there is a clearly perceived support from the countries of the region in question for the course of action proposed.
125.	We believe that the draft resolution which my Government will submit very shortly in the Security Council has such support. The draft resolution will provide for the appointment by the Secretary-General of a representative to enter into discussions with the British Resident Commissioner designate and with all the parties, with a view to establishing in detail the respective roles of all the forces in Southern Rhodesia during the transition to majority rule. The draft resolution will, we believe, provide the necessary basis for the cease-fire negotiations referred to in the documents which were presented to the Security Council on 1 and 8 September. No final settlement can be agreed or brought to the Council until these essential preliminary negotiations are completed.
126.	Now, it is a truism that the Organization is only what its Members make of it. It is precisely because the British Government is acutely aware of the paradox of the United Nations role—on the one hand, indispensable in the search for peace, and on the other, limited in what it can achieve on its own initiative-that we have framed proposals for Rhodesia which acknowledge the vital importance of a United Nations role in guaranteeing an impartial and orderly framework for negotiations, arid in helping to supervise fair and free elections.
127.	Our proposals also reflect the blunt truth that peace on the ground is unobtainable unless there is first agreement between the parties who are conducting the fighting. The lesson of United Nations involvement in the Congo and in Cyprus is that a peace-keeping force has little chance of doing its job if, around it, rival armed forces are building up their strength and are determined to use it. This is why the five front-line States and OAU have an important role in helping to achieve an independent Zimbabwe. They have supported the liberation forces in their struggle for freedom, but they have always maintained that it is for the people of Zimbabwe to determine who is to be the future president and who should form the government on independence.
128.	Over Namibia the five Western members of the Security Council, including my own country, took an initiative. Negotiations are still in progress, so it is hard to be specific, but we are all under no illusions that, without the support of the United Nations, no settlement can be achieved there which will command the support of the international community, end the violence and allow for a majority-rule government to be freely elected.
129.	Now, southern Africa, over the next few months and years, will be the focus of growing tensions. There is at the moment a controlled anger among the majority of the population. The risk that this anger will develop into urban violence is considerable. Those of us here in the United Nations who uphold the essentially peaceful values of a pluralist democracy will come under growing challenge to support violent change. But if we cannot become the advocates of violence and at the same time stay true to our beliefs, our responsibility to the world is to show, beyond any shadow of doubt, that change can be brought about by peaceful means, whether we are talking of Rhodesia, Namibia or South Africa. If we turn our backs on the path of peace—a path of peace—a path which still lies open—then once again the barrel of the gun will be seen to wield more power and influence than reason. Peaceful persuasion and pressures can still achieve results. Violence is the last resort. To advocate it alone is to threaten the whole system of values on which the United Nations rests, and which we are all pledged to sustain.
130.	These considerations apply with particular force to the situation in South Africa. South Africa will not be allowed to avoid its responsibilities. It sustains and supports the illegal regime in Rhodesia; it has allowed United Nations sanctions to be systematically undermined since 1967. Within South Africa, apartheid is abhorrent to us all.
South Africa faces a choice between a democratic and orderly evolution and an inevitable descent into bloodshed and violence. The choice which South Africa makes may present a challenge to all of us, as Members of the United Nations. Rhodesia is not just an issue for Britain or for the United States, whose support has been so important to my country; it is not just an issue for the freedom fighters, the nationalist leaders, the front-line Presidents, OAU: it is an issue for us all.
131.	Over southern Africa the world community and individual Member States may have some awesome and difficult choices in the next few months. These issues cannot be treated with anything other than the utmost seriousness. Certainly, if the negotiations over Rhodesia produced a settlement which the Security Council could endorse, the world would not allow South Africa to continue, in the face of such a settlement, to sustain an obdurate illegal regime in Rhodesia, were it to refuse to give up power.
132.	As a world community we are, over South Africa, attempting to change human behaviour, to turn a State away from institutionalized racialism. It will not be achieved overnight, but it must be achieved, Without a serious programme of reform inside South Africa the oppressed majority will have no hope. The tough code of conduct recently adopted by the European Community for its companies operating in South Africa demonstrates, by attacking racialism at the place of work, one form of positive action which I hope others will also adopt. It is but one of the pressures for continuing change which it is vital we espouse if peaceful change is to  be successful.
133.	Anxiety over the proliferation of nuclear weapons also lurks in the background. It is in the interests of us all that South Africa should sign the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [see resolution 2373(XXII)l and agree to international inspection of all its nuclear installations. A State which feels itself under attack may, regardless of logic or long-term interest, seek to acquire nuclear weapons as an act of desperation. Desperation is the crucible of violence.
134.	My Government, traditionally active in seeking disarmament and promoting the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, is engaged in various negotiations. I am particularly glad that the United States, the Soviet Union and my country are now actively negotiating about a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. This achievement has eluded the world for too long. A comprehensive nuclear test-ban would have a profound effect in limiting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The development of a specialized dialogue between the Soviet Union and the United States on strategic nuclear weapons and the signing of the first agreement concluded as a result of the Strategic Arms limitation Talks [SALT] was a major step. We all hope that the present negotiations will be successful. It would have been inconceivable, even 10 years ago, that military and scientific personnel from these two countries would share such detailed and highly-classified information about their own national security. We need now to widen and build on this important dialogue.
135.	World security involves more than conflict situations. It is intimately associated with the search for practical and realizable measures of disarmament. All Member States aspire to the objective of total disarmament, but the relentless increase in most Member States' armament budgets shows how far performance falls short of aspiration.
136.	In the more general field of disarmament, we welcome next year's special session of the General Assembly. It will directly engage the international community and the United Nations in what must be a world effort to promote disarmament and check nuclear proliferation. While certain important disarmament negotiations, such as SALT, are necessarily the subject of a bilateral or restricted dialogue, it is vital that the international community and the United Nations in particular should not be excluded from the disarmament effort. It would perhaps have been easier to secure more accessions by now to the non-proliferation Treaty had the international community as a whole, as opposed to a small group of major nuclear Powers, been more closely involved in drawing up its provisions at the start. It means, however, that if the United Nations is to be involved meaningfully it must move from just passing resolutions to the intricacies and the detail of complex scientific negotiations. It will need to develop and expertise that can work in the interests of all the Member States.
137.	The search for peace, the promotion of human rights and individual freedom, the elimination of poverty and want in all its forms—these are formidable but inescapable challenges. To meet them our performance will have to move closer to our aspirations. To succeed in this endeavour we must make, in the recent words of the Secretary- General,  a conscious effort to develop more positive attitudes to the work of the United Nations both among ourselves and in the outside world. In Britain, support for the United Nations is a corner-stone of our foreign policy. We for our part are resolute in our determination to help make the United Nations a more effective instrument for world peace and co-operation.
 

﻿183.	India recently accomplished a historic non-violent revolution. In a magnificent assertion of the indomitable human spirit, our people reaffirmed in March last their firm faith in a free and open society. Calculated efforts by forces of darkness and tyranny to destroy democracy were decisively defeated. The March revolution was clearly of far-reaching significance for our 600 million people. We are happy that its significance has been equally appreciated by freedom-loving people all over the world.
184.	Our people boldly upheld the basic principles, values and aspirations on which the United Nations was founded more than three decades ago, and regained their hard-won freedom and fundamental human rights. I have, therefore, great pleasure in bringing to the United Nations the greetings of our people and of reiterating, on their behalf, at this thirty-second session of the General Assembly, India's abiding faith in the United Nations as an instrument for maintaining global peace and security and for promoting orderly progress through co-operation among nations based on justice and equality.
185.	Our new Janata Government has been in office for barely six months. Nevertheless, much has already been achieved during this time. Basic human rights have been restored. The pall of fear that hung menacingly over our people has been lifted. Constitutional measures are being devised to ensure that democracy and fundamental freedoms can never be smothered again. But we are not going to rest content with this only. As solemnly affirmed by our Parliament on 22 July 1977, our people are determined to bring about by peaceful and legitimate methods  a socio-economic revolution, illuminated by democratic standards, vivified by socialist ideals and firmly founded on moral and spiritual values .
186.	I am a newcomer to the United Nations, but India is not, having been associated actively with the Organization from its very inception. For me, it is a great privilege to address this Assembly. Indeed, as one who has been a  parliamentarian in my own country for two decades and more, I feel a special sense of exhilaration in attending this assembly of nations for the first time.
187.	What has added to my pleasure is to have in the Chair, Mr. President, the representative of a country which, together with India, was one of the founders of the non-aligned movement, and with which we have firm bonds of friendship. I extend to you, Mr. President, the cordial felicitations of my Government and myself on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-second General Assembly. Your election is as much a tribute to your personal eminence and wide diplomatic experience as to Yugoslavia and the role it has been playing in strengthening the forces of peace and stability. We assure you of our fullest co-operation in the discharge of your responsibilities.
188.	I also take this opportunity to pay a warm tribute to the outgoing President, Ambassador Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe, the representative of our close neighbour, Sri Lanka, for steering the thirty-first session with great tact and ability.
189.	May I also join the other delegations in paying my sincere tribute to our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, who brings to his heavy responsibilities wisdom, patience and a deep commitment to the United Nations and its role in the promotion of international understanding and global well-being.
190.	I should, moreover, like to compliment Mr. Waldheim for his thought-provoking report to the Assembly in which he has candidly drawn attention to the challenging tasks that lie ahead. The United Nations, he has pointed out,  presents unrivalled opportunities  and  is still to some extent, an Organization in search of its identity and its true role .
191.	The Janata Government stands firmly for peace, non-alignment and friendship with all countries. These policies have always represented India's national consensus and tradition. Non-alignment is a projection of national sovereignty in international relations. Its essence is not neutrality but freedom, which is the natural consequence of the struggle for the liberation of our nation from colonial rule and the liberation of the human spirit from subjugation and oppression. We believe in the true independence of nation-States and their freedom to pursue policies in their best national interests, and to judge every issue on its merit.
192.	The new Government took the earliest opportunity, on assuming office, to declare its resolve not only to continue non-alignment but in fact to restore to the policy its original positive thrust. It is a matter of some satisfaction that our stress on genuine non-alignment and our decision to pursue the policy with vigour and dynamism has been understood and appreciated in its proper perspective.
193.	The vision of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakum is an old one. We in India have all along believed in the concept of the world as one family. After many trials and tribulations there are prospects of realizing the dream in the shape of the United Nations which has reached near universality in its membership representing 4,000 million people of diverse races, colours and creeds. However, the United Nations should not function merely as a conclave of governmental delegations. We must see how this assembly of nations can be transformed into a parliament of man, representing the collective conscience and will of humanity.
194.	The United Nations Charter was a pledge not just by nations or for nations. It was a declaration on behalf of the peoples of the world to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war and, what is more, to build a new world order in true freedom,
195.	My thoughts are not in terms of the might and majesty of nations. Much more important to me are the dignity and demands of the common man. Our successes and failures should be judged ultimately by one yardstick alone: whether we are working towards social justice and dignity for all peoples, indeed for every man, woman and child. For its success the United Nations must become the effective voice of all humanity and a dynamic forum for collective action and co-operation based on interdependence between nations.
196.	Our own history and political experience have taught us that the real sanction, indeed the ultimate power, rests in the will and response of the people, not in governments. Thirty years ago under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi our people courageously fought the might of a great imperial Power and ended its domination over India without resort to arms. Earlier this year our people successfully frustrated attempts by a self-seeking regime to deprive them of their fundamental freedoms.
197.	What came to pass took many friends abroad by surprise. But to me the great political courage shown by the people came from our ethos and tradition. The individual in India has always been given the pivotal place in our religious and philosophic tradition. Our scriptures and epics have all along made one central point: the cosmos and creation hinge on the individual and his fulfilment.
198.	We have accepted all along that divinity may have many forms. Everyone in India is therefore free to pursue his own path to salvation, irrespective of birth or belief. At the same time, however, our seers, in an unbroken line from ancient Vedic times to the present, have taught us compassion and tolerance towards our fellow man. Gandhi summed up the essence of this teaching in a favourite word: Antyodaya, which means  unto this last . This word, which he used time and again in his messages, signifies the concern which any society should have for the well-being of the poorest, the lowliest and the lost.
199.	I am, therefore,, convinced that our national as well as international politics must be constantly permeated with the thought of man, his happiness and well-being, and his essential unity with fellow beings. I am not thinking of man in the abstract, in whose name tyranny has been perpetrated down the ages. What I have in mind is man of flesh and blood. Our central concern must be his joys and sorrows, his hopes and aspirations.
200.	We stand for peace—a warm, living peace—which is the bedrock of all our efforts. Peace, however, is not just the absence of war. The tenuous fabric of world peace could be torn asunder any time. Peace can be secured only by collective effort to end the exploitation and domination of one people over another and by eliminating glaring inequalities and imbalances between nations, and in the rights and opportunities for the world's peoples.
201.	Each nation-State has, no doubt, to preserve and promote its national interests. But no country can live in isolation within the four corners of its frontiers. We have to recognize the inevitability of global interdependence for promoting human welfare and happiness in every part of the world. And interdependence  demands that we should all look beyond our national horizons and display a spirit of accommodation and sacrifice in order to share with the rest of mankind the fruits of progress and prosperity.
202.	The world has come a long way since India launched its national liberation movement against colonialism and imperialism. As an Asian country, we watched with anguish the enormity of the suffering and sacrifice of the brave Vietnamese people in their long struggle for national liberation. Their ultimate success is a shining tribute to the might and power of the human spirit and its indomitable resistance to subjugation.
203.	We are happy that the United Nations has rightly and properly mounted an international operation to provide assistance for the reconstruction of Viet Nam and for the rehabilitation of its people, as task in which my country is extending its full co-operation.
204.	It is with a feeling of great joy that we welcome the entry of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam into the United Nations. We also extend a cordial welcome to a new African State, the Republic of Djibouti. The entry of these two countries into the United Nations has taken this Organization one step closer to its goal of universality. We have friendly ties with both countries and look forward to working with them in closest co-operation.
205.	We mourn the passing of Archbishop Makarios, the President of Cyprus, and pay our homage to his memory. The late Archbishop was a world statesman and one of the founding fathers of the non-aligned movement. He was the chief architect of the independence of Cyprus and its struggle to preserve its identity.
206.	The agenda before the Assembly is one covering a multitude of problems of current concern to the world. May I spotlight only a few specific issues which are of great importance and urgency and must take priority in our collective deliberations.
207.	Foremost among these problems is the momentous and agonizing struggle for human rights and freedom in southern Africa. India has always been opposed to unnecessary bloodshed and violence in national affairs and interstate relations. It stands for non-violence and for resolving conflicts along the path of peace and negotiations. Even during the dark period of foreign subjugation, India adhered to certain basic principles:  steadfast opposition to colonial oppression and total rejection of any form of racialism and suppression of human rights. India's dedication to these principles is even deeper today.
324
208.	The challenge in Africa is clear: whether a people have the inalienable right to live in dignity and freedom or whether a racist minority can be allowed to perpetuate injustice and oppression over the vast majority. There is no question that all forms of racialism must be eradicated, root and branch. Apartheid must go. Its continuance is a blot on humanity and a grave reflection on the United Nations.
209.	India would like to see the problem of Zimbabwe resolved at the earliest possible moment through peaceful means. It has thus welcomed the positive elements in the recent Anglo-United States initiative taken towards the establishment of genuine majority rule within a time-bound framework. We hope that the Security Council resolution adopted recently on the subject, resolution 415 (1977), will lead to a ceasefire and eventually to a solution of the problem.
210.	Much will depend upon the willingness of the illegal Ian Smith regime to see reason and give up its arrogance and intransigence. Until the Smith regime is ousted from power and freedom is restored to the long-suffering people, we cannot expect the freedom fighters to lay down their arms. In the meantime, India reaffirms its support for, and solidarity with, the patriotic forces of Zimbabwe, who are valiantly fighting for the liberation of their country against heavy odds. If world opinion continues to be wilfully defied by Ian Smith in a desperate bid to cling to power, the United Nations will have to exercise all its authority to widen its mandatory sanctions against the illegal minority regime and its South African supporter. That alone would hasten its collapse and help to restore to the people of Zimbabwe their inalienable right to determine their own destiny.
211.	The authority, credibility and prestige of the United Nations face an equally stubborn challenge in Namibia, which has the status of an international Territory. If remains to be seen whether the efforts of the Western Powers can bring about the withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia so that the resolutions of the United Nations may be implemented. We condemn South Africa for its decision to integrate Walvis Bay, a part of Namibia, with the Cape Province. We also condemn South Africa for its reported plans to use a part of Namibian territory for nuclear testing.
212.	We stand by the South West Africa People's Organization and urge all nations to recognize its representative character. We cannot expect the people of Namibia not to resort to armed struggle if that is the only means left to them to achieve their goal of independence. However, the issue cannot be left to be resolved only by the efforts and struggle of that Organization. The United Nations has a collective and direct responsibility. It has by no means exhausted its capacity to discipline the South African regime into total withdrawal from Namibia.
213.	While in southern Africa we face colonialism and racialism at its worst, in west Asia there remains an even more explosive threat to international peace. Here, too, some basic principles are involved, First, no one can be permitted to enjoy the fruits of aggression. Secondly, no people can be denied their inalienable right to their homeland. Thirdly, all border disputes should be resolved by negotiation and not by force.
214.	There can thus be no recognition of the territories illegally occupied by Israel through the use of force and aggression, and they must be vacated. At the same time the Arab people of Palestine who have been forcibly evicted from their hearths and homes must be enabled to exercise their inalienable right to return to their land. All peoples and States in the region have the right to live in peace and harmony with their neighbours. That is an essential prerequisite for a durable solution to the problems of the region.
215.	The United Nations must also reject and repudiate the recent efforts by Israel to alter further the demographic character of the territories occupied through new settlements on the West Bank and in Gaza. Unless resolved satisfactorily and in good time, the problem would have disastrous repercussions far beyond the region. There is clearly urgent need to reconvene the Geneva Conference, with the participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization in it.
216.	The situation in Cyprus remains unresolved. We still hope that bicommunal talks may be resumed and a solution will be found which is consistent with the territorial integrity, sovereignty and non-aligned status of the Republic of Cyprus.
217.	Economic issues are an increasingly vital dimension of international relations. The concept of a new international economic order based on equality and justice has already been accepted by the world community. We must now move forward to its early realization so that men and women everywhere may look forward to more just and equitable opportunities and rewards for their labours.
218.	I mentioned earlier the challenge and paradox of how to balance national responsibilities with the imperatives of unavoidable international co-operation. After over 30 years with the United Nations we recognize, better than before, that no nation or group of nations can become islands of prosperity in an ocean of poverty. The discussions on international economic relations have been going on for more than two decades. Even the modest targets set for the current Second United Nations Development Decade have been either disregarded or diluted. The transfer of resources and technology has never been sufficient to correct the accentuated disparities.
219.	All these problems were vividly explained and projected in the Conference on International Economic Cooperation, which ended in Paris this year. In the 18 months of long deliberations some progress WAS made, but results were deeply disappointing. A special fund is to be set up and some commitment to fulfil the allocation of overseas development aid has been reaffirmed. But the major problems of transfer of resources-and technology and relief from the burden of debt remain. The common fund within the Integrated Programme for Commodities has been agreed to in principle but remains to be realized in practice.
220.	Arguments and theories are being put forward which do not show sufficient appreciation of the grave crisis confronting the developing countries. Perhaps that is due to the preoccupation of the developed nations with their own problems and difficulties. In many cases, what is being given by one hand is being taken away by the other.
221.	It is claimed that modern science and technology have- the means of removing poverty and spreading the benefits of progress to the v/hole world. The fact, however, remains that the non-availability of the right type of technology for the developing countries is only accentuating the disparities between the rich and the poor. International commerce has undoubtedly multiplied in the post-war decades. But the advantage from its manifold increase has contributed mainly to the material progress and higher standards of living in the developed world.
222.	The problems of the easing of trade barriers for the developing countries and protection of remunerative prices for their exports remain more or less where they were following the energy crisis. The problem of oil-importing developing countries is so serious that they can look forward to nothing but mounting debts for survival.
223.	We recognize that developed nations have their own internal social and economic problems. But they need to lift their perspectives and policies beyond immediate and narrow national concerns. One could ask, Would it not be economically sound to facilitate a significant flow of financial and technological capabilities from the developed to the developing world as an enlightened answer to structural problem? for their own economies? An increase in the purchasing power of 3,000 million people inhabiting the developing countries could well provide an answer to the problems of unemployment and economic dislocation in the affluent world.
224.	India has participated with vigour and sincerity in all the deliberations of the world community, not in a sprit of confrontation, but in the recognition that the world economic malaise requires a new sense of international interdependence.
225.	In this regard I venture to suggest an approach which was suggested many decades ago by Mahatma Gandhi. He was indeed a universal man. Only two days ago we celebrated the one hundred and eighth anniversary of his birth. He had a clear perception of the world economic order based on certain principles which, in my opinion, may be summed up as follows.
226.	First, all peoples have a right to the satisfaction of their primary needs, irrespective of the state of their economies, their levels of productivity, or their geographic location.
227.	Secondly, interdependence between nations must be without exploitation. Since there can be no genuine interdependence among unequals, action must be taken to correct this inequality.
228.	Thirdly, the developing countries must pursue paths of individual and collective self-reliance as part of their over-all strategy to secure the transfer or resources and technology from the developed world.
229.	Fourthly, despite their division into nation-States, the people of the world constitute one family. An integrated world economic order demands movement across frontiers, not only of goods, capital resources and technology, as at present, but even more so of people themselves.
230.	Fifthly, economic strategy should be directed towards the growth of employment rather than the growth of gross national product alone.
231.	Sixthly, there should be a world-wide movement against the extravagance of consumption, which tends to dehumanize and alienate man from his fellow-beings.
232.	Seventhly, the developing countries, no less than the developed world, must reduce the gap between their elite and their masses. An equitable world economic order can only be based on an equitable economic system within each nation.
233.	As the second most populous country in the world, the dimensions of our problems are immense. Our achievements are noteworthy, but challenging tasks lie ahead. As a country which has recently recommitted itself to the democratic path and the principle of rule by consent our tasks tend to become more complex.
234.	We have no magic wand or instant solutions to the myriad problems inherited from the near and the distant past. But we have reason to be optimistic and confident. In three decades of independence, the traditional genius of our people has enabled them to show their capacity to grasp the new opportunities offered by science and technology and to bend these modern tools of innovation and advancement to serve our own national needs.
235.	While recognizing the advantages of international co-operation, we have sought to depend largely on our own effort for national progress and economic self-reliance. Our new Government is in the process of setting itself new priorities and removing the distortions that have crept into our policies and planning. On the  economic front, we want to move away from the  growthmanship  and blind imitation of industrialized States towards integrated planning in which man is at the centre.
236.	We propose to concentrate more on the development of our rural areas, where an overwhelming proportion of our people live and will always belong. We do not seek affluence based on elitist consumption. Man must be judged by what he is, and not by what he has. We want to provide our jobless people with purposeful employment and fulfil the basic needs of the underprivileged masses. We seek to arrest, if not to reverse, the process of urbanization, which has become one of the biggest social and economic problems of the developing world—a subject on which Gandhi sounded a note of caution many decades ago.
237.	Even as India struggles for a better tomorrow, it has demonstrated its willingness to share the benefits of its economic and technological experience with other developing countries. Our professional and academic institutions have been providing training and instruction to thousands of students from other developing countries in diverse fields of social and economic development. We stand for increasing co-operation with other developing countries to mutual advantage, without in any way seeking exclusive advantage, either economic or political.
238.	India seeks friendship with all and dominance over none. The Janata Government has actively sought to build bridges of friendship, understanding and co-operation with all countries. Attention has been paid, first and foremost, to strengthening ties with our immediate neighbours. This is the message I sought to carry to Nepal, Burma and Afghanistan in my recent visits. We look forward to consolidating the process of normalization of relations with Pakistan, not only to ensure durable peace, but to promote beneficial bilateral co-operation.
239.	Four days ago, on 30 September, the representatives of India and Bangladesh initialed the text of an agreement on the Gang waters issue. It is a comprehensive understanding covering the short-term problem, and lays the foundation for a long-term solution to meet the optimum requirements of both countries.
240.	This problem has bedevilled the relations between us and our neighbour for 25 years. The agreement vindicates our faith that so complex a problem, affecting the economy and lives of millions of people of two neighbouring nations, could only be resolved in a spirit of shared sacrifice and mutual accommodation through sincerely motivated bilateral negotiations.
241.	Many political changes have taken place in the last year in South Asia. Even so, it is a tribute to the people that this area is today freer of tension than it has been for decades. If, indeed, South Asia can find a recipe for peace and co-operation, all of us with similar burdens can then devote greater attention to development and to constructive endeavour. In fact, it is in this context that we make the special plea that the area around us-the region enveloping the Indian Ocean-should be made free of great-Power rivalry and bases which can be used for aggressive actions. In the wider context, India welcomes the continuing search for detente—detente not only in Europe but everywhere—so that the benefits flowing from it can be enjoyed by all.
242.	Year after yea: scores of resolutions have been adopted at the United Nations calling for general and complete disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament. The arms race, with the resulting arsenals of fearsome weapons, has reached such an alarming stage that the world is poised on the horns of a strange dilemma. We are told that nuclear weapons are necessary as a deterrent against war and that it is only the assurance of their use that constitutes the core of deterrence. ,we do not accept that thesis.
243.	We believe that nuclear weapons are dangerous whether they are in the possession of one country, some countries or many countries. We are not only against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, we are against nuclear weapons themselves. India has been consistently opposed to the acquisition and development of nuclear weapons. Indeed, India was the first country to plead at the United Nations more than 20 years ago for a ban on the testing of all nuclear weapons. The great Powers were not in a mood to listen to us at that time. When they were ready for it, they signed the partial test-ban Treaty. That was 14 years ago. The world rejoiced and believed that a comprehensive test-ban treaty was close at hand, but we are still waiting. More nuclear-weapons tests have been conducted since the partial test ban than prior to it. Weapon tests underground are being conducted even now. There has been no progress in nuclear disarmament.
244.	We are not a nuclear-weapon Power and have no intention of being one. The new Government has reiterated this position in unambiguous terms. Our Prime Minister, Mr. Moraiji Desai, has said that India would not go in for nuclear weapons even if all the other countries in the world did so. We did not sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons because it was a discriminatory and unequal Treaty. Nothing has happened since that Treaty was formulated nearly 10 years ago to change our view.
245.	India embarked upon a programme for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy nearly 25 years ago. We continue to be committed to it. We fully share the view that non- proliferation of nuclear weapons should not be confused with non-dissemination of nuclear technology. We shall oppose, as before, any moves or measures that would stand in the way of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. We shall also oppose moves or measures that are discriminatory in nature. At the same time we are prepared to co-operate whole-heartedly with other countries in discussing ways and means of putting an end to the danger of nuclear weapons.
246.	It is both urgent and necessary for the political mind to free itself of military logic and for the political will to assert the force of reason and reverse the nuclear arms race in the direction of nuclear disarmament. We trust that the discussions in the special session on disarmament to be held next year will identify the priorities in nuclear disarmament and help the formulation of a time-bound programme of realistic and concrete measures for disarmament without further delay.
247.	Already the establishment of the new international economic order is being delayed because of diversion of scarce resources to the futile arms race. World military expenditure is estimated to be more than $300 billion annually at current prices. Of this amount 90 per cent is accounted for by developed countries, which is equivalent to 20 times the official development assistance now given by them to developing countries. Even 5 per cent of the total expenditure incurred by the developed countries could vastly help the efforts of the developing countries to achieve many of their modest economic goals. Disarmament is thus vital not only to ensure peace and security but to promote speedy economic and social progress.
248.	A great deal undoubtedly remains to be done. We often complain of the lack of will or progress. However, there is no occasion for cynicism and despair. Despite our many disappointments the family of the United Nations has an impressive record of achievement. I would commend the work of the ILO, WHO, UNESCO, FAO, UNCTAD and many other bodies within the United Nations system. Given the required funds these bodies could do a lot more to alleviate human suffering and promote well-being. A case in point is the WHO efforts to eradicate malaria, which is again raising its ugly head: Its programme to eradicate this scourge from the globe is estimated to cost about $450 million—half of what is spent daily for military purposes- yet the programme is dragging for lack of funds.
249.	India is convinced of the necessity of supporting, strengthening and developing the United Nations as a universal Organization, not only for preserving peace among nation States and promoting respect for human rights, but also for fostering economic co-operation and harmonizing the actions of States. This is clearly a vital task facing the international community.
250.	In the final analysis, I return to my basic theme. The greatest task before us, which envelops all the issues confronting mankind, concerns the welfare of man, regardless of race, colour, creed or nationality. All our problems, the questions of war and peace, economic malaise and rapidly diminishing natural resources, must lead us to one conclusion: in our interdependent world each one of us is his brother's keeper.
251.	The single all-embracing item on our agenda is the future of man, and it will remain so in the years and decades to come. Man inherited, developed and still nurtures this good earth and is nourished by it. If we realize that his survival is inextricably linked with that of millions of others as never in the past, we shall reach the only answer to the requirement of our times: national sovereignty must adjust itself to international interdependence.
252.	On behalf of India I pledge before this Assembly that our country will never be found wanting in its resolve to share in the sacrifice for the ideals of one world and for the welfare and greater glory of man.
﻿154.	Mr. President, permit me to join those representatives who have already spoken in the debate, and have offered their congratulations to you on your unanimous election to the office of President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly.
155.	The cause of human rights received a powerful impetus this year when the President of the United States told this body on 17 March of this year that every nation has a responsibility to speak out in defence of basic rights and freedoms throughout the world. We subscribed fully to this view and we are proud that, despite intense strains and provocations, Israel has succeeded in maintaining a free, open and multiracial society in which the dignity of man and the rule of law are held supreme.
156.	Unfortunately, the record of the United Nations in the field of human rights is poor. We are witnesses here to a deplorable exercise in double standards and cynicism.
157.	We have also been disappointed that so little progress has been made in implementing the humanitarian principles of the Final Act of Helsinki. Regrettably, there has been no improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Exit from the Soviet Union, the right to leave one's country a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Final Act of Helsinki—is still severely restricted, and those Jews who do insist on their rights are subject to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment and in some cases to arrest and imprisonment. The Government of Israel once again calls on the Soviet Union to permit those Jews who wish to do so to leave in order to go to Israel to join their people and their families.
158.	May I again raise the matter of the sorry plight of the Jewish community in Syria. That community does not enjoy such basic human rights as freedom of movement or the right to be reunited with their families. There can be no valid reason for the Government of Syria to hold those 5,000 innocent people as hostages.
159.	Ever since it joined the United Nations some 28 years ago, Israel has steadily supported all significant moves by this Organization to promote and to propagate the limitation of armaments on a global scale. Although disarmament has always been closely linked with security, Israel is prepared to play its part in the reduction of the arms race in the Middle East.
160.	In the past three years, an estimated $US 7.5 billion in arms supplies have been delivered by East and West to Arab countries in the vicinity of Israel. In addition, about $US 22 billion worth of arms was contracted for by Arab States for delivery from the end of 1976 onwards. Israel is ready to enter into an agreement on arms limitation with all the States in the Middle East.
161.	With regard to another crucial aspect of disarmament, Israel has frequently called on its Arab neighbours to join it in direct negotiations with a view to establishing a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East. Indeed, on this issue as on others, the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Fahmy, has deliberately misled this Assembly. Israel firmly believes that such negotiations should lead to the conclusion of a formal, contractual, multilateral convention between all the States of the region, on the lines of such notable precedents as the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin America and the proposals for similar agreements in the areas of south Asia and the south Pacific. Unfortunately, the Arab States have totally rejected this call by Israel which, after all, is in the interests of all the people of the Middle East. On this occasion I repeat our proposal.
162.	A year ago, following the rescue by Israel of innocent hostages hijacked to Entebbe in an Air France airbus, the Vice Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany proposed that the United Nations should draft an international convention banning the taking of hostages and providing for the prosecution or extradition of the "criminals. This was an important step in the right direction, which Israel welcomed. It is therefore very disturbing to note that the Ad Hoc Committee appointed to deal with this matter has made so little progress in attempting to draft a convention for consideration by this Assembly. If this Organization fails, because of the efforts of those who support international terror, to take even this step in the right direction, then it will have lost all credibility as an effective instrument of international action.
163.	It is regrettable that Arab States have played and continue to play a central role in encouraging international terror. It is to Arab airports that hijacked aircraft are directed by terrorists in their search for safe destinations. The recent Japan Air Lines case is a classic example. The kidnappers and murderers of public figures in Germany are graduates of the courses of the PLO.
164.	No cause can justify or condone terrorism. Terrorism is a criminal activity, totally indiscriminate in its effects, which by design strikes at the innocent and the defenceless. The issue is therefore a fundamental one for the international community. The attitude this Organization takes on the question of terrorism is a clear reflection of its moral strength and its international responsibility.
165.	So far, the record of the United Nations in combating terrorism is dismal. Not once has the Security Council convened to condemn terrorists and hijackers.
166.	I noted with interest that, after my Egyptian colleague had talked with the President and the Secretary of State in Washington on 22 September, he announced to the press that, for the first time, Egypt was prepared to accept Israel as a Middle Eastern country and to live in peace in that area. It saddened me therefore that, before this Assembly on 28 September, Mr. Fahmy chose to make a personal attack on my Prime Minister and to vilify Zionism and to launch a move to isolate Israel in this forum. He also made peace conditional on an end to immigration to Israel, and openly threatened war. It would be easy to rebut him, but I shall refrain. I shall only comment that Mr. Fahmy's double-talk does not enhance Egypt's credibility and is prejudicial to the prospects of peace in the Middle East.
167.	Israel will never limit immigration. Zionism is the life-blood of Israel. We will do our utmost to achieve peace and to prevent war; but let me remind Mr. Fahmy, when he threatens us with war, that every war launched by Egypt has ended to its considerable disadvantage. The last cease-fire negotiations between Israel and Egypt after the Yom Kippur war took place 101 kilometres from Cairo. I submit that it would be more appropriate for Mr. Fahmy to stop talking about war and concentrate on the issues of peace.
168.	Similarly, I shall not engage in polemics with any of the other Arab representatives who have made countless false and malicious allegations against Israel.
169.	However, certain facts must be recalled. We have been reminded that General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947 on the partition of Palestine has not been implemented. True, but the Arab States themselves voted against that resolution, obstructed its implementation and destroyed it by force of arms. For the last 30 years they have been guilty of aggression against Israel.
170.	After every war we proposed peace, but in vain. After the 1948 war we negotiated with Abdullah, King of Jordan. We reached an agreement, which was initialled by both sides, but because of that he was assassinated by his own people while praying at the A1 Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. In 1957, we proposed to President Nasser of Egypt that Egyptian troops, and not United Nations troops, should take over Sharm el Sheikh, which controls the Strait of Tiran, on condition that Israeli vessels be guaranteed freedom of passage, but Nasser rejected our proposal. After the 1967 war, we offered to negotiate for peace: we offered to return territory in return for peace. The reply we received from the Arab countries was given to us on 1 September 1967 at the Arab Summit Conference: no negotiation, no recognition, no peace.
171.	Many representatives have referred nostalgically to the 1967 armistice lines, and seem to see an Israeli withdrawal to them as a complete solution to all the problems of the Middle East. But if the 1967 lines are the answer to the problem, why is it that peace was not achieved in the years between 1949 and 1967, when Israel's frontiers were at the pre-1967 lines? During that period the Arab States refused to negotiate peace, as they were pledged to do under the armistice agreements which they signed in 1949. The PLO, an instrument of war for the destruction of Israel, was created in 1964 when Israel was still behind the 1967 lines.
172.	There has been much talk about the territories held by Israel since the six day war. But nothing has been said about the reasons for that war; nothing of President Nasser's blockade of the Strait of Tiran and his public undertakings to annihilate Israel; nothing of Egypt's movement of forces leading up to the war; nothing of how King Hussein ignored our advice, passed on to him by General Odd Bull of the United Nations, when he joined in the attack on Israel with the forces of Egypt and Syria.
173.	We did not plan to go to war. We fought to defend ourselves from the grim fate promised us.
174.	We cannot overlook the fact that the simplistic solution, which has been advocated by so many participants in this debate, was a reality on the ground from 1949 to 1967. It brought us war.
175.	In 1973, Syria and Egypt again launched a war against Israel. After their defeat, the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East was set up in the framework of which two disengagement agreements were reached with Egypt and Syria in 1974, and an interim agreement was made with Egypt in 1975.
176.	Since then, Israel has not ceased to indicate its readiness to resume the peace negotiations at Geneva on the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
177.	In view of the many inaccurate constructions that have been put on resolution 242(1967), let us be quite clear what that resolution does say and what it does not say. It does not require Israel to withdraw unilaterally from the territories it occupied in 1967. It does not call upon Israel to leave all those territories. It does not make peace negotiations contingent upon such withdrawal. It does not fix boundaries. What it does require is negotiations between the parties to arrive at an agreed peace treaty.
178.	The wording of the resolution makes it perfectly clear that new boundaries are to be determined between the States of the region. The statement that "secure and recognized boundaries" must be negotiated implies that previous boundaries were not secure or recognized. The fact that new boundaries are to be reached can also be inferred from the fact that Arab and Soviet pressure for the inclusion of a reference to "withdrawal from all the territories" was unsuccessful.
179.	I quote Mr. Joseph Sisco, who was the United States Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization
Affairs at the time that resolution 242 (1967) was adopted. He said:
"That resolution did not say 'withdrawal to the pre-June 5 lines'. That resolution said that the parties must negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final secure and recognized borders. In other words, the question of the final borders ... is a matter of negotiations between the parties."
This is still our position. We have to establish new boundaries, and not to return to the old ones. We have to negotiate permanent boundaries that will afford Israel security.
180.	According to resolution 242 (1967), the peace settlement must include:
"Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area . ..".
The settlement is therefore to be reached between States, and not to involve the participation of any organization whatsoever.
181.	Resolution 242 (1967) makes no mention whatsoever of the PLO. The PLO is a terrorist organization whose record is one of deliberate and indiscriminate atrocities against innocent civilians, including women and children. The PLO is governed by the Palestinian National Covenant of 1964, as amended in 1968 and reconfirmed as recently as in March of this year by the Palestinian National Council in Cairo.
182.	Article 6 of this Covenant calls for the expulsion of the vast majority of the Jewish population from our country. In article 15, it calls for the elimination of Zionism. In article 19, it calls in effect for the destruction of the State of Israel. In article 20, it makes the preposterous assertion that "the claim of historical or spiritual links between the Jews and Palestine is [not] in conformity with historical fact...". In article 21, it declares that "all alternatives to the total liberation of Palestine" are rejected-that is, any plan that falls short of the destruction of Israel.
183.	There is not a sovereign State in this Organization that would negotiate with a body calling for its destruction.
184.	Many delegations have proposed the establishment of a Palestinian State governed by the PLO on the West Bank and in Gaza. Again, this is but a futile exercise in wishful thinking, totally unacceptable to us, ignoring, as it does, the language of resolution 242 (1967) and the basic facts on the ground.
185.	A PLO mini-State on the West Bank, which could not be viable in itself, would be a base for attempts to destroy Israel. One has only to consult a map and the political programme of the PLO to realize this.
186.	The provisions of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) were accepted by Israel as the basis of negotiation towards peace. We accepted Council resolution 242 (1967). We did not accept an amended Council resolution 242 (1967)-even if such an amendment were feasible, which it is not, Council resolution 242 (1967) derives its strength and authority from the fact that it has been accepted by the States parties to the conflict.
187.	Moreover, the United States regards resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) as the exclusive basis for a settlement of the conflict. The memorandum of agreement between Israel and the United States on the Geneva Peace Conference, signed on I September 1975, declares in article 4 that the United States
"... will oppose and if necessary vote against any initiatives in the Security Council to alter adversely the terms of reference of the Geneva Peace Conference, or to change resolutions 242 and 338 in ways which are incompatible with their original purpose".
This position was reaffirmed by the United States only a few days ago in a joint statement with Israel.
188.	Israel is ready to resume negotiations at Geneva for the achievement of true, contractual and effective peace treaties, including the establishment of diplomatic relations between Israel and the Arab States. There can be no participation of any additional State, group or organization at the Geneva Peace Conference without the agreement of all the initial participants. All negotiations should be conducted on a bilateral basis.
189.	Through the good offices- of the United States, we have conveyed suggestions on the substantive, and not merely on the procedural, issues.
190.	First, we have provided a draft text of a full peace treaty in all its aspects. Secondly, we have supplied details of our approach in respect of discussion and negotiation on the various issues. This part is in turn made up of two elements: first, a presentation of some of the main questions involved in a peace agreement between ourselves and each of our neighbours, questions such as Israel's security, guarantees of freedom of navigation in all international waterways, the security of the Jordan River sources in the north, a basis for coexistence with the Palestinian Arabs in the" Gaza Strip, Judaea and Samaria, and other relevant topics—in other words, the questions which we believe we must contend with if we are to sign a final peace agreement between ourselves and each of the neighbouring Arab States. The second element comprises our ideas for resolving these questions. In our view, there should be complete normalization of relations, including diplomatic relations, trade and cultural ties. We have suggested modalities, including demilitarized zones and other arrangements.
191.	In addition, there remains the cardinal principle that the negotiations should be conducted without prior conditions or commitments. This principle means not only that neither side obligates the other to agree in advance to any condition whatsoever but also that all issues and areas are
open to negotiation. We for our part will be completely open and sincere in listening to, discussing and examining the proposals of the other parties. To illustrate this: we believe that the settlement concerning Judaea and Samaria and the Gaza Strip should be based on our living together with the Palestinian Arabs in those areas, and not on a partition of the territory.
192.	For 10 years, between 1967 and 1977, the Government of Israel was committed to territorial concessions in return for genuine peace, and this implied the redivision of the area. But to no avail.
193.	Now our view is that redivision is not the answer. Nowhere is it possible to draw a dividing line which will satisfy not only the security, but also the historical, economic and social needs of all sides. Bethlehem, a satellite town of Jerusalem and dependent on Jerusalem for its tourist trade and indeed its very existence, cannot be cut off from the holy city. Mount Scopus, the site of the Hebrew University and the Hadassah Hospital, cannot be separated from Israel. And are the Arabs in Gaza once again to be bottled up in an intolerably narrow strip of land, unable to get out without passing an international frontier? No. The model for the future must be united Jerusalem, where since 1967 Jews and Arabs have proved that they can live together harmoniously to their joint benefit, where all residents enjoy freedom of movement in all parts of the holy city and where freedom of access to the Holy Places is assured for all. There is no room—and no need—for barbed wire any more.
194.	But, for all that, had the Arabs proposed partitioning those territories between ourselves and them, we would have discussed and examined their proposal and afterwards would have decided whether we were ready to agree to it or not. In this connexion I should like to point out that we have re-examined the positions of Jordan and of the Palestinian Arabs and we have found no inclination on the part of either for a solution based on the redivision of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza Strip.
- 195. The criticism which has been directed against Israel in respect of the establishment of settlements in Judaea and Samaria is unfounded. The settlements are legal. Under international law neither Jordan nor any other Arab State has any sovereign territorial rights in the West Bank or in any other part of what was mandatory Palestine in 1948 when the United Kingdom surrendered its Mandate. No State today has any claim of sovereignty to what was mandatory Palestine that is better than or even equal to Israel's claims.
196.	The Arab States rejected the United Nations partition resolution and, in violation of the United Nations Charter, they used force in an attempt to prevent its implementation. The Arab use of force in 1948 was an act of aggression-not of self-defence.
197.	"... an armed struggle is taking place in Palestine as a result of the unlawful invasion by a number of States of the territory of Palestine, which does not form part of the territory of any of the States whose armed forces have invaded it."
That is what Mr. Tarasenko of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic said in the Security Council in 1948.
198.	No rights accrued to any of the Arab States from that act, and those States were in fact subject to the restrictions that international law imposes on a "conquering" and "occupying" army.
199.	Jordan's annexation of Judaea and Samaria early in 1950 was never recognized by any State other than Pakistan and the United Kingdom. The United States Department of State, at a press conference on 29 July 1977, confirmed that there were legal problems over the sovereign rights of Jordan in the West Bank.
200.	In view of this illegal annexation of the West Bank, the fourth Geneva Convention is not applicable.
201.	But even if the laws of belligerent occupation were applicable, those rules contain no restrictions on the freedom of persons to take up residence in the area involved. The fourth Geneva Convention bans forcible transfers, not voluntary acts of individuals taking up residence in the area of the West Bank. Mo Arab inhabitants have been displaced by the establishment of these Jewish settlements. Not a single Arab resident of Judaea and Samaria has been made homeless as a result of the establishment of those peaceful villages. And, above all, it is unacceptable to us that Jews should be prohibited from living in any part of their ancestral land.
202.	Let me make one point clear: the settlements will not decide the final borders between Israel and its neighbours. The borders will be decided upon in the negotiations between Israel and its neighbours. The settlements are by no means an obstacle to peace because, if they were, we should have had peace years ago.
203.	We believe that the problem concerning the status of the Arabs living in the West Bank should be settled in the framework of peace negotiations in Geneva between us and the Jordanian delegation, which may include Palestinian Arabs from Judaea and Samaria.
204.	One of the central problems that has to be solved in a peace settlement is the problem of the refugees. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) refers to "refugees", not "Arab refugees": it covers both Jewish and Arab refugees. When the resolution was being drafted, a Soviet attempt to restrict it to Arab refugees failed.
205.	The origin of the Palestinian Arab refugee problem was the Arab rejection of the United Nations partition resolution and the war which the Arab States declared against the State of Israel one day after its establishment. The responsibility is therefore theirs. Had the Arabs accepted the resolution, there would have been no refugee problem. Furthermore, because of the wars conducted by the Arab States against Israel, Jews who had lived for thousands of years in Arab lands were forced to leave, abandoning all their property and possessions. For about 590,000 Arab refugees there were about 600,000 Jewish refugees from Iraq, Yemen, Syria, Egypt, Libya and the rest of North Africa. 

  

206.	Refugees in other parts of the world have been successfully integrated into the national community to which they belong. The only exception to the general rule is the situation of the Arab refugees. The Arab States have refused to absorb and integrate their brothers into their respective societies. The Arab States have made the "restoration" of the "legitimate rights" of those refugees- namely, their return to Israel—the central demand. That demand constitutes a serious distortion of the realities of the refugee problem.
207.	We do not intend to send back Jews to Iraq, Syria, Egypt, Morocco, Yemen and other Arab countries, to be hanged in the public squares of Baghdad and to be deprived of their human rights and to become third-class citizens, imprisoned in ghettoes, as in Syria now, in order to take Arab refugees in their place. The fact is that an exchange of population has taken place between Israel and the Arab countries.
208.	The difference between Israel and the Arab States is that, while we in Israel from the outset integrated all the Jewish refugees into our society, the Arab States deliberately perpetuated the "refugee status" of their own brethren in order to use them as a political weapon against Israel. The Arab demand for the return of the refugees to Israel, coupled with proposals for the establishment of a Palestinian State, is calculated to bring about the destruction of Israel. The refugees should be resettled and integrated into the Arab societies in which they now live. In any peace settlement specific provisions should be made to enable all refugees to find accommodation, employment and adequate compensation.
209.	In any discussion of reparations for the refugees, Israel will raise the question of reparations for Jewish refugees from Arab lands and insist that all their claims be settled within the framework of the peace agreement.
210.	There is only one road along which it is possible to move towards peace; that is the road of direct negotiations with no pre-conditions. No conflict in the world has ever been resolved without the parties to the conflict negotiating face to face. Our conflict is not different.
211.	The heart of the problem is the Arab refusal to recognize the right of Israel to national sovereignty in the ancient, historical land of the Jewish people. That is the heart of the problem, and until it is overcome the obstacles to a just and durable peace will remain.
212.	The developments of recent days and the possibility of a resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East, none the less, give room for guarded optimism which could turn into grounds for great hope. For our part, we are prepared to embark on a common effort, long and challenging as it may be, to negotiate a final agreement to live in peace and security.
 

﻿74.	 Mr. President, I offer you my warmest congratulations on your election as President of this Assembly. It is at once a notable mark of confidence in you personally and a timely acknowledgement of your country's standing in the world community.
75.	We welcome as new Members the Republic of Djibouti and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. New Zealand was privileged to be a sponsor of Viet Nam's application for membership. We did so not merely because of our belief in the value of universal membership of the United Nations, but because we regard the participation of Viet Nam as indispensable in the task of solving the pressing problems of South-East Asia. We look forward to developing a positive relationship with this dynamic State both within the United Nations system and in our direct bilateral dealings.
76.	This year's General Assembly, like its predecessors, confronts awesome problems which we human beings have created and which—we must believe—human beings have the intelligence to solve, if only we can summon the will and forge the consensus. Our Secretary-General has pinpointed the issues in his valuable report. Many of them have been with us for a long time. Others, as he notes, are new. All directly affect the peace, security and welfare of our fragile world community. Indeed, they are basic to its continued functioning and even to its continued existence.
77.	Whether the issue be the softening of the expensive and potentially deadly rivalry between the super-Power?;, whether it be the establishment of human justice for all the people of southern Africa and the Middle East, whether it be the imperative of a more just and workable international economic order, whether it be the conservation and orderly use of the resources of the sea and the sea-bed, whether it be the sensible management and sharing of the finite resources of this planet, whether it be the halting and reversal of the arms race-whatever the issue, all of us have a direct stake in the outcome. No one of us can opt out. All of us face the challenge; all of us will share the responsibility if we fail to find solutions and then uphold them in good faith.
78.	It would, of course, be naive to pretend that this body is an objective research institution or a philanthropic agency, or that national or regional interests are likely to be set aside, or that advances will be made except step by step through deals and compromises. That is the nature of national or international political institutions, of which this is one. We represent our constituents, and they have their interests and their aspirations, to which we must be responsive. But all of us, I think, can feel in our bones that in its economic, no less than its political, condition the world is not many steps away from chaos; and that for all of us the consequences of failure are so grave that, however intractable the problems, however elusive the solutions, we are called upon to make the effort to face them with seriousness and compassion. We are then in the area of attitudes. Attitudes determine political will, and without a shift of attitudes the indispensable consensus will continue to elude us.
79.	No issue calls more urgently for agreement among us than that of the more just and effective use of the world's economic resources. It is at our peril that we should ignore the fact that one third of our fellow beings are subsisting in conditions of destitution and mounting despair, that, after two decades of international consideration and some, but all too little, action, development problems have increased in magnitude, that, despite dozens of conferences, the relative position of the people of the developing countries has each year steadily deteriorated.
80.	in recently reviewing the decline in the terms of trade of countless which produce agricultural exports, and considering measures such as the supplementary financing facility established by the IMF, my Prime Minister made this observation:
"We cannot say to a poor country, 'We will pay you much less in relative terms for your goods than we used to pay, but you need not worry as we will lend you the balance at market rates of interest providing you take the steps to lower the standard of living of your people.' It is difficult," he said, "to cut what you haven't got."
81.	As an exporter of agricultural products, New Zealand has suffered greatly from declining terms of trade and, I might add, from the social burdens involved in adjusting to a greatly reduced income. We are therefore well placed to understand the far greater difficulties of the oil-deficient developing countries. We claim no special sympathy for New Zealand because we are well placed by comparison with most of the world's population. But our difficulties stem from causes similar to some of those which frustrate the developing world: declining terms of trade for countries which export agricultural goods and Increasing protectionism on the part of the affluent industrial countries. In many countries belts have already been tightened up to, and beyond, what is socially and politically acceptable. We must all think in terms not of palliatives but of fundamental shifts of attitudes and policies.
82.	In such a situation more attention must be given, not just to financing deficits and tightening the belt, but to enabling the primary producing and newly industrializing countries to increase their earnings. And this must involve facing squarely two fundamental questions, namely, the relationship between the prices of primary products and industrial goods, and the question of access to the markets of the affluent industrial countries of the world. These are political questions of the greatest importance, questions that must be tackled by those in whose power it lies to diminish both surpluses and deficits. And surely it must be obvious that for the rich, industrialized world to do so would be no more than enlightened self-interest. Could it not help to revitalize their faltering economies and to provide their societies with a renewed purpose and sense of direction?
83.	The problem is, of course, at the very essence of politics. It is the far from easy task of convincing electorates and, more specifically, of ensuring that special interest groups in those electorates are harnessed to wider national and international imperatives. We are convinced that most of the leaders of countries whose policies will determine the course of the world's economy, and the social and political ramifications of those policies, are aware of what must be done if the looming economic and political chaos is to be avoided. Their problem, and the problem of all in government, is to mobilize sufficient determination and creative leadership to change entrenched attitudes and to confront those interests which, however obsolete they may be, are nevertheless deeply entrenched in their national history and their political processes. But time is short, and it is running out.
84.	I have concentrated some attention on She responsibilities of the affluent market-economy nations, but it is not only their problem. It is the problem of all, regardless of ideology, regardless of economic system.
85.	There appears to be a general recognition that it is within the United Nations framework that the efforts of the international community to promote such action should be carried forward. The present session of the General Assembly has a special responsibility to put in hand preparations for a new international development strategy. The conclusions and agreements of the Paris Conference on International Economic Co-operation held earlier this year need to be followed up.
86.	New Zealand was not a participant at the Paris Conference. We have, however, welcomed the progress made, and my Government has now completed its study of the measures agreed at that Conference. We endorse the agreements reached, limited though these were, and will take up the debate in the various forums concerned on the topics left uncompleted.
87.	An important element in our efforts to promote development and greater equity in the distribution of the world's resources is, of course, international energy cooperation, with particular reference to the interests and needs of energy-deficient developing countries. We are encouraged that the Secretary-General has recently made proposals for such co-operation within the United Nations system, and we shall play our part in working out this concept in the course of this session and thereafter.
88.	It is now almost three years since the World Food Conference decided to establish an International Fund for Agricultural Development. The Fund represents a new approach to the age-old problem of world hunger-the pooling, on a hitherto unprecedented scale, of resources to be devoted exclusively to improving agriculture in developing countries. The Fund's initial pledging target of SI billion was achieved at the beginning of the year, and the Agreement establishing the Fund was thrown open for signature in February. New Zealand will formally ratify the agreement today. We look forward to its early entry into force and the fulfilment of initial pledges by donor countries so that operations may begin.
89.	New Zealand will also participate actively and constructively in the resumed session of the United Nations Negotiating Conference on a Common Fund under the Integrated Programme for Commodities. We earn our living by the export of primary produce, and therefore share the concern of developing countries that greater stability should be introduced into the commodity markets of the world.
90.	New Zealand is experiencing the most prolonged and deep-seated recession in its post-war economic history. This fact has sharpened our appreciation of the lot of developing countries. It has, however, circumscribed our ability to help those beyond our shores, but we remain pledged to the target of 0.7 per cent for official development assistance, and we shall move again towards that target as soon as our economic circumstances permit.
91.	In our interdependent world there are no issues that can be considered in isolation. The refashioning of the global economic system is closely linked to negotiating settlements in southern Africa and the Middle East, to halting the arms race, and to controlling and ultimately eliminating weapons of mass destruction. The more we can establish conditions of security and stability the more chance there is of securing the massive diversion of resources and the rearrangement of economic activity needed to reduce the unacceptable disparities that new exist among nations. How, then, do we address these problems?
92.	All of us agree that the situation in southern Africa is a tragedy, c tragedy compounded by intransigence and repression, a tragedy of expanding and enveloping dimensions. Change must come, and it will come. The question is not if, but how. Here, of course, there is less agreement.
93.	Some claim that armed struggle is the only way; and if intransigence persists they will, of course, be right. But it is a way that would extract a terrible price in human lives and suffering and would create bitter problems for the future.
94.	When the Anglo-American proposals on Rhodesia were announced, I said publicly that they offered the last chance for a peaceful settlement. If the Smith regime tosses this chance away it might buy itself a little time, but it can only be a time of tension and a time of knowing that the end will almost certainly be bloodshed in Salisbury and Bulawayo. I would urge the Smith regime to realize it, not only for their own sake,- but also for the sake of Zimbabwe as a whole.
95.	There has been some progress on Namibia. The southern African authorities have apparently recognized the futility of pressing ahead with the Turnhalle proposals and have accepted the need for elections on the basis of one man, one vote. The Maputo Conference showed them, if they needed any showing, that the international community is united in its demand that Namibia should be free and independent. But if there has been some progress, there remain formidable problems. One of the most taxing is that of Walvis Bay. There can be no question that any exclusion of Walvis Bay from Namibia would undermine that country's integrity and impede significantly its chances of building a viable economy.
96.	The gravest problems are those of South Africa. They are complex and deep-rooted. And they are on a huge scale. White South Africa remains to be convinced that it has no alternative but to accept fundamental changes of attitude. Even a society that is as inward-looking and as determined to go its own way as South Africa cannot survive alone. It is part of the world whether it likes it or not. If the rest of the world makes it clear that it will have nothing to do with
South Africa so long as it persists with its discriminatory policies, the pressure for change will sooner or later become irresistible.
97.	We in New Zealand have played our part in this process. We took part in the Lagos World Conference for Action against Apartheid and subscribed, without reservation, to the terms of the Lagos Declaration. We have minimal trade with South Africa and virtually no investment. We have supported the Swedish initiative calling for the ending of all new investment in South Africa. We have refused to contemplate any exchange of diplomatic representatives. My Government is actively discouraging sporting contacts. We support the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa and the appeal for South African refugee students. We are opposed to the creation of the so-called "Bantustans"' which would seek to make black South Africans aliens in their own country. We have scrupulously observed the voluntary arms embargo and will give our full support to any proposal to establish a mandatory arms embargo in terms of the appropriate provisions of the Charter. We have taken a forthright stand in pressing for the release of political prisoners and in condemning the brutal treatment which has led to the unexplained deaths in confinement of more than one black leader-most recently Steven Biko. In short, we shall do all we can to bring about the atmosphere in which a just solution of the problems of racism and minority rule in South Africa might be achieved before a long, drawn-out and bloody armed struggle becomes inevitable.
98.	The Arab-Israeli dispute is another problem that threatens world peace. It is a dispute about which we have little direct knowledge and we are certainly not well placed to presume to offer any new ideas on how it can be resolved. Even so, it seems to us that certain things stand out. One is that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) must continue to form the basis-for any settlement. We are obliged, therefore, to reject any attempt by one party to the dispute to pursue policies that are contrary to the principles laid down in resolution 242(1967). We believe that territory occupied by Israel must be returned.
99.	The second thing is that the Palestinian people have a right to a homeland, either as a separate State or as a part of a larger, Arab State. The precise boundaries of that homeland are a matter for negotiations by the parties directly concerned. But if there is to be a peace in the Middle East, the principle must be recognized. It does not derogate in any way from the fundamental right of Israel to exist as a sovereign, independent State within secure and recognized boundaries, free from threat by any acts of force, and indeed we believe that a final territorial settlement will confirm and help to protect that right.
100.	And, finally, it is imperative that negotiations begin soon. The longer a start is delayed, the greater the build-up of tension and the greater the chances of the outbreak of another war. Obviously, to be constructive, negotiations must include all the parties to the dispute, including the Palestinians, through their chosen representatives.
101.	In another long-standing dispute, that between North and South Korea, the resumption of early negotiations between the parties directly concerned is, in our view, an urgent requirement. My Government remains deeply concerned lest the tensions on the peninsula should lead, once again, to confrontation. It is our earnest hope that, during the pause in international deliberations on the problem, a peaceful solution can be found through negotiations between the two Korean parties. New Zealand hopes that all Governments which are in a position to encourage this peaceful means to a solution will use their influence accordingly.
102.	We have a deep concern also for the security and prosperity of South-East Asia. We therefore welcome the co-operative, constructive efforts of the countries of the region through the Association of South-East Asian Nations. ASEAN is a non-military association dedicated to the establishment of peace and stability in South-East Asia. Its leaders have made clear on many occasions their desire to promote friendship and understanding with their neighbours. We hope they will soon get a response. For our part we are glad to be associated with ASEAN in its efforts to improve the well-being of the people of this area.
103.	This same developing regional co-operation is to be found so in our own part of the world, the South Pacific. There, the South Pacific Forum, a group of ten States, five of which are represented in this Assembly, is the principal vehicle for co-operation and consultation. Two of the Forum's recent initiative deserve particular mention. In June it was agreed to establish a regional shipping line, the Pacific Forum Line. Ships are to be chartered to the Line by participating Governments and it will operate services within the region, commencing early next year. Sea transport, of course, is the key to economic development in the region and the Forum Line will open new possibilities.
104.	The second major initiative was the agreement of the Forum, at its most recent meeting in Papua New Guinea, to establish a fisheries agency to co-ordinate and develop protection and surveillance of fisheries within the economic zones of member countries. The proper control of this huge area, which in total is one of the largest in the world, is clearly beyond the capability of any one member country. By sharing their skills and knowledge, the members will be able to exploit their resources to the best advantage of all countries in the region. At the same time the establishment of exclusive economic zones in the South Pacific and of a regional fishing agency in no way diminishes the importance for the area of the early completion of the treaty on the law of the sea. It is our earnest hope that negotiations will result in an agreed text during 1978.
105.	Before I leave the subject of regional co-operation I should like to refer, very briefly, to the signing on 7 September in Washington of the Panama Canal Treaties. This is a significant advance which my Government welcomes. We see the agreements as a milestone for the principal parties, the United States and the Republic of Panama, for the Americas as a whole, and for countries as far flung as my own. The large volume of our trade which passes through the Canal causes us to take a positive interest in its security and efficiency. I warmly congratulate the Governments concerned.
106.	The protection and promotion of human rights is one of the basic purposes of the United Nations and next year will be the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. New Zealand attaches great importance to the Universal Declaration and to the values enunciated in the International Covenants on Human Rights, the one covering political and civil rights, the other economic, social and cultural rights.
107.	Before formally committing ourselves to the Covenants we have sought to ensure that in every respect our laws and juridical system were capable of enforcing the obligations of those Covenants. This has been a lengthy task involving the drafting of new legislation. That task is now substantially completed. Enactment of this legislation will mean that our laws will sustain any scrutiny under the Covenants. I expect, therefore, that we will ratify both those Covenants, as well as the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide not later than 1978. Respect for human rights, for human dignity and the individual's fundamental freedoms have long had a central place in our traditions and values. Through this codification the law in fact will have caught up with our practice.
108.	In preparing for the ratification of the Covenants the New Zealand Government has drafted, and Parliament is expected to adopt during the current parliamentary session, a measure which will outlaw every kind of discrimination based on sex or religion. Racial discrimination is already contrary to New Zealand tradition, law and practice and New Zealand reports regularly to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Under the new legislation a national commission of human rights will be established to deal with complaints of racial, religious or sexual discrimination. This legislation should facilitate New Zealand's signature and ratification of the draft Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women when it is adopted—in the preparation of which New Zealand has taken an active part. We hope it will be completed and opened for signature at the present session of the Assembly.
109.	I have touched on a number of problems and I want now to turn to the most menacing of all-the arms race. No other issue before this Assembly creates greater hopes and engenders greater despair. The gap between our aspirations and our achievements frustrates and dispirits us, and that gap must be closed.
110.	There has been some progress. It is encouraging that at last serious negotiations have begun among three of the nuclear-weapon States on the content of a comprehensive test-ban treaty. This will provide the most effective restriction on vertical nuclear proliferation so far and is clearly the first priority. We hope that a generally accepted comprehensive test-ban treaty will have been drafted by the time the special session is held. No other development, in our judgement, would provide a happier augury for the success of that session. We do not consider acceptable to wait for technology to solve all the political problems confronting a test ban. This would be to wait indefinitely and perhaps for ever. The time for action is now.
111.	None of the great issues before this Assembly are capable of quick or simple solution. But we can make a start, and if the will is present we can move progressively and consistently to the settlement of our disputes, to the changing of attitudes and to the reconciliation of our differences. The New Zealand delegation approaches this session of the Assembly determined to work conscientiously towards that objective.
 

﻿108.	 Mr. President, on behalf of the delegation of the Soviet Union I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly of the United Nations. I wish you full success in the discharge of this high and responsible task.
109.	At every session of the General Assembly we take satisfaction at seeing the growing ranks of States Members of the United Nations. Their number has now almost reached 150. This is yet one more indication of the positive changes occurring in world affairs. It signifies that the peoples one after another continue to gain freedom and independence, thereby confirming the inexorable advance of the process of national liberation.
110.	But what matters most is that the constant influx of new Members adds to the political weight and capabilities of the United Nations and enhances the over-all potential of the policy of peace. Indeed, the main objective of all activities of the United Nations as laid down in its Charter is  to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war .
111.	Our country made its irrevocable choice long ago. The essence of Soviet foreign policy is to ensure a peaceful, creative life for our people and peace for all people on earth. For 60 years now we have been firmly and unswervingly following this line bequeathed to us by the founder of the Soviet State, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.
112.	In this year of the sixtieth anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution the peaceful goals and humane principles of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union will acquire the force of a fundamental law and as such will be enshrined in the new Constitution of the USSR.
111. The same objectives are served by concrete foreign policy actions of the Soviet Union, by the initiatives which we take in international affairs. Many of them have been enunciated from this very rostrum. In a condensed form they are set forth in the programme of further struggle for peace and international co-operation and for the freedom and independence of peoples, adopted by the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the highest political forum of the party of the Soviet country.
! 12. As an integral part of the world socialist system our country acts in the international arena in close unity with fraternal socialist States. We are proud that the entire world is increasingly recognizing the fact that the socialist community of States commits its growing resources and the full weight of its foreign policy on the side of fruitful co-operation among peoples, their security, and universal peace.
113.	But is it not true that the work for a stronger peace is no less pressing today than it was yesterday? Indeed, it has proved possible in recent years to make headway in this direction. In various parts of the planet people have felt tangibly that it is easier to breathe, that the threat of war is receding. The process of detente is becoming pivotal to the development of international relations. But it is clear that in the current situation with its pluses and minuses intricately intertwined this process is not yet immune from delays or even reverses.
114.	One cannot fail to notice that there are still forces at work in the world which do not find detente to their liking. And to say this is perhaps to put it too mildly if one takes into account how fiercely they are attacking the policy of detente.
115.	Faced with a clear prospect of improvement of the international climate, certain groups are intensifying their attempts to launch an offensive to push the world back to the times of the  cold war . Those groups have a stake in an unrestrained arms race, the preservation of old centers of tensions and the creation of new ones, and the perpetuation of the remnants of colonialism and racism.
116.	As a matter of fact we are confronted with the following alternative: either the world will follow the road of renouncing the use of force, the road of disarmament and equal, mutually beneficial co-operation, or it may plunge even more deeply into the arms race and find itself on the brink of a nuclear catastrophe. That is why our country is laying such stress on the need to continue and consolidate detente.
117.	One hears it said at times:  You know, detente is an abstract thing; nobody really knows what it is all about.  Such an argument is spurious and far-fetched. But if it is really necessary to clarify the meaning which the USSR gives to the concept of a relaxation of tensions, this has been done most authoritatively by the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid I. Brezhnev. He said in his speech in the city of Tula last January:
 Detente means, first of all the overcoming of the 'cold war' and transition to normal, stable relations among
States; detente means willingness to resolve differences and disputes not by force, not by threats or sabre-rattling, but by peaceful means, at the conference table. Detente means a certain trust and ability to take into consideration each other's legitimate interests. 
118.	Is there really anything recondite in this definition or indeed anything that could provoke objections from those who truly aspire to peace? No, there is nothing of that kind nor can. there possibly be. All this is exactly what each country should be guided by in its policy when facing the countless variety of problems posed by international life. We note with satisfaction that an - increasing number of responsible statesmen are coming to the conclusion that in a nuclear age there is no reasonable alternative to the policy of detente and peaceful coexistence.
119.	The experience of recent years has shown that when States are inspired by peaceful strivings, in actual deeds and not just in words, they do find a common language in settling on actions that lead to a stronger peace. Moreover, not only do they find it, they also work quite successfully—jointly or along parallel courses—to attain this goal.
120.	Indeed, the very improvement of the international climate in recent years has become possible because this was the common cause for a sizable number of countries and for political and social forces which in their world outlook and ideology often stand quite far apart but are none the less willing to co-operate for the benefit of peace.
121.	The policy of detente cannot be allowed to mark time, still less to take a downward turn. It must be constantly nourished with new initiatives and brought within the reach of an ever greater number of States; in short, we must ensure what one may call the materialization of detente.
122.	The United Nations has a weighty role in this respect also. All States Members of the United Nations, no matter how diverse their positions and views, are called upon to step up their efforts to deepen and strengthen detente.
123.	In the conditions now shaping up in the international arena, we consider it extremely important that the United Nations and all its Member States solemnly declare their commitment to detente and use all their authority to back it up. This directly follows from the obligation to live together in peace with one another which the States Members of the United Nations assumed under the Charter.
124.	If the States Members of the United Nations jointly express their political will and determination to advance the cause of detente, this will contribute to overcoming the obstacles which arise in the path of this process and to the over-all improvement of the political climate in the world. In so doing the General Assembly could determine, in terms of the present-day situation, the top priority areas in which States could exert peaceful efforts and the line of conduct which they should follow in relations with each other.
125.	What, specifically, do we have in mind?
126.	It is necessary, above all, scrupulously to protect the assets of detente that have already been accumulated and to prevent them from being squandered. And these assets accumulated in recent years are quite impressive. It is necessary to assist actively in the implementation of multilateral treaties and agreements which serve the interests of strengthening international security and developing peaceful relations, as well as of United Nations decisions aimed at reaching these goals. And a good many such decisions have indeed been adopted.
127.	Another appropriate channel for directing efforts to the benefit of peace and peaceful relations among States is, of course, that of taking resolute steps to contain the arms race and to turn the course of events towards disarmament. What words can be found to make those responsible for the policies of their States realize the imperative need to act seriously in this area?
128.	In the post-war period the arms race has been spiralling upwards continuously, but we were not the ones to cause this. This race was forced on the world by others. However, at every stage the Soviet Union proposed, backing its proposals up with concrete deeds, that an end be put to the dangerous competition and that funds be diverted to the noble endeavour of improving conditions of life for the peoples of the world. And that is still our position.
129.	The Soviet proposals in the field of disarmament are well known. At the last session of the General Assembly we submitted them again in a summarized form in the memorandum of the Soviet Union on questions of ending the arms race and on disarmament. It emphasizes our willingness to search for new measures in the field of disarmament as well as to advance towards general and complete disarmament.
130.	We do not in the least underestimate the significance of some constraints placed on the arms race in a number of areas in recent years. The Soviet Union has made its contribution, together with other countries, in the preparation and implementation of a whole series of relevant international treaties and agreements. These either curtail the build-up of certain types of weapons or ban the arms race in certain environments. The latest example of this is the signing of the Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of Environmental Modification Techniques. In our view, all States without exception should accede to it if they want to support by deeds their words about peace.
131.	None the less, in realistic terms very little has been done so far Actually, physical disarmament and the elimination of the material means of warfare have not even been started yet. The armies of States have not been reduced by a single aircraft or a single tank as called for in United Nations resolutions. How many good and excellent concrete proposals failed to materialize because of overt or covert sabotage by those who would not even hear of disarmament? Will they ever give thought to where they are pushing the world by incessantly whipping up war production and the arms race?
132.	If one listens to the pronouncements of certain statesmen, one might even get the impression that they appear to be in favour of putting an end to tills. But what, I ask, is the actual state of affairs?
133.	A closer look at what are sometimes proposed as  comprehensive  disarmament recipes would reveal that the objectives pursued are diametrically opposed to those of reaching agreements. It would seem that the intent here is roughly as follows: what about making a proposal known in advance to be unacceptable to our counterpart? He then will reject it, thereby giving us a convenient excuse, first, to blame him for that and, secondly, by invoking his rejection, to take steps to build up armaments which, in the absence of such camouflage, would appear quite unseemly.
134.	Can one really on the one hand propose various  drastic reductions  while on the other hand authorizing the development of new and, bluntly speaking, merciless, terrifying types of weapons such as the neutron bomb? No wonder the world literally shuddered when it learned of the secret programmes to manufacture that weapon. How can one qualify this inhuman weapon as  humane ? After all, it is intended to be used directly against human beings and is in the same category as such cruel and barbaric means of warfare as bacteriological or chemical weapons. In our view, the United Nations must resolutely demand that the plans for the production of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction, including the neutron bomb, should be discontinued.
135.	It becomes increasingly evident with each passing day that the achievement of concrete results in the field of disarmament requires the mobilization of the efforts of. all States of the world. The United Nations has a special responsibility in this regard. It must be acknowledged that the United Nations does not stand aloof as regards the disarmament problem. It has adopted a whole number of meaningful resolutions on that score. They are said to be recommendations, but if such recommendations express the will of the peoples for disarmament, it is then the duty of all Governments to be guided by them in their practical action.
136.	A special session of the United Nations General Assembly on disarmament is to be convened next year. We shall not merely have to conduct there a wide exchange of views on fundamental approaches to the disarmament problem at. the present stage but we shall also have jointly to identify the main areas where States should concentrate their priority efforts in the field of disarmament. The Soviet Union would like that session to be business-like and to help with practical preparations for a successful convening in the immediate future of a World Disarmament Conference.
137.	Next, efforts in favour of detente presuppose such actions by States as would contribute to an early peaceful settlement of situations of conflict and to the preclusion of new situations of that kind from arising.
138.	Acting in conformity with the decisions of the Twenty-fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, our country continues actively to press for the elimination of the remaining hotbeds of war. Of course, the most dangerous of those is the one in the Middle East. Why is there no durable peace in that region? Simply because the principal causes of the conflict have .not been removed. Israeli troops have not been withdrawn from the Arab lands seized in 1967. The right of the Arab people of Palestine, including its right to self-determination and the creation of a State of its own, has still not been guaranteed. All of that means that the independent existence and security of all the peoples and States of that region have not been ensured.
139.	Serious apprehensions are aroused by the words and deeds of the leaders of Israel. They are well known. A great deal of combustible material has been accumulated in the Middle East, and in the event of another outbreak of hostilities no one would be able to predict its outcome.
140.	For its part the Soviet Union will go on doing all in its power to bring about such settlement in the Middle East as would establish a lasting peace there without infringing the legitimate rights and interests of any people or any State of the region.
141.	From this high rostrum our country declares once again that we have been and remain advocates of the just cause of the Arabs whose lands have been unlawfully taken away and are still retained by force of arms. Those lands must be returned unconditionally to the Arab peoples.
142.	But if there is any need to reiterate once again that Israel has a right to exist as an independent and sovereign State in the Middle East, then on behalf of the Soviet leadership, on behalf of the Soviet Union, I say again that we have always adhered and will continue to adhere to precisely that line. So why should Israel not take advantage of the opportunity that presents itself and agree to a genuinely just settlement in the Middle East? That would, after all, be in its own national interests also.
143.	The Soviet Union is in favour of an early reconvening of the Geneva Peace Conference with the participation on an equal footing of all parties concerned, including representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization. There appears to exist now a broad understanding of the need to reconvene the Geneva Conference at the end of this year, but there are some who oppose it, and Israel is the main opponent. It appears that the Israeli statesmen will not bring themselves to climb one step higher, will not bring themselves closer to common sense and to the abandonment of their plans for expansion at the expense of other countries and peoples. The Soviet Union, as Co-Chairman of the Conference, intends to do its utmost to have it convened and make it work successfully, and it expects the other Co-Chairman-the United States of America-also to follow that line.
144.	For more than a year now tensions have also persisted in Cyprus. No one will convince us that it is impossible to solve this problem without impairing the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It is clear that there a most intricate knot has been tied, but given goodwill it can be untied by peaceful means. The Soviet Union is prepared to facilitate this, and our relevant proposals remain valid.
145.	For many years now the question of withdrawing foreign troops from Korea has been on the agenda. Is it really essential that the United Nations should admit its impotence in this respect? We think otherwise. There are quite a few possibilities for solving this question so as to prevent a potential conflict from erupting in that part of the world.
146.	There is one more point to be emphasized. In conditions of detente, and in its interests, all countries are required to abide by the fundamental principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter and in other major international instruments. This means, in the first place, pursuing a policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of other States and settling differences and disputes by peaceful means without resorting to the threat or use of force. Experience shows that it is necessary for every country to take into account the legitimate interests of other States and to measure its actions in the international arena against the requirements of detente.
147.	Naturally, all these are basic requirements. Yet, how very often do we see that even such generally recognized norms governing relations between States are violated, and frequently in the most flagrant manner.
148.	A great deal has long been said about those many complications and frictions in the current international situation that are due to the fact that there are still no signs of lessening military confrontation between States or groups of States. This problem is particularly acute in Europe. But on other continents, too, there are some who simply will not abandon the policy of maintaining the old blocs and forming new aggressive blocs, a policy typical of the time of the  cold war . Attempts are made to impart a  defensive  character to certain non-military associations of States as well. And what of the persistent intention to establish more and more military bases?
149.	Attempts to strengthen and expand military blocs run directly counter to the spirit of detente. The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist community have recently made a proposal that at least no action should be taken that could result in enlarging the existing closed groupings and political-military alliances, or creating new ones. However, the attitude of the Western countries to this initiative of the socialist States was, to put it mildly, cool. It would appear that its realization would run counter to their designs.
150.	Let us take the Vienna talks on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. These talks have now been going on for four years, and throughout all those years our Western partners in the talks have stubbornly sought to ensure for themselves unilateral military advantages and to encroach upon the security interest of the socialist countries. Therefore, these talks have so far produced no practical results. We urge that we should proceed to a real search for an understanding rather than just talk about the desire for an agreement.
151.	The relaxation of tensions creates still more favourable conditions for completing, within the shortest possible time, the liberation of all colonial countries and peoples, for eliminating the racist regimes and for eradicating apartheid, the vestiges of national oppression and discrimination of all kinds. On the other hand, there is no doubt 
that the solution of these pending problems will give fresh momentum to the process of detente and add a new geographical dimension to it.
152.	Today, colonialism is on the brink of total collapse. Conditions are improving for the further development of the struggle of peoples for their national liberation. A vivid example of this is the glorious victory of the peoples of Indo-China over imperialist aggression. That victory has opened up favourable prospects for the establishment of peace in South-East Asia and on the entire Asian continent.
153.	It is with special feeling that we welcome the entry into the United Nations of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Justice has been restored: the united socialist State of Viet Nam has taken its rightful place in this Organization. A large State, which has consistently taken a peaceful stand, has joined the United Nations. We whole-heartedly congratulate our Vietnamese friends.
154.	We also welcome the admission of a new African State, the Republic of Djibouti.
155.	When a conflict breaks out in a particular part of the world, more often than not there is, lurking in the background, either a desire to cling to colonial privileges or there are actions of a neo-colonialist nature. Let us look at what is happening in southern Africa. It is now the biggest colonialist and racist enclave in the world. An enormous majority of the population in the Republic of South Africa, Rhodesia and Namibia are deprived of the most elementary human rights. This would seem to be a boundless field of activity where those who clamour for  human rights  could best apply their efforts. But for some reason or other, they shut their eyes to the intolerable plight of millions of people. What is more, they actually connive at the shameful acts of these racist regimes; they support them and cover up their crimes.
156.	Speaking of Africa, some are pointing their finger at Moscow.  This is where , they allege,  the tension on the continent originates . But what is our policy in Africa? We seek no privileges there for ourselves, nor do we covet concessions or bases, nor do we impose on African countries our world outlook. Our aims in Africa are independence, freedom and peace for its peoples.
!
157.	We do not conceal the fact that in Africa, as elsewhere, our sympathies lie with the States that have embarked on a progressive path of development, a path of social and economic transformations for the benefit of the masses. We openly declare our complete solidarity with the peoples fighting for the liquidation of the remaining strongholds of colonialism and racism. The Soviet Union will do its utmost to ensure that the desire to establish peaceful, good-neighbourly relations with one another prevails among African States as well as all other States that have gained independence, and that the sources of discord and conflict stoked up between them by imperialism and reaction be eliminated. In this connection, in Africa just as in Europe it is highly important not only to proclaim the principle of the territorial integrity of States and the inviolability of their borders but also to respect it in practice. And this applies to all parts of the world, to all continents. The violation of this principle results in armed conflicts, torrents of blood and countless sacrifices for the peoples involved in those conflicts.
158.	The sooner we do away with this anachronism of our age-colonialism, racism and apartheid-the cleaner will be the air in Africa and the world at large, and the greater will be the range of action for the policy of detente. This is what was called for by the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted by the United 'Nations 17 years ago.
159.	This is also called for in the specific decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council condemning South African and Rhodesian racists. Those decisions must be strictly implemented by all-and I emphasize this—by all States.
160.	It will not be an exaggeration to say that there is another major world problem, and if it is not solved it is difficult to expect detente to be irreversible. What I have in mind is the development of equal, mutually beneficial economic relations between all States-in short, the restructuring of international economic relations on a just and democratic basis.
161.	I should like to stress immediately that one cannot apply to this problem a mere  geographical  yardstick. After all, it is not along meridians or parallels that the boundaries of poverty and wealth run today. What matters here is how, by whom and for what purposes the natural resources of each country are being used. What is involved here is a wide range of economic, social and political factors.
162.	The Soviet Union has for a long time been making a major contribution to the building of the national economies of developing countries. Representatives of many States in this hall know this, not merely by hearsay. And we fail to understand the allegations made here and there in the West-especially after the so-called  North-South dialogue  reached an impasse-to the effect that the USSR should, as they say,  lend a hand  in providing assistance to the developing countries. A strange way of putting things indeed!
163.	We shall continue to give all possible assistance to the countries which have embarked on the road of independent development. But is it not clear to everyone that developing States will hardly be able to stand squarely on their feet if they remain hobbled by hundreds and thousands of tethers of neo-colonialist exploitation?
164.	We resolutely support their demands that all manifestations of inequality, diktat and discrimination in international economic relations be eliminated. This was reiterated in the statement of the Soviet Government submitted to the last session of the General Assembly on restructuring international economic relations.
165.	Now, a few more words about another aspect of the development of friendly relations between States. What we have in mind is cultivating the feelings of friendship and 
trust among all peoples, increasing mutual exchanges in cultural and other humanitarian fields. We have in mind also the need to encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, as determined, inter alia, by the International Covenants on Human Rights. this has always been our approach to these questions and it has been clearly reflected in the draft of the new Constitution of the USSR.
166.	But let no one have any doubts about something else: any attempts at preaching to us, at reading us sermons or, still worse, at interfering in our internal affairs under contrived pretexts, have encountered and will always encounter a most resolute rebuff. We are ready to say this once again from this high rostrum: it is high time to realize that by acting in a spirit of psychological warfare the most that one could hope for would be to poison the international atmosphere and .to sour relations between States. We should like to think that all this will be taken seriously.
167.	An exceptionally important area where the policy of detente is being implemented in practice is the sphere of bilateral relations between States. For us, this is not an abstract proposal. !t is confirmed by our consistent policy of ensuring peaceful coexistence among States belonging to different social systems.
168.	For about 10 years now Soviet-French relations have been developing steadily without a hitch. the joint documents signed as a result of the recent visit of Leonid llyich Brezhnev to France convincingly demonstrate that joint actions of the two countries are making a major contribution to the cause of the relaxation of tensions and the development of co-operation in Europe and elsewhere.
169.	Our relations with the Federal Republic of Germany have now been brought into a normal path, which is a major accomplishment in itself if we recall how strained they were in the not-too-distant past. We intend to go on expanding and deepening our ties with the Federal Republic of Germany in various fields. It is clear, however, that everything does not depend on us. There are quarters in the Federal Republic of Germany that are still exploiting some issues in a manner which is far from conducive to the favourable development of relations between our two countries.
170.	We are satisfied with the way in which our relations are shaping up with Finland, Italy, Austria, Britain and other Western European States, even though all possibilities have not yet been exhausted. Relations with those countries as well as with the other participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe have now been put on a solid foundation-namely, in the principles and understandings embodied in the Final Act. The Soviet Union strictly adheres to all the provisions of that outstanding international document. We expect the same of all the other States whose highest representatives affixed their signatures to the Final Act of the Conference.
171.	The meeting of representatives of the States that participated in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe is due to open in Belgrade in a few days' time. We do not overestimate the significance of that meeting, nor do we underestimate it. For its part, the Soviet Union is prepared to do everything so that that meeting may proceed constructively and become yet another milestone on the road embarked upon at Helsinki.
172.	Relations between the Soviet Union and the United States of America merit special consideration. It is difficult to conceive of further progress in the policy of detente unless there is at least a minimum of trust and mutual understanding between them. The experience of the late 1960s and the first half of the 1970s indicates that when both countries are guided by principles of equality, mutual interest in the fate of peace and non-interference in internal affairs it becomes possible not only to reach a number of major agreements and arrangements but also to establish useful co-operation in many areas.
173.	Unfortunately, it must be noted that recently Soviet-American relations have experienced a certain stagnation if not a downright slump. To a somewhat lesser extent that has affected the practical aspects of bilateral ties. However, more complications have emerged now than before regarding issues of broad international concern. We, the Soviet Union, stand for the improvement of relations with the United States, for Soviet-American co-operation in the interests of our peoples, in the interests of peace. But we say just as clearly that the efforts of one side alone are not sufficient for that. In response to relevant remarks by President Carter about the desire of the United States to develop relations with the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev said that if there was an intention to translate those words into the language of practical deeds we would willingly seek mutually acceptable solutions.
174.	The Soviet Union invariably pursues a policy of good-neighbourly relations with Japan. Soviet-Japanese co-operation is developing successfully in a number of areas. In some other areas that is not the case. In our opinion the cause lies in the unhealthy sentiments regarding the Soviet Union that are still strong in some Japanese circles. Besides, those feelings are being whipped up by outside forces. We are convinced that the situation can and must change for the better in the interests of the peoples of our two countries and of peace in Asia.
175.	For many years now Soviet-Indian relations have served as an important stabilizing factor on the vast continent of Asia. They provide a good example of friendly co-operation based upon the principles of peaceful coexistence and enshrined in the relevant treaty. It is our firm intention to continue promoting the development, intensification and enrichment of our ties with India.
176.	A few words now about our relations with a large neighbouring country, China. Our position in this respect was defined by the Twenty-Fifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. From the rostrum of the Congress L. I. Brezhnev stated:
 As regards China, as well as other countries, we adhere firmly to the principles of equality, respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference in each other's internal affairs and the non-use of force. In short, we are prepared to normalize relations with China in accordance with the principles of peaceful coexistence.  And that position of ours remains fully valid.
177.	Every State, be it in Europe or in Asia, in Africa or in Latin America, if it is guided by the interests of peace and co-operation, can rest assured that it will find a reliable partner in the USSR. In this regard we have an open mind.
178.	For the Soviet Union-and we are confident this is true of others—the struggle for the deepening of detente is at the same time the struggle for the complete elimination of the risk of nuclear conflict. Widening the scope of detente means at the same time pushing back the risk of mankind's finding itself under the crushing steam-roller of a nuclear war. These are in fact two most important aspects of securing a genuinely solid and genuinely lasting peace on earth. It was precisely the atmosphere of detente that made it possible to undertake some major actions with a view to reducing the nuclear threat.
179.	In this connexion one might single out the 1973 Soviet-American Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War. Mention could also be made of the Soviet-French agreement to prevent the accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons.11 The interests of peace require that similar agreements be concluded between all the other nuclear Powers as well.
180.	However, there is still a lot more to be done than has been done. We call upon the United Nations and its Member States to continue and intensify their efforts so as to reduce step by step the likelihood of the aforementioned threat in order subsequently to remove it from the lives of human beings.
181.	Of course the most radical and effective means of preventing nuclear war would be the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union has favoured this course ever since that very moment when the world saw the first ominous silhouettes of nuclear explosions. Now, as before, we repeat our readiness to sit down at any time, together with all the other nuclear Powers, at the negotiating table to examine the problem of nuclear disarmament in its entirety and jointly to work out concrete ways for its practical solution.
182.	But while there are no such negotiations—through no fault of our own-one cannot sit twiddling one's thumbs. Any steps would do in this respect provided they bring us closer, even by an inch or two, even gradually but steadily, to a complete removal of the threat of nuclear conflict.
183.	The United Nations has played a certain role in creating a favourable political climate as regards the problem of averting a nuclear war. It suffices to recall the resolution adopted five years ago on the non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons [resolution 2936 (XXVII)]. And yet we should like to see a more active United Nations in this matter, which is of the greatest concern to mankind.
184.	How might that look in practice?
185.	Using the full weight of its prestige the United Nations could, on behalf of all its Member States, solemnly call upon all States to act in such a way as to prevent the emergence of situations which could cause a dangerous strain in relations between them and to avoid armed conflicts.
186.	This applies particularly to nuclear-weapon States. What is required of them is continuous restraint in their mutual relations and a readiness to negotiate and settle their differences by peaceful means. In short, they should do all they can to prevent the emergence of conflicts and situations .which give rise to international tensions. After all, they are often but a step away from armed conflicts, and can one always guarantee that such a step will not be taken?
187.	This is closely connected with strict observance of the principle of renunciation of the use or threat of force in international relations involving both nuclear weapons and conventional armaments. This principle has already been enshrined in a series of recent bilateral and multilateral agreements, including the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. The non-aligned movement actively advocates the establishment of this principle in relations between States.
188.	The United Nations would accomplish a great deal by calling on ail States to start negotiations to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations. The draft of such a treaty has been circulated among all Members of the United Nations. The replies received by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to the questionnaire relating to their attitude to the idea of its conclusion point to a growing interest in our proposal. We are in favour of translating this idea into reality as early as possible.
189.	The joint initiative of the socialist countries advanced last November also had to do with the prevention of nuclear war. This is a proposal addressed to the countries that participated in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to conclude a treaty whereby each would engage not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against the others. This would be of tremendous significance not only for Europe but for the world at large. We express the hope that the States to which this initiative is addressed will adopt a serious attitude. No one should dismiss a proposal which is dictated by life itself. We shall continue to work persistently to translate into practical terms the idea of concluding such a treaty.
190.	I shall mention yet another area where in our view it is possible to arrive at an agreement that would reduce the threat of war. Nuclear countries could start negotiations with a view to working out arrangements concerning the withdrawal of ships carrying nuclear weapons from certain areas of the world's oceans.
191.	Other steps are also possible to curb the arms race. On a broader plane this would meet with the desire of non-nuclear States to establish zones of peace completely free from nuclear weapons. They could include both individual .countries or groups of States and vast geographical regions or even entire continents.
192.	In this connexion, we reaffirm our sympathetic attitude to the idea of turning the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. The main prerequisite for this is the dismantling of the foreign military bases that exist there and the prevention of the establishment of new ones. It is precisely from this position that the Soviet Union approaches this idea. And it is from the same angle that we are holding consultations with the United States on certain problems relating to the Indian Ocean.
193.	An extremely important question which attracts the closest attention throughout the world is the limitation of strategic arms. The need to contain the threat of nuclear war, to achieve progress in other areas of the struggle to end the arms race and for disarmament, the strengthening of international security and the further development of the process of detente call for the speediest solution of this pressing issue. And the United Nations has every right to expect from the countries participating in the talks on the limitation of strategic arms more intensive efforts for their speedy and effective completion and also to call on those States to come to a common agreement on the renunciation of the development of even more destructive systems of such weapons.
194.	As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, its stand is well known. The USSR has invariably sought to achieve an agreement on the limitation of strategic arms and has done and is doing everything in its power to that end. We are prepared to go even further and to proceed to negotiations on the reduction of existing stockpiled arsenals of strategic weapons.
195.	What is the state of affairs in this respect'?
196.	It is an open secret today that the USSR and the United States were able some time ago to agree to a considerable extent on a new Soviet-American agreement on the limitation of strategic offensive arms on the basis of the well-known Vladivostok agreements. Yet subsequently much of what was agreed upon has been called into question-not by us.
197.	What is the reason for this? The reason is clear. What is involved here above all is the decision of the United States to begin deploying a new type of strategic weapon, the so-called cruise missiles. Thus yet another channel has been opened for the strategic arms race and of course it would be naive to think that the other side would be a passive onlooker.
198.	So what will happen in the long run? Certainly not the strengthening of security-this is openly admitted even in the United States-and certainly not a reduction in military expenditures. The result will be greater rivalry, more billions which could be used far more sensibly thrown into the bottomless pit of the arms race, and consequently greater dangers for peace.
199.	Even now it is not easy to reach an agreement in the field of limiting strategic arms, but the situation would become a more complicated if we had to deal with weapons whose limitation hardly lends itself or does not lend itself at all to verification by the other side. And this could spell extreme danger in the military and political fields. In this really what the USSR and the United States should strive for?
200.	No, it certainly is not. It may be said with confidence that a positive conclusion of the Soviet-American talks on the limitation of strategic arms is extremely important for the peoples of our two countries, for the peoples of the entire world. As-a result of recent meetings in .Washington some progress has been achieved in bringing closer together the positions of the two sides, and this is all to the good. However, there still remain issues to be agreed upon. It is important now to ensure the prompt successful completion of the talks. I repeat that we are doing everything possible to that end in the firm belief that a mutually acceptable agreement at the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks is quite feasible, of course on the basis of strict observance of the principle of the equality and equal security of the sides. We cannot back-track from this unchallengeable position.
201.	While speaking of nuclear missiles, we should not forget that there may emerge new and terrifying means of the annihilation of people. Is it not true that the threat of war will increase many fold if ever more new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction are developed? Two years have elapsed since the Soviet Union proposed the conclusion of an international agreement which would ban their emergence. Negotiations are under way and this of course is a positive factor, but progress has been rather slow.
202.	In the meantime, ever more sophisticated means of killing people go into production from laboratories and experimental facilities. It is the duty of the United Nations to call upon all States to put a dependable road-block in the way of the emergence of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction.
203.	Today the problem of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons is most acute. It is a fact that many States have not yet become parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and some of those countries are near-nuclear States or have already attained the capability of manufacturing such weapons. Is it really necessary, for example, to speak of the grave consequences for the security of the peoples of Africa and for universal peace which might result from actions of the Republic of South Africa taken in order to get hold of nuclear weapons? We believe that urgent and effective efforts on the part of all Member States of the United Nations are required to prevent the development of such weapons in the Republic of South Africa. We must not wait for the potential threat inherent in the spread of nuclear weapons all over the world to become a reality.
204.	The Soviet Union is a convinced advocate of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Our country is already co-operating in this field with many States and we are prepared to expand that co-operation. However, we are categorically opposed to a state of affairs in which the peaceful uses of the atom would become a channel for the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and yet this is a real danger which is growing. What is required here is co-ordination of the efforts of many States and an elaborate international system of safeguards and controls. We intend to co-operate constructively in this area.
205.	The prohibition of all nuclear-weapon tests would be a major step towards lessening the threat of a nuclear war and deepening detente. As is well known, the Soviet Union has proposed that a treaty be concluded to this effect. Moreover, to meet the wishes of some countries we have expressed our willingness to take part in the search for a generally acceptable agreement on the question of verification. Today we are taking yet one more step forward: under an arrangement with the United States and the United Kingdom we have consented to suspend underground nuclear-weapon tests for a certain period of time even before the other nuclear Powers accede to the future treaty.
206.	It is also important that the countries which have not yet acceded to the treaties on the nuclear weapon test ban in three environments, on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and on the non-emplacement of nuclear weapons on the sea-bed and in outer space /see resolution 2660(XXV)j become parties to them and, pending their accession, strictly observe the provisions of those treaties.
207.	Such are the ideas regarding the key international problems-making detente stable and preventing nuclear war-which the Soviet Union deems it necessary to set forth at the current stage of the development of the international situation from the high rostrum of the United Nations.
208.	Guided by these considerations, the Government of the USSR proposes the inclusion in the agenda of the thirty-second session of the United Nations General Assembly, as an important and urgent question, an item entitled  Deepening and consolidation of international detente and prevention of the danger of nuclear war .
209.	At the same time, the Soviet Union is submitting for consideration by the General Assembly two draft documents: a draft declaration on the deepening and consolidation of international detente and a draft resolution on the prevention of the danger of nuclear war .
210.	We should like to express the hope that the Assembly 'at this session will give thorough consideration to those documents and address a corresponding appeal to all States of the world. In the current situation in the international arena this would no doubt facilitate greater and broader efforts in favour of the security of peoples.
211.	Increasingly broad opportunities to work for the benefit of peace are opening up before the United Nations in conditions of detente. The key to the success of this noble mission is the strict adherence of all the Members of tills body to the United Nations Charter. The Charter contains all that is essential for preserving and strengthening peace on earth.
212.	Our country will work tirelessly for the benefit of peace, hand in hand with fraternal socialist States, together with all our allies and friends, and with the realistically minded forces which put the ensuring of peace and the prevention of the risks of war above transitory considerations. Our country will constantly labour for peace.
213.	The General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, recently said:
 The Soviet Union will always be an active participant in any negotiations or any international action aimed at developing peaceful co-operation and strengthening the security of the peoples.
 It is our belief-it is our firm belief—that realism in politics and the will for detente and progress will ultimately prevail and that mankind will be able to step into the twenty-first century in conditions of peace, secure as never before. And we shall do all in our power to make this a reality. 
214.	I trust that this appeal of the Soviet State will evoke a grateful response from those who cherish peace.

﻿1.	 Mr. President, I wish to offer you my congratulations on your election as President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly. It gives my own Government particular satisfaction to work under the leadership of a representative of Yugoslavia, a nation with which the United States enjoys close and valued relations. We pledge our co-operation and we will depend heavily on your experience and skill in guiding these discussions which we are beginning.
2.	I should like also to express again the high esteem in which we hold Secretary-General Waldheim. We continue to benefit greatly from our close consultations with him and we place great trust in his leadership of this Organization.
3.	Thirty-two years ago, in the cold dawn of the atomic age, this Organization came into being. Its first and most urgent purpose has been to tenure peace for an exhausted and ravaged world.
4.	Present conditions in some respects appear quite hopeful, yet the assurance of peace continues to elude us. Before the end of this century a score of nations could possess nuclear weapons. If this should happen the world we leave our children will mock our own hopes for peace.
5.	The level of nuclear armaments could grow by tens of thousands and the same situation could well occur with advanced conventional weapons, The temptation to use those weapons, or fear that someone else might do it first, would be almost irresistible. The ever-growing trade in conventional arms subverts international commerce from a force for peace to a caterer for war.
6.	Violence, terrorism, assassination and undeclared wars all threaten to destroy the restraint and the moderation that must become the dominant characteristic of our age. Unless we establish a code of international behaviour in which the resort to violence becomes increasingly irrelevant to the pursuit of national interests we will crush the world's dreams for human development and the full flowering of human freedom.
7.	We have already become a global community, but only in the sense that we face common problems and share, for good or evil, a common future. In this community, the power to solve the world's problems, particularly economic and political power, no longer lies solely in the hands of a few nations. Power is now widely shared among many nations with different cultures, different histories and different aspirations. The question is whether we will allow our differences to defeat us or whether we will work together to realize our common hopes for peace.
8.	Today I want to address the major dimensions of peace and the role the United States intends to play in limiting and reducing all armaments, controlling nuclear technology, restricting the arms trade and settling disputes by peaceful means.
9.	When atomic weapons were used for the first time Winston Churchill described the power of the atom as  a revelation long mercifully withheld from man . Since then we have learned, in Durrenmatt’s chilling words, that  what has once been thought can never be unthought .
10.	If we are to have any assurance that our children will live out their lives in a world which satisfies our hope—or that they will have a chance to live at all-we must finally come to terms with this enormous nuclear force and turn it to exclusively beneficial ends. Peace will not be assured until the weapons of war are finally put away. While we work towards that goal nations will want sufficient arms to preserve their security. The United States purpose is to ensure peace. It is for that reason that our military posture and our alliances will remain as strong as necessary to deter attack.
11.	However, the security of the global community cannot for ever rest on a balance of terror. In the past, war has been accepted as the ultimate arbiter of disputes among nations, but in the nuclear era we can no longer think of war as merely a continuation of diplomacy by other means. Nuclear war cannot be  measured by the archaic standards of  victory  or  defeat . This stark reality imposes on the 

United States and the Soviet Union an awesome and special responsibility.
12.	The United States is engaged along with other nations in a broad range of negotiations. In Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT], we and the Soviets are within sight of a significant agreement in limiting the total numbers of weapons and in restricting certain categories of weapons of special concern to each of us. We can also start the crucial process of curbing the relentless march of technological development which makes nuclear weapons ever more difficult to control.
13.	We must look beyond the present, and work to prevent the critical threats and instabilities of the future. If the principles of self-restraint, reciprocity and mutual accommodation of interests are observed, then the United States and the Soviet Union not only will succeed in limiting weapons but also will create r foundation for better relations in other spheres of interest.
14.	The United States is willing to go as far as possible, consistent with our security interests, in limiting and reducing our nuclear weapons. On a reciprocal basis we are willing now to reduce them by 10 per cent, 20 percent or even 50 per cent, Then we will work for further reductions with a view to a world truly free of nuclear weapons.
15.	The United States also recognize the threat of continued testing of nuclear explosives.
16.	Negotiations for a comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions are now being conducted by the United States, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union. As in other areas where vital nation J security interests are engaged, agreements must be verifiable and fair. They must be seen by all the parties as serving a longer-term interest that justifies the restraints of the moment. The longer-term interest in this instance is to close one more avenue of nuclear competition and thereby demonstrate to all the world that the major nuclear Powers take seriously our obligations to reduce the threat of nuclear catastrophe.
17.	My country believes that the time has come to end all explosions of nuclear devices, no matter what their claimed justification—peaceful or military-and we appreciate the efforts of other nations to reach this same goal.
18.	During the past nine months, I have expressed the special importance we attach to controlling nuclear proliferation; but I fear that many do not understand why the United States feels as it does. Why is it so important to avoid the chance that one or two or 10 other nations might acquire one or two or 10 nuclear weapons of their own? Let me try to explain, for I deeply believe that this is one of the greatest challenges that we face in the next quarter of a century.
19.	It is a truism that nuclear weapons are a powerful deterrent. They are a deterrent because they threaten. They could be used for terrorism or blackmail as well as for war. But they threaten not just the intended enemy; they threaten every nation—combatant and non-combatant alike. That is why all of us must be concerned.
20.	Let me be frank. The existence of nuclear weapons in the United States and the Soviet Union, and in the United Kingdom, France and China, is something we cannot undo except by the painstaking process of negotiation. But the existence of these weapons does not mean that other nations need to develop their own weapons, any more than it provides a reason for those of us who have them to share them with others. Rather it imposes two solemn obligations on the nations which have the capacity to export nuclear fuels and nuclear technologies-the obligation to meet legitimate energy needs and, in doing so, the obligation to ensure that nothing we export contributes, directly or indirectly, to the production of nuclear explosives. That is why the supplier nations arc seeking a common policy, and that is why the United States and the Soviet Unions even as we struggle to find common ground in the SALT talks, have already moved closer towards agreement and co-operation in our efforts to limit nuclear proliferation.
22. I believe that the London suppliers group must conclude its work as it is presently constituted, so that world security will be safeguarded from the pressures of commercial competition. We have learned that it is not enough to safeguard just some facilities or some materials. Full-scope, comprehensive safeguard ire necessary.
23 . Two weeks from now, in our own country, more than SO supplier and consuming nations will convene in Washington for the Conference on International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation which we proposed last spring. For the next several years experts will work together on every facet of the nuclear fuel cycle. The scientists and the policy-makers of these nations will face a tremendous challenge.  We know that, by the year 2000, nuclear power reactors could be producing enough plutonium to make tens of thousands of bombs every year. I believe, from my own personal knowledge of this issue, that there are ways to solve the problems we face. I believe that there are alternative fuel cycles that can be managed safely on global basis. I hope, therefore, that the Conference on the international Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation will have the support and encouragement of every nation.
24.	I have heard it said that efforts to control nuclear proliferation are facile  that thing is already out of the bottle. I do not believe this to be true. It should not be forgotten that for 25 years the nuclear club did not expand its membership., By genuine co-operation we can make certain that this terrible club expands no further.
25.	I have talked about the special problems of nuclear arms control' and nuclear proliferation at length. Let me turn to the problem of conventional arms control, which affects potentially or directly every nation represented in this great hall. This is not a matter for the future-even the near future-but one for the immediate present. World-wide military expenditures are. now in the neighborhood of $300 billion a year. Last year the nations of the world spent more than 60 times as much equipping each soldier as we spent educating each child. The industrialized nations spend the most money, but the rate of growth in military spending is faster in the developing world. While only a handful of states produce sophisticated weapons, the number of nations which seek to purchase these weapons is increasing rapidly.
26.	The conventional arms race both causes and feeds on the threat of larger and more deadly wars. It levies an enormous burden on an already troubled world economy.
27.	.For its part, the United States has now begun to reduce its arms exports. Our aim is to reduce both the quantity and the deadliness of the weapons we sell. We have already taken the first few steps, but we cannot go very far alone. Nations whose neighbours are purchasing large quantities of arms feel constrained to do the same. Supplier nations that practise restraint in arms sales sometimes find that they simply lose valuable commercial markets to other suppliers.
28.	We hope to work with other supplier nations to cut back on the flow of arms and to reduce the rate at which the most advanced and sophisticated weapon technologies spread around the world. We do not expect this task to be easy or to produce instant results. But we are committed to stop the spiral of the increasing sale of weapons.
29.	Equally important, we hope that purchaser nations, individually and through regional organizations, will limit their arms imports. We are ready to provide to some nations the necessary means for legitimate self-defence, but we are also eager to work with any nation or region in order to decrease the need for more numerous, more deadly and ever more expensive weapons.
30.	Fourteen years ago, one of my predecessors spoke in this hall under circumstances that in certain ways resembled these. It was a time, he said, of comparative calm and there was art atmosphere of rising hope about the prospect of controlling nuclear energy. The first specific step had been taken to limit the nuclear arms race-a test-ban treaty signed by nearly a hundred nations.
31.	But the succeeding years did not live up to the optimistic prospect John F. Kennedy placed before this Assembly because, as a community of nations, we failed to address the deepest sources of potential conflict among us.
32.	As we seek to establish the principles of detente among the major nuclear Powers, we believe that these principles must also apply in regional conflicts. The United States is committed to the peaceful settlement of differences. We are committed to the strengthening of the peace-making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations, such as the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American States.
33.	The United States supports the United Kingdom's efforts to bring about a peaceful, rapid transition to majority rule and independence in Zimbabwe. We joined .other members of the Security Council last week and also the Secretary-General in efforts to bring about independence and democratic rule in Namibia. We are pleased with the level of co-operation we have achieved with the leaders of the nations in the area, as well as with those peoples who are struggling for independence. We urge South Africa and other nations to support the proposed solution to the problems in Zimbabwe, and to co-operate still more closely in providing for a smooth and prompt transition in Namibia.
34.	But it is essential that all outside nations exercise restraint in their actions in Zimbabwe and Namibia, so that we can bring about that majority rule and avoid a widening war that could engulf the southern half of the African continent.
35.	Of all the regional conflicts in the world, none holds more menace than the Middle East. War there has already carried the world to the edge of nuclear confrontation. It has already disrupted the world economy and imposed severe hardships on the people in the developed and the developing nations alike. So true peace-peace embodied in binding treaties—is essential. It will be in the interest of the Israelis and the Arabs. It is in the interest of the American people. It is in the interest of the entire world.
36.	The United Nations Security Council has provided the basis for peace in resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), but negotiations in good faith by all parties is needed to give substance to peace.
37.	Such negotiations in good faith must be inspired by a recognition that all nations in the area-Israel and the Arab countries-have a right to exist in peace, with the early establishment of economic and cultural exchanges and of normal diplomatic relations. Peace must include a process in which the bitter divisions o: generations, even centuries- hatreds and suspicions—can be overcome. Negotiations cannot be successful if any of the parties harbours the deceitful view that peace is simply an interlude in which to prepare for war.
38.	Negotiations in good faith will also require acceptance by all sides of the fundamental rights and interest of everyone involved.
39.	For Israel, this means borders that are recognized and secure. Security arrangements are crucial to a nation that has fought for its survival in each of the last four decades. The commitment of the United States to Israel's security is unquestionable.
40.	For the Arabs, the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people must be recognized. One of the things that binds the American people to Israel is our shared respect for human rights and the courage with which Israel has defended such rights. It is clear that a true and lasting peace in the Middle East must also respect the rights of all the peoples of the area. How these rights are to be defined and implemented is, of course; for the interested parties to decide in detailed negotiations, and not for us to dictate.
41.	We do not intend to impose from the outside a settlement on the nations of the Middle East.
42.	The United States has been meeting with the Foreign Ministers of Israel and the Arab nations involved in the search for peace. We are staying in close contact with the Soviet Union, with which we share responsibility for reconvening the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. As a result of these consultations, the Soviet Union and the United States have agreed to call for the resumption of the Geneva Conference before the end of this year. While a number of procedural questions remain, if the parties continue to act in good faith, I believe that these questions can be answered.
310
43.	The major Powers have a special responsibility to act with restraint in areas of the world where they have competing interests because the association of these interests with local rivalries and conflicts can lead to serious confrontation. In the Indian Ocean area neither we nor the Soviet Union has a large military presence, nor is there a rapidly mounting competition between us. Restraint in the area may well begin with a mutual effort to stabilize our presence and to avoid an escalation in military competition. Then both sides can consider how our military activities in the Indian Ocean area might be even further-reduced.
44.	The peaceful settlement of differences is, of course, essential. The United States is willing to abide by that principle, as in the case of the recently signed Panama Canal treaties. Once ratified, these treaties can transform the United States-Panama relationship into one that permanently protects the interests and respects the sovereignty of both our countries.
45.	We have all survived and surmounted major challenges since the United Nations was founded, but we can accelerate progress even in a world of ever-increasing diversity. A commitment to strengthen international institutions is vital, but progress lies also in our own national policies. We can work together to form a community of peace if we accept the kind of obligations that I have suggested today.
46.	To summarize: first, there is an obligation to remove the threat of nuclear weaponry, to reverse the build-up of armaments and the trade in them, and to conclude bilateral and multilateral arms control agreements that can bring security to all of us.
47.	In order to reduce the reliance of nations on nuclear weaponry, 1 hereby solemnly declare, on behalf of the United States, that we will not use nuclear weapons except in self-defence; that is, in circumstances of an actual nuclear or conventional attack on the United States, our territories or armed forces, or such an attack on our allies.
48.	In addition, we hope that initiatives by the Western nations to secure mutual and balanced force reductions in Europe will be met by equal response from the Warsaw Pact countries.
49.	Secondly, an obligation to show restraint in areas of tension, to negotiate disputes and settle them peacefully, and to strengthen the peace-making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations.
50.	And, finally, an effort by all nations, East as well as West, North as well as South, to fulfil mankind's aspirations for human development and human freedom. It is to meet these basic demands that we build Governments and seek peace.
51.	We must share these obligations for our own mutual survival and our own mutual prosperity.
52.	We can see a world at peace. We can work for a world without want. We can build a global community dedicated to these purposes and to human dignity.
53.	The view that I have sketched for you today is that of only one leader in only one nation. However wealthy and powerful the United States may be, however capable of leadership, this power is increasingly only relative. The leadership increasingly is in need of being shared. No nation has a monopoly of vision, of creativity or of ideas. Bringing these together from many nations is our common responsibility and our common challenge. For only in these ways can the idea of a peaceful global community grow and prosper.
 

	

