223.	I would like to begin my speech by congratulating Mr Indalecio Lievano on his election as President of the current session of the General Assembly. I would also like to take this opportunity to extend warm congratulations to Solomon Islands on its admission to membership in the United Nations and sincerely to wish it new successes in advancing independently along the road to progress.
224.	Since the thirty-second session of the General Assembly last year, there have been new developments and changes in the international situation. The struggle of the people of all countries to win and defend national independence, safeguard international peace and security and oppose imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism has developed vigorously and scored new victories. In this struggle the countries and people of the third world have played the major role. Some Asian and African countries
and peoples have succeeded in defending their national independence and territorial integrity by repulsing military intrusions engineered by a super-Power and frustrating its schemes of subversion and sabotage. The African countries have voiced strong opposition to foreign interference in African affairs. The struggles of the people in southern Africa against racism and for national liberation have developed in depth. The people of the Arab countries and Palestine have fought persistently and resolutely against Israeli Zionism and the rivalry between the super-Powers in the Middle East. The people of the Latin American countries have achieved important successes in safeguarding their independence and sovereignty, developing their national economy and strengthening regional co-operation. The non-aligned movement, withstanding super-Power pressure, has maintained its basic orientation and become an important force in the present struggle of the people of the whole world against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. There is a clear trend growing among the Western European and other second-world countries towards strengthening their unity, expanding their cooperation and opposing super-Power interference and domination. All these are signs that the international situation has continued to develop in a direction favourable to the people of the world.
225. However, we must not fail to notice that over the past year there has been great turbulence in the international situation, and world peace and international security have been seriously threatened. The two superpowers have intensified their struggle for world hegemony, with one striving to preserve its vested interests and the other trying hard to extend its spheres of influence. Strategically the, focus of their rivalry is in Europe, where the two sides are locked in sharp confrontation as before. To outflank and encircle Europe, social-imperialism has stepped up its aggression and expansion in Africa, the Middle East and the Gulf region, seizing positions and resources of strategic importance and trying to control transportation routes, and this constitutes an important component of its strategy for world domination. Meanwhile, in an effort to strengthen its position in seeking domination in the Asia-Pacific region, it has stepped up its expansion and infiltration, created frictions and conflicts, and thus posed a direct threat to the security of the countries involved. In this period, the salient features of the tactics used by this super-Power in its offensive were as follows: in an increasingly flagrant way it has employed agents, has organized mercenaries and has incited Africans against Africans and Asians against Asians so as to make them pull its chestnuts out of the fire for it. It even has no scruples about using terrorist means of assassination and creating shocking incidents of subversion and disturbance. The social-imperialists' unbridled acts of aggression and expansion constitute a new trend in the international arena which calls for attention. They prove once again that social-imperialism is the more aggressive cid adventurous of the two super-Powers and is the major threat to world peace and security.
226. As a result of the intensified rivalry between the two hegemonist Powers and the accelerated global strategic deployment of social-imperialism, there have been more local wars and the danger of a world war has increased. Therefore, putting off a world war and maintaining world
peace has now become an important task for the people of all countries.
227.	Over the past year, the people of the world, in the face of the threat of a new war, have been increasingly awakened and have waged struggles in many fields. In order to safeguard their independence and security, many countries have been striving to strengthen their defence capabilities. People all over the world have condemned the super-Powers for their arms expansion and war preparations and have voiced a loud demand for a halt to the arms race. A growing number of discerning persons have urged a sharper vigilance against war. All this is no doubt of positive significance for preserving peace and delaying war.
228.	The super-Powers are busy spreading illusions of peace to lull the people of the world in an effort to cover up their plans for war. The social-imperialists babble that "detente has been a dominant feature" in the international political climate. If this were so, why should they spend colossal sums of money every year hectically expanding their arms? Why should they desperately seek an edge in nuclear weapons after establishing a superiority in conventional armaments? Clearly, the social-imperialists have ulterior motives when they foster a false sense of detente.
229.	A correct path must be followed in order to win and maintain world peace and put off the outbreak of war. The approach we stand for is that, first, it is necessary to tell truthfully the people of all countries about the growing danger of war, so that they may heighten their vigilance and make all preparations to comb t the aggressor. Secondly, efforts should be made to reinforce the struggle against the warmongers, frustrate every act of aggression and expansion of theirs, and upset in good time their deployment for war. Thirdly, there should be continued opposition to the policy of appeasement, which means compromises and concessions in dealing with the aggressor. Because, like rearing a tiger and suffering for it later on, such a policy is harmful and simply augments the danger of war. China has been acting on these three principles and will continue to do so in the future.
230.	The super-Powers are outwardly strong but inwardly weak. The more aggressive they are, the stronger the resistance they meet from the people of all countries. Over the past year, social-imperialism has stepped up its aggression and expansion only to teach the people of all countries by negative example and arouse them to a more resolute struggle against it and to bring about the further consolidation and broadening of the international anti-hegemonist united front. Such is the logic of history. The strength of the people is great. It is entirely possible to put off the outbreak of a world war so long as the people of the world get united, wage a tit-for-tat struggle against the superpowers' war plans and constantly thwart their schemes of war.
231.	The rivalry between the super-Powers endangers world peace and poses a direct threat to the independence and security of various countries. So it has become an urgent task for the people of all countries to defend national independence and State sovereignty.
232.	At present, the countries of the third world find themselves in a new and complex situation in their struggle to safeguard national independence. To further its aggression and expansion, social-imperialism is trying to fool people by flaunting a signboard saying "a natural ally of the developing countries" who "supports the national liberation movements". Besides, it is doing its utmost to sow discord among third-world countries. It confers on you the title "progressive" one day, but labels you "reactionary" the next. Now supporting one against another, now the other way round, it stops at nothing in creating dissension and undermining the unity of the third-world countries. The people of the third world have come to realize through their own experience that upholding unity and struggling jointly against the enemy are an important guarantee for victories in the fight to defend national independence. Over the past year, when confronted with the arch-enemy, they have attached importance to the general interest and have sought common ground on major issues while putting aside minor differences. They have upheld unity, opposed division and foreign interference, and have persevered in the struggle against hegemonism. At the fifteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU in Khartoum in July and the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Belgrade also in July, satisfactory results were achieved in the teeth of super-Power interference and sabotage. The Khartoum summit meeting strongly condemned any foreign interference in the internal affairs of the African continent, decided to strengthen African-Arab co-operation and laid stress on the peaceful settlement of disputes between the member States of the OAU and on strengthening unity and economic co-operation. The Belgrade Conference maintained the unity of the non-aligned movement by frustrating super-Power designs to split it. The Conference once again affirmed and safeguarded the nature and principles of the movement, stressed the fight against "all forms of foreign domination and hegemony" [see A/33/206, annex I, para. 10] and kept to its anti-imperialist, anti-colonialist and anti-hegemonist orientation. The two Conferences fully demonstrated the great vitality of the non-aligned movement and the OAU as well as their significant roles in current international relations, and they were an important indication of the further development of the united struggle of the people of the world against hegemonism.
233.	The grave danger of social-imperialist aggression and annexation has also prompted the countries of the second world to pay ever greater attention to the defence of their national independence. Faced with this super-Power's military threat and divisive schemes, the Western European countries and some other second-world countries have further built up their national defences, harmonized their mutual relations and strengthened their economic, political and military alliance. This not only conforms to the interests of these countries in safeguarding their independence and security, but it is also in the interests of the people of -all countries.
234.	The situation in the Middle East merits serious attention. The Israeli Zionists now still adamantly refuse to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories or to recognize the national rights of the Palestinian people, and they are carrying out new threats of war against the Arab and Palestinian peoples. Such truculence on the part of the Israeli Zionists is closely related to the support and abetment given them by the two super-Powers. One super-Power has always been shielding Israel. The other
super-Power, while trying hard to maintain a state of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East, has been stirring up trouble and sowing dissension among the Arab countries in order to undermine their unity and sap their fighting strength so as to fish in troubled waters.
235. The Chinese Government and people have always held that the Arab and Palestinian peoples are the immediate victims of the fierce rivalry of the super-Powers and the aggression and expansion committed by Israel. The settlement of the Middle East question can be realized only when it truly leads to the recovery of the lost territories of the Arab people and the restoration of the national rights of the Palestinian people, and only thus can it bring peace to the Middle East. The struggle of the Arab countries and people against Israeli Zionism is perfectly just, and it is closely linked with the struggle against hegemonism. The Chinese Government and people consistently and resolutely support the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their struggle to recover their lost territories and to regain Palestinian national rights, and we are firmly opposed to the two super-Powers competing for hegemony in the Middle East and grossly trampling upon the interests of the Arab people. We strongly condemn the Israeli Zionist policies of aggression and expansion. We do not recognize Israel and will have nothing to do with it. It is our sincere hope that through patient consultations the Arab and Palestinian peoples will eliminate their differences, ceaselessly strengthen their unity, gradually overcome the difficulties on their road to progress and finally win great victories in their struggle against aggression.
236 Southern Africa remains the biggest colonial region in the world today. Abetted and backed by the imperialists, the reactionary regimes in South Africa and Rhodesia are still zealously pushing their colonialist and racist policies. This state of affairs must not continue but must be thoroughly changed. Under heavy blows from the Zimbabwean and Namibian peoples rising in armed struggle, the racist regimes are h ding for their doom, but they are still putting up a last-aitch fight by pressing ahead with such political tricks as the so-called "internal settlement and making incessant incursions into neighbouring African States in an effort to maintain their reactionary rule. Moreover, there is no slackening in the rivalry between the two super-Powers in this region. The late-coming superpower, in particular, is carrying out infiltration and expansion by every possible means. We have always held that all countries which uphold justice should strongly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azama in their struggle for liberation. Zimbabwe and Namibia should attain genuine national independence free from any outside interference and on the basis of territorial integrity and unification. South Africa's policy of apartheid must be abolished. The United Nations must follow the historical trend and perform its bounden duty of putting an end to the colonialist and racist rule in southern Africa in accordance with the eager desire and just demands of the African people. China firmly supports the just struggles of the Azanian, Zimbabwean and Namibian peoples. We are sure that the great African people will shatter the last stronghold of colonialism and racism and win .complete independence and liberation for the whole of Africa.
237. The Korean people's just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland has won
the sympathy and support of the people of the world. At present, the key to a solution of the Korean question is that the United States must withdraw all its troops and armaments from South Korea and that the so-called "United Nations Command" must be disbanded. The United States and the Park Chung Hee clique of South Korea must stop all their scheming activities to create two Koreas". We firmly support the position and efforts of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to achieve the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. The resolution for promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session resolution 3390 (XXX)] should be implemented in earnest and without delay. The Korean question should be settled by the Korean people themselves free from any foreign interference.
238. Disarmament is' one of the important items on the agenda of the current session. The tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly on disarmament, convened not long ago on the proposal of the non-aligned countries was the first of its kind in the history of the United Nations. At the session, many countries strongly condemned the imperialist and hegemonist policies of aggression and war. Rightly pointing out that the real cause of the intensifying arms race between the super-Powers was their increased rivalry for world hegemony, these countries demanded that the super-Powers carry out genuine disarmament. They also put forward a number of reasonable ideas and proposals. The special session on disarmament has a positive significance inasmuch as it exposed the superpowers' arms expansion and war preparations and demanded that they be the first to carry out disarmament. But the super-Powers were very obdurate. They rejected any genuine nuclear or conventional disarmament. The facts show that the struggle for genuine disarmament is most arduous.
239. Under the pressure of the people of the world for disarmament, the super-Powers have been playing the tricks of sham disarmament to deceive the public. Recently, the Soviet Union put before the current session a new proposal entitled "Conclusion of an international convention on the strengthening of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States". Under the signboard reading "guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States", this proposal is designed to bind hand and foot the numerous small and medium-sized countries and deprive them of their capabilities for self-defence. Not contented with the large amount of nuclear weapons in its possession, the Soviet Union is desperately expanding its nuclear armament. Instead of undertaking the obligation not to use nuclear weapons under whatever conditions against the large number of non-nuclear countries, the Soviet Union wants those countries to abandon their right of possessing nuclear strength for self-defence. This proposal of the Soviet Union is simply designed to allow itself alone to possess large numbers of nuclear weapons, while forcing the non-nuclear countries to act according to its dictates in all docility. Otherwise, those countries would be exposed to its nuclear attacks at any time. Is this not pure gangster's lope, undisguised nuclear blackmail and nuclear threat? We have consistently held that the most effective means of eliminating the danger of a nuclear war and of guaranteeing the
security of all countries is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. Moreover, we have reaffirmed on many occasions that at no time and under no circumstances shall we use nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear countries. If the author of the proposed "international convention" had the slightest concern for the security of the non-nuclear countries and for international peace, it should at least undertake the obligation not to use nuclear weapons under whatever conditions against the non-nuclear countries, instead of playing tricks of one kind or another.
240.	During the current session, a further decision is to be taken on the machinery for disarmament. It is entirely legitimate for the numerous small and medium-sized countries to demand strongly a change in the super-Power manipulation of the disarmament negotiations and a reform in the disarmament machinery. The decision of the tenth special session to reform the disarmament machinery reflects to some extent the aspiration of these countries. However, the new negotiating body still falls far short of the demand of many countries, and it can hardly free itself entirely from super-Power control and ensure the realization of the reasonable propositions of various countries on disarmament. Of course, the progress of the struggle for disarmament does not depend entirely on the negotiating body; rather it depends essentially on whether the superpowers can be forced to change their intransigent stand. The struggle for disarmament must be closely linked with the struggle to safeguard national independence, defend state sovereignty and territorial integrity, and combat hegemonism. We are ready to continue to work together with the large number of small and medium-sized countries for genuine disarmament.
r
241.	In the past year, the third-world countries have continued their unremitting struggle for the establishment of a new international economic order. United as one, they have made great efforts for the realization of their just proposals in disregard of the threats and promises of the super-Powers. They have greatly expanded their economic and technical co-operation, and various organizations of raw-material-producing countries and regional co-operative bodies have been established and steadily consolidated. The third-world countries have also increased their economic and technical co-operation with many second-world countries. Some developed countries have taken measures to reduce or cancel some debts owed by developing countries. All this has a positive effect on the reform of the old international economic relations and the establishment of a new international economic order and on ,the development of the national economies of the third world.
242.	However, owing to super-Power obstruction and sabotage, no real progress has been made in destroying the old and establishing the new in the international economic field. One super-Power is playing with the words "new order" but is in fact still obstinately defending the old order. The other super-Power has put up the slogan of "democratic reform" but has tried to make international economic relations serve its interests in gaining world hegemony so as to extend and aggravate exploitation and control of developing countries: This is the main obstacle to the establishment of a new international economic order.
243.	The urgent desire of the developing countries for establishing a new international economic order has become a great historical trend. At the same time, it must be noticed that arduous and complex struggles have to be waged before this goal can be attained. We believe that, so long as the third-world countries keep to the correct principles and orientation of the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, persist in solidarity and unite with all forces that can be united and wage a long and unremitting struggle, they will surmount all difficulties and win successive victories. The Chinese Government resolutely supports this just struggle as well as the reasonable proposals of the developing countries, such as an integrated programme for commodities and its common fund, the reduction or cancellation of debts, an increase in funds for development, and better conditions for the transfer of technology so as to promote production and scientific and technological progress in the developing countries. It is also our hope that the second-world countries will all adopt a correct attitude to strengthen their co-operation with developing countries on an equal footing and contribute to the establishment of a new international economic order.
244.	At present, China is in a new period of development. Following the behests of our great leader Chairman Mao Tsetung and beloved Premier Chou En-lai, the Chinese people have set off on a new Long March and are determined to turn China into a prosperous socialist country with modernized agriculture, industry, national defence and science and technology by the end of the century. In high spirits, the Chinese people are working hard to attain this magnificent goal.
245.	In international affairs, China will pursue, as always, Chairman Mao's revolutionary line in foreign affairs. Firmly adhering to Chairman Mao's theory of the three worlds, we will strengthen our unity with the oppressed peoples and nations of the world and with all third-world countries, and unite with all countries which are subjected to super-Power aggression, subversion, interference, control or bullying to form the broadest possible united front against super-Power hegemonism. We will establish or develop relations with other countries on the basis of the Five Principles: mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity; mutual non-aggression;  non-interference in each other's internal affairs; equality and mutual benefit; and peaceful coexistence. We support all the oppressed peoples and Nations in their revolutionary struggles and all countries struggling to safes their independence and sovereignty and to defend international peace and security, and we are opposed to all forms of foreign rule, domination and hegemony.
246.. The past year has witnessed great progress in our friendly relations with many countries. We have warmly entertained on-friendly visits many State leaders from , whom we have received much encouragement, sympathy and support. In the current new situation, our State leaders, -out of a sincere desire for friendship, peace, understanding and co-operation, have taken the initiative of visiting many countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe. Our friendship with many countries and our mutual understanding have been enhanced through sincere and candid talks based on mutual respect. With joint exploration and endeavour, our economic links, scientific and technological co-operation and Cultural exchanges with them have been
markedly strengthened. Our friendly contacts with other peoples have also become more frequent. The Chinese people, and people of other countries likewise, are happy to see mo growth of friendly relations between them. We will continue our efforts in this direction.
247.	This year, our supreme leader, Chairman Hua Kuo-feng, has visited Korea, Romania, Yugoslavia and Iran. These visits, which have had satisfactory results, constitute a major event in China's relations with foreign countries, have received wide attention and have been given a positive appraisal by international opinion. These historic visits have greatly deepened the sincere understanding between China and the countries concerned, have opened up broader vistas for bilateral friendly co-operation, and are conducive to world peace.
248.	Recently, China and Japan signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship after making prolonged efforts and overcoming various obstacles. This treaty records the desire of the Chinese and Japanese peoples to live in amity from generation to generation. It includes the explicit stipulation that "... neither of them should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region or in any other region and that each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony". This is the first time that such a stipulation is included in an international treaty. The treaty is of great importance both to the development of relations of peace and friendship between China and Japan and to the defence of peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region.
249.	The Chinese people ardently love peace and are opposed to a new world war. Moreover, we need an enduring, peaceful international environment in which to build up our country. Faithful to Chairman Mao's teachings, China will never seek hegemony or act like a super-Power, neither now nor in the future, when China becomes a powerful modernized socialist country. Confronted with the growing danger of war, we are determined, while engaging in peaceful construction at home, to do our part, together with the people of all other countries, to safeguard peace and put off war.
250.	Reviewing the international developments of the past year and looking ahead into the future, we see that countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want revolution-this historical trend is irresistible though the road may be tortuous and the sky may be overcast from time to time. The world belongs to the people, and the future of the world is bright. Of this we are fully confident.




















﻿135.	The Federal Republic of Germany at present holds the presidency of the European Community and in the European Political Co-operation. Therefore, I should like to begin, Sir, by addressing you in my capacity as the spokesman of the nine member countries of the European Community. Let me first carry out a particularly pleasant duty by congratulating you on your assuming your high office. In you we greet the distinguished representative of a country with which the members of the Community maintain close and friendly relations. I am confident that you will give the thirty-third session of the General Assembly firm and effective leadership.
136.	We also congratulate the outgoing President, who was probably the first to preside over four General Assembly sessions-the thirty-second regular session and the eighth, ninth and tenth special sessions. During those sessions we were able to admire the skill with which he guided the proceedings and conducted negotiations.
137.	Our Community also thanks the Secretary-General, who has continuously and untiringly placed himself at the service of the United Nations. We appreciate his efforts to manage the many divergent trends and currents within our Organization for the benefit of us all.
138.	It gives me special pleasure to welcome a new Member in our midst—Solomon Islands. With the admission of every new Member we are moving ever closer to our common aim of the universality of the United Nations.
139.	The world today is in a state of transition, with two realities and philosophies in conflict with one another. The one reality is that of power politics. It finds expression in a gigantic arms build-up, which is constantly escalating and spreading to more and more regions, including regions of the third world. Behind this is the obsolete idea that a State can best safeguard its interests by force and by striving for predominance.
140.	The other, the new, reality is global interdependence. Today, all States need reliable access to the markets of others, to the technology of others, to the raw materials of others. They all need the growth of others to stimulate their own growth. They need co-operation in the fight against international terrorism. They need co-operation to protect the threatened ecological balance.
141.	In our complex world, however, this cannot be achieved by means of power politics. Force means chaos and destruction; force means bondage and loss of freedom for all. But co-operation for everyone's benefit can result only from an order that is accepted by all nations because all nations consider it to be just and because it is in their own interest to contribute to it.
142.	It is this perception that engenders a new international consciousness and awareness. It is nourished by respect for the independence and equality of States, by joint decisions and joint responsibilities of all, by the settlement of conflicts through negotiation and the reconciliation of interests.
143.	It is this consciousness that will determine the future. No one can turn back the wheel of history, however strong and powerful he may be. This world of ours, confronted as it is with huge common tasks, cannot but drift into self-destruction if countries still persist in trying to steer its fortunes by outmoded power politics.
144.	This new consciousness, this awareness of interdependence, gave birth to the Europe of the Community, which believes in a future of equality and partnership all over the world. The Europe we are building aims at realizing the great idea of the dignity and rights of man. It is by its very nature a democratic Europe. It is open to other European democracies, and we are looking forward to the accession of Greece, Portugal and Spain, making the Community of nine members soon a community of twelve. We feel ourselves linked with those European democracies which for reasons of historical tradition or other reasons have not, or have not yet, become members of the Community.
145.	However, the Europe of the nine is not an inward- looking community. Indeed, it endeavours in the wider world as well to promote peace and the welfare of all. It is the biggest trading partner in the world, especially for the third world, and it is the biggest donor of development assistance. It wants to be a centre of co-operation in the world, and it sees itself on the side of those who seek to create an order for that co-operation founded on equality and partnership.
146.	We want one world in which the nations will meet the challenge of global interdependence through global co-operation. But we by no means want a uniform world—quite the contrary; we want a world in which all nations can themselves determine their political, economic and cultural ways of life. Mankind needs diversity if its creative forces are not to fade away.
147.	The European Community is founded on respect for the equality of all its members and on the principle of joint decision-making. On the strength of these qualities and principles it can serve as an example for a global order giving all States, big and small, the same right and the same opportunity to play a part in the shaping of their common future. It can also serve as an example of the countries of a region forming an association and combining their efforts so as to accomplish the tasks at hand and to strengthen the independence, the political stability and the economic growth of that region.
148.	We are glad to see that the idea of regional association among States with equal rights is gaining ground in all parts of the world, and we support this trend.
149.	Under the Lome Convention we are co-operating with 53 African, Pacific and Caribbean States. Another expression of the new form of interregional co-operation is the Euro-Arab dialogue, with which both sides are pursuing the common goal of placing the interdependence of the two regions on a stable basis of comprehensive and long-term co-operation. In Asia, the Europe of the Community is establishing ever closer links with the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
150.	We follow with great interest also the work of other regional organizations, in particular, the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American States.
151.	The Europe of the Community welcomes the fact that the People's Republic of China is becoming more outward-looking, as is in keeping with its size and its political weight. The trade agreement between the People's Republic of China and the Community expresses the desire of both sides constantly to expand their economic relations and exchanges.
152.	It is now my privilege to describe the role of the Europe of the Community in the world and thus our
position on the central issues up for discussion at this thirty-third session of the General Assembly.
153.	As in previous years the conflicts in Africa and the Middle East again figure prominently on the agenda. With both those regions the Europe of the Community is most closely connected. We have a vital interest in the peaceful settlement of those conflicts.
154.	In large parts of Africa peace has been seriously disrupted. Many African States are in the difficult process of nation-building. In southern African an end to racial discrimination and independence for Namibia are still to be achieved. Thus Africa is confronted with the difficult task of settling internal and external conflicts by peaceful means and at the same time promoting its economic development. The rest of the world must assist Africa in this task. But, instead, conflicts are being aggravated by outside Powers which use the opportunities provided by those conflicts to establish new spheres of influence in Africa. Africa needs peace and Africa needs economic development. It needs, as the Nigerian Head of State said at the Fifteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held at Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978: ".. . massive economic assistance ... and not military hardware for self-destruction and sterile ideological slogans",
155.	We, the members of the Community, support the countries of Africa in their quest for peaceful development. We do not seek to impose our political and social system on Africa. We want to see an independent and united Africa whose nations will find African solutions and answers to African questions and problems. And with that Africa we want to co-operate on a basis of partnership, that is, on a basis of equality.
156.	In Namibia—after a hopeful development had begun-we are now confronted with a serious situation. The nine members most deeply regret the decision taken by the South African Government to hold elections in Namibia without the United Nations being involved. We are disappointed at this unilateral step taken by the Government of South Africa. Its action brings forth great dangers for Namibia and, beyond that, for the whole of southern Africa. South Africa in this way is playing into the hands of those who advocate violent solutions in southern Africa.
157.	Over the last 18 months efforts have been made in dogged and persevering negotiations within the framework of the United Nations to pave the way for Namibia to gain independence by peaceful means. Thanks to the understanding and goodwill of all parties concerned it has proved possible time and again to overcome deadlock, crises and setbacks. The South African Government has now conjured up a new serious crisis which calls into question all the efforts undertaken so far. Where the negotiations had helped so far to develop an atmosphere of confidence, understanding and readiness for compromise, the old differences are now re-emerging. The results achieved in laborious and complex negotiations involving African States as responsible participants-in particular the front-line States-are in jeopardy.
158.	The Europe of the Community supports the appeal made by the Secretary-General to continue efforts to achieve a peaceful solution to the Namibia problem on the basis of Security Council resolution 431 (1978) and on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General.  We are convinced that the report by the Secretary-General is in line with the Western plan for Namibia.
159.	The Community urgently appeals to the South African Government to consider the far-reaching consequences of its action. The new South African Government to be formed in the next few days is faced with a historic responsibility. The five Western members of the Security Council-Canada, France, the United Kingdom, the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany-yesterday decided to ask for a meeting of the Security Council in the course of this week and they expect that at that meeting the Waldheim report will be accepted. Such a decision should give an opportunity to the new Government of South Africa to reconsider its position, as we have requested it to do. It will then have an opportunity to put developments back on the right track, on a positive track. Without the participation of all political forces in Namibia and without the involvement of the United Nations, a peaceful, internationally recognized settlement is not possible.
160.	The dangerous situation produced by South Africa constitutes a challenge to the people of Namibia, to the United Nations and to all those who struggle to achieve a peaceful and internationally recognized solution to the Namibia problem. Furthermore the opportunity—and nobody should overlook this-to set an example for the peaceful solution of other problems in southern Africa would be missed.
161.	With regard to Zimbabwe, the members of the Community hope that in spite of all difficulties it will still be possible even at this late hour to arrive at a peaceful settlement with the participation of all parties involved. We are convinced that the British-American plan for Rhodesia still offers the most realistic possibility for peaceful transition to independence. The European Community is ready to offer its aid for development to a Zimbabwe which will substitute for the present minority regime an internationally accepted democratic majority Government.
162.	The nine members of the Community are urgently pressing for peaceful and rapid change in the system of apartheid in South Africa itself. That system of racial discrimination is contrary to everything in which the Europe of the Community believes. South Africa is a multiracial society. That society can find a peaceful future only in a State that guarantees the enjoyment of human rights to all and ensures that all can live together as equal citizens.
163.	We appeal to the future Prime Minister who will be elected shortly to make a new beginning here, too. The nine members of the Community are using the influence they have to bring about a change in this direction. We are still waiting for others to follow the code of conduct for companies of the Community in South Africa'0 which is designed to ensure equal treatment for black and white employees. We have furthermore supported the Security Council decision to impose an arms embargo on South Africa.
164.	The eyes of the world are also on the Middle East.
165.	The events that have occurred since the last session of the General Assembly, especially the courageous initiative of President Fl Sadat and the Camp David meetings, have renewed hope for a settlement to the bitter Middle East conflict which has threatened the security of the world for the past 30 years.
166.	In view of the close ties between Europe and the Middle East, efforts to achieve a peace settlement in that region are of vital interest to us, too. This is reflected in our determination to support all efforts to bring about such a settlement.
167.	The nine member States of the European Community have therefore paid a tribute to the achievements of the participants in the Camp David meetings and its successful conclusion. They have expressed their hope that the results of those meetings will represent another important step on the path to a just, comprehensive and therefore lasting peace settlement.
168.	If such a peace settlement is to be achieved it is imperative that all parties concerned participate in its negotiation and completion. Meanwhile no obstacle should be placed in the way of this process, which should be kept open and should through further development and wider participation lead to a comprehensive settlement.
169.	Proceeding from Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338(1973), which would have to be applied in all their parts and on all fronts, the nine members of the Community continue to believe that the settlement should be founded on the principles which they last set out in their declaration of 29 June 1977 in London, namely: the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force; the need for Israel to end the territorial occupation which it has maintained since the conflict of 1967; respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of every State in the area and its right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries; and recognition that in the establishment of a just and lasting peace account must be taken of the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. It remains our firm view that all these aspects must be taken as a whole.
170.	We uphold the view that a peace settlement in the Middle East will be possible only if the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to give effective expression to its national identity is translated into fact. This would take into account the need for a homeland for the Palestinian people.

171.	In this context it is important that Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) have been accepted by both Israel and its neighbours. This must be the starting-point for any progress in the peace-making process.
172.	The situation in the Middle East is inseparably linked with the situation in Lebanon. After three years of crisis and conflict the restoration of peace and order and the rebuilding of that country still seem remote. The members of the Community are still deeply concerned about this situation, which threatens not only the existence of Lebanon but the stability of the entire region.
173.	Once more they appeal urgently to all who have an influence on developments in that country to be fully conscious of their responsibility for peace, and they hope that all parties concerned will support efforts to strengthen the authority of the Lebanese Government in the whole territory, as called for in the Security Council resolutions on Lebanon. The members of the Community welcome the fact that the Security Council has renewed the mandate of UNIFIL. They appeal to all parties to give that Force their full support in exercising its mandate.
174.	On the Cyprus question there has still been no breakthrough, A solution to the conflict must be based on the principles of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It can be achieved only through direct negotiations between the two communities in Cyprus. The United Nations can facilitate such negotiations, but can be no substitute for them. The Republic of Cyprus is linked with the European Community by an association agreement. The Community will continue to give every support to the efforts of the Secretary-General to bring the parties together for constructive negotiations.
175.	The efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Africa, the Middle East and Cyprus have demonstrated time and again how indispensable is the role of the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
176.	The members of the European Community as well as other responsible Members of the world Organization have consistently contributed to the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations by providing troops, logistic support and financial assistance. They regard it as an urgent task to appeal to the sense of responsibility of all Members of the United Nations and ask them to increase their readiness to support peace-keeping measures. They are for this reason preparing a proposal to that effect for submission to the General Assembly. 
177.	The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has provided us with a broad basis on which to shape relations between the Governments and peoples of Eastern and Western Europe. What is important now is to work for the implementation of the Helsinki Final Act in all its parts. The Belgrade follow-up session in 1977 has shown the shortcomings in its implementation, and the Community will call persistently for these to be made good.
178.	The Helsinki Final Act is not important for Europe alone, for detente in Europe and in East-West relations can and should release new political and economic energy to master the great challenge of our times, the elimination of hunger and want from the third world. The developing countries need the support of the Western and of the Eastern industrialized countries. There is nothing they need less than a transfer of the East-West confrontation to their regions.
179.	This year's tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, which was devoted to disarmament was an expression of the awareness that all nations of the world have a vital interest in the success of the efforts to achieve arms limitation and disarmament. The members of the Community participated in that session with joint statements and contributions and attach great importance to its results. That session has strengthened by means of institutional reforms world-wide co-operation in pursuit of disarmament, and the Declaration and Programme of Action included in the Final Document of the session [resolution S-10/2] have established a broad framework for that co-operation. The task now is to develop further what has been achieved so far and use it to establish concrete arrangements. The Community will be playing an active role in these efforts. I shall be setting out the position of my own country in detail later on.
180.	I should now like to turn to economic issues.
181.	In the world of today growth and development have come to be a joint objective and a joint responsibility of all States. We are confronted with the following challenge: to build up an order of co-operation for the purpose of joint management in global economic interdependence, an order towards the establishment of which all States and all groups of States will make a contribution of their own so as to be able to achieve the dual aim of sustained non-inflationary growth in the industrialized countries and an accelerated and proportionately higher rate of growth in the developing countries.
182.	The establishment of such an order specifically requires the reshaping of North-South relations. In line with the present division of labour, the developing countries are supplying mainly raw materials, and the industrialized countries, above all, finished products. But what we need is an order designed to replace this traditional pattern of exchange by increasingly balanced co-operation and a greater degree of equality in this co-operation, and to provide the countries of the third world with more favourable external conditions for their development.
183.	In concluding the Lome Convention the European Community and the States of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group have in a regionally oriented approach undertaken to remould their relations with these objectives in mind. The Convention has already proved its value in practice, and the contracting parties intend to carry it forward in a new, further improved agreement.
184.	Within the framework of the North-South dialogue the Community is, furthermore, willing to help on a global scale to accelerate development and to establish a balanced pattern of North-South co-operation. It reaffirmed its willingness to work towards the achievement of these goals at the meeting of the European Council held in Bremen from 6 to 7 July 1978.
185.	The European Community is committed to free world trade and is ready to accept the structural changes resulting from open markets and to master the problems they create. It will help to ensure that the negotiations within GATT are brought to a successful conclusion by the end of this year. The purpose of these negotiations is unmistakably to pave the way for further liberalization and once more to create a climate of long-term security for international trade. The negotiations are, furthermore, intended to create favourable conditions, in particular, for an expansion of trade between industrialized and developing countries. The Community intends to keep its markets open and to continue widening access within those markets to products, including finished products, from the developing countries.
186.	We are determined to fight protectionism, which is a manifestation of short-sighted self-interest and is particularly detrimental to the third world. The import planning of the Communist industrial countries is also a form of protectionism, which explains why these countries account for only 4 per cent of the third world's exports.
187.	Within the framework of UNCTAD the Community is helping to achieve constructive results as regards a common fund and individual commodity agreements.
188.	On the question of investment in the field of commodities, new forms of co-operation between industrialized and developing countries must be developed. We must prevent any further shift of the exploration and development of commodities to the industrial countries, something which is happening even though in many cases the developing countries have lower-cost deposits at their disposal.
189.	Within the framework of its comprehensive development strategy, the Community and its member countries will increase the volume of their assistance and improve its quality. The poorest developing countries especially must receive an increasing share of official aid. We also seek to meet the needs of middle-income developing countries. This is why we must soon arrive at satisfactory decisions on replenishing the resources of the World Bank, of IDA, and of the regional banks and funds.
190.	It is due largely to the efforts of the member countries of the Community that the ministerial meeting of UNCTAD  was in a position to take a decision on the question of indebtedness [see A/33/15, part two, annex I, resolution 165(S-IX)]. The Community is promoting the transfer of private capital, which is an indispensable means of maintaining an adequate supply of investment capital for the developing countries and is encouraging the developing countries' access to its own capital markets.
191.	In order to ensure that direct investments contribute fully to the development process, we must at long last evolve reliable guidelines for this field of activity. These guidelines must be designed to meet the host countries' requirement of full control over their economies and the investors' requirement of legal security.
192.	In the field of energy the international community is confronted with the challenge of smoothly leading the world out of the era of oil into an era of new and renewable energy sources. This challenge can only met on the basis of world-wide co-operation. Hence the community welcomes the resolution adopted at the sixty fifth session of the Economic and Social Council recommending that a conference on new and renewable energy sources be convened.
193.	Simultaneously with the objective of establishing a more equitable international economic order, nations should pursue the objective of translating an equitable order into reality at home is well. It must be the primary aim of every development policy to satisfy the basic needs of all human beings. The poorest, too. must he given the ability and the opportunity to do productive work
194.	The Community considers the acceleration of that development process and the continuous reduction in the gap between rich and poor countries to he the central task of international politics in the last quarter of this century. We will fully contribute to the solution of these problems and we hope that (lie Communist industrialized countries, too, will begin to provide assistance on a scale commensurate with their economic potential and will open their markets to the manufactures of the developing countries
195.	The Community offered constructive co-operation at the last session of the Committee established under General Assembly Resolution M?4. or the Committee of the Whole and regrets that the Committee was not vet able to fulfil satisfactorily the tasks assigned to it, but hopes that it will soon be able to continue its work in a constructive manner.
196.	In the view of the Community it is. furthermore. important that we take a decision at tins session of the General Assembly on how to prepare the development strategy for the 1980s. The nations of the third world cannot wait any longer
197.	In December the United Nations will be celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We are conscious that we arc still far from translating that Declaration into reality all over the world. Millions of people are hungry in main parts of the world; millions arc oppressed on account of their race, sex or creed. Tens of thousands of political prisoners languish in camps and prisons. Others are deprived of their citizenship and exiled. And among those persecuted are main whose only "crime" was that they invoked their human rights. This is the reality in the year 1978.
198.	None the less, we must not lose sight of the long-term trend of fusion. Since the proclamation of human rights, people all over the world have increasingly come to demand the realization of their rights, and today human rights are enshrined in the constitutions of most States. But in many countries there is a sharp contrast between constitution and daily practice.
Through the United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenants cm Human Rights, and a number of other obligations, including the Final Act of Helsinki, the rights of man have also become an international concern. Today they are one of the major issues of world politics.
200.	Human rights comprise civil and political as well as economic, social and cultural rights. Freedom from want is no less a human right than freedom from fear, and vice versa. The United Nations has created a number of institutions and procedures to protect human rights. The Community urges that they should be used more effectively, that they should be developed and unproved. It urges also that those countries which have ratified the International Covenants on Human Rights adopted by the United Nations (resolution 2200 A) should indeed implement the provisions of those Covenants. Signature without corresponding action is worth little, The will to implement a treaty must be recognizable to the world public arid to the citizens of the country concerned.
201.	I should like now to add some remarks on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany.
202.	liver since it came into being, the Federal Republic of Germany has pursued a foreign policy for peace. All democratic parties in our country champion the cause of peace. We have a comprehensive understanding of peace: as a guarantee of peaceful, stable co-operation and of the common responsibility of all States, without which the problems facing mankind today cannot be resolved.
203.	The Federal Government's policy is embedded in the nine-member European Community and the alliance with the democracies of North America. Democracy, freedom and human rights are the unmistakable characteristics of this partnership. The close link between free Europe and the United States and Canada is the indispensable prerequisite for our security. This is a factor of world stability, and it is the hope of all who put their faith in freedom and not in oppression and predominance. This transatlantic partnership is more than a community thinking solely in terms of its own security interests. It is based on the great common aims; freedom, independence, the right of self- determination and human rights, not only for ourselves but for all individuals and all nations. That is why this partnership is irreplaceable - no less so than are our values. Upon these foundations we are helping to build bridges of co-operation across the ideological gulf between East and West. We want also to play our part in steadily reducing the disparity in levels of development between North and South.
204.	European union and Atlantic partnership are indispensable prerequisites also of our realistic policy of detente and a reconciliation of interests with the countries of Eastern Europe, a policy which we pursue together with our Western partners. The Federal Republic of Germany, by means of the Treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague,  has helped to further the process of detente in Europe and in East-West relations and since the conclusion of those treaties has always been ready to assist in seeking further progress. The Federal Government will continue that policy, which of course is a long-term policy. The policy of detente must take account of the indivisibility of peace all over the world.
205.	The development of the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union is of special significance for continuing detente in Europe. During the state visit which the Soviet Head of State paid to the Federal Republic of Germany last May, both sides reiterated their determination to raise the quality and level of their relations in all fields. By means of a joint declaration and an economic agreement they have again emphasized the long-term character of their relations.
206.	The Federal Government also-indeed particularly- includes the other German State in its policy of detente. No nation has a greater interest in detente than the German nation, for the line dividing East and West runs right through our nation. We aim, in accordance with the Basic Treaty,  to develop co-operation with the German Democratic Republic and to widen the contractual framework of that co-operation. We do so also aware of our responsibility for peace and for people throughout Europe. We wish at the same time to make detente something tangible in the everyday life of the people and, above all, to increase the possibilities for Germans on both sides of the border to come together.
207.	On signing the Treaty of Moscow and the Basic Treaty, the Federal Government emphasized that it remained the aim of its policy to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation would recover its unity in free self-determination. Here, too, we are on the side of progress. No one can halt the course of history. It is moving in the direction of unity, not separation; in the direction of progress, not delimitation. Finally, detente must stand the test especially in the very city that lies at the heart of Europe and at the heart of Germany-Berlin'.
208.	The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin  has improved the situation of Berlin considerably. I shall not conceal that there are still difficulties, which both sides must help to remove once and for all-all sides must help to remove them. What matters to us is that West Berlin should be able to prosper and develop, and we shall do everything in our power to ensure that it can do so. We do not want to change the existing situation unilaterally. We are maintaining and developing the ties between Berlin and the Federal Republic of Germany within the framework prescribed by the Quadripartite Agreement and we shall take care that West Berlin is fully incorporated in international cooperation. The strict observance and full application of the Quadripartite Agreement is a major prerequisite for lasting detente in the centre of Europe. Berlin is a symbol and a touchstone of the readiness for detente and co-operation between East and West.
209.	In order to safeguard peace under the conditions of East-West relations there must be a balance of military power. To ensure and maintain that balance is the goal of the security policy which the Federal Republic of Germany pursues, together with its partners in the Alliance. It is our desire to secure that balance, not through an increased build-up of arms but through arms limitation and disarmament. What we want is a stable balance at a lower level,
210.	The Federal Government hopes for an early and successful conclusion of the second series of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. In a system of military balance between the alliances, the Soviet nuclear medium-range missiles should not be left out of consideration. Soviet superiority in this field is a source of concern to us. In the interests of true stability it is necessary that this existing imbalance should be reduced, including also the so-called grey area.
211.	The aim pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany, together with its allies, in the Vienna talks on mutual and balanced force reduction is to establish approximate parity in Central Europe, in the form of a common collective over-all ceiling for ground forces and a reduction of tank disparity. An important result of the visit to Bonn of the Soviet Head of State was that in the joint declaration issued with Chancellor Schmidt the principle of parity was expressly recognized for the first time in an East-West statement. The joint declaration says:
"Both sides deem it important that no one should seek military superiority. They proceed on the assumption that approximate equality and parity suffice to safeguard defence."
212.	This principle must now be translated into reality. In order to achieve, by means of reductions, true parity between East and West in the heart of Europe, the two sides must first agree on the data basis. The discussion on data is therefore now the main topic of the Vienna negotiations and will be continued.
213.	Disclosure of military budgets and confidence- building measures such as the exchange of observers during manoeuvres are therefore important preliminary steps towards verified arms limitation and disarmament.
214.	The Federal Republic of Germany therefore supports all measures calculated to make the balance of military power more transparent and in this way to build up more confidence. It has played a part in the preparatory work done by the Secretary-General to ensure disclosure and comparability of military budgets. The limitation and reduction of nuclear weapons and the non-proliferation of these weapons are of world-wide importance.
2)5. We appeal once again to all countries that have not yet done so to accede at long last to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
216.	Along with the efforts to promote nuclear arms limitation and non-proliferation, the efforts to limit and reduce conventional forces must also be stepped up. The tenth special session of the General Assembly, on disarmament, rightly emphasized this requirement.
217.	The greatly increased volume of weapons transferred has become a problem of the first order. This transfer must be restricted by supplying and recipient countries jointly. The Federal Republic of Germany does not supply any weapons to areas of tension. Moreover, only in exceptional cases does it allow arms to be supplied to countries outside the alliance. The proportion of our arms exports to the third world is 0.2 per cent of our over-all exports.
218.	We consider it intolerable that the world spends in the region of $400 billion every year for military purposes. This is a threat to peace; in a world in which there is much poverty and hunger, this is a challenge to reason and to our moral conscience. It is time that this money was released and earmarked for the economic and social development of all nations, thus also serving to increase the security of every nation.
219.	International terrorism has become an acute problem of increasingly threatening proportions. It can be stopped only if all countries co-operate in a spirit of solidarity.
220.	As long ago as the thirty-first regular session of the General Assembly the Federal Government proposed that an international convention be concluded on measures to prevent the taking of hostages.10 The Committee drafting such a convention has undoubtedly made progress, and I would ask the General Assembly to extend its mandate in accordance with its recommendation.
221.	The countries participating in the Bonn Economic Summit Conference declared their willingness to intensify their joint efforts in the fight against aircraft hijacking in particular,  In cases where a country refuses to extradite aircraft hijackers or to take court action against them, air traffic with that country is to be discontinued. This is an important step forward and other Governments are called upon to join us in this action.
222.	I spoke earlier about the task of jointly managing world economic interdependence. The Federal Republic of Germany is conscious of the responsibility that falls on it as the world's second largest trading country in carrying out this task,
223.	At the Bonn Economic Summit Conference in July we promised that, in order to strengthen our growth we would introduce additional measures to stimulate demand costing about 1 per cent of the gross national product. That promise has been kept.
224.	In the months, indeed years, previous to that we had, moreover, already helped considerably to promote economic activity and growth in the countries with which we trade. In the first half of 1978 our imports increased in real terms by 8 per cent. They increased much faster than our exports and were considerably higher than those of nearly all other major industrialized countries.
225.	With an inflation rate of 2.4 per cent in August 1978, the Federal Republic of Germany is close to price stability. It exports growth and stability, and 1 thank you, Mr. President, for yourself having explicitly expressed appreciation of this.
226.	My country is also making its full contribution in promoting the development of the third world.
227.	"We are firmly in favour of ensuring a steady increase in exports of manufactures from the third world. Indeed, we see in this increase and in the corresponding opening up of markets in the industrialized countries a central element of the evolution of a balanced world economic order. In 1977 our imports of manufactures from the non-oil- exporting, non-European developing countries were up by 10 per cent. That means that they have increased at four times the rate of our national product. This amazing rate of growth impressively demonstrates the openness of the German market. The non-European developing countries, excluding the oil-producing countries, ran up a trade- balance surplus in relation to the Federal Republic of Germany of 2.7 billion marks.
228.	The Federal Government has made a special effort this year and boosted its development assistance budget by more than 20 per cent. It also plans considerable increases for the years ahead, so that it will rise at a rate significantly higher than that of the over-all budget.
229.	In addition, we have further improved the conditions on which aid is given. As from 1978 we are giving aid to the least-developed countries entirely in the form of grants. The Federal Government will also convert into grants development assistance loans already afforded to that group of countries, which amounts to cancelling debts of $2 billion or more.
230.	The Federal Government expects the Committee of the Whole at last to deal with the substance of its work. This body is too important for the North-South dialogue to be allowed to continue any longer to deal with procedural questions. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will do all it can to ensure the success of the Committee's work.
231.	Of great importance for the future of international economic growth and development is the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. Here we must above all find a balanced solution as regards a regime for sea-bed mining. It must give all States and enterprises access to the resources of the deep sea and bring with it the political and economic security needed for the heavy long-term investment in sea-bed mining.
232.	The focal point of all efforts to lead the world, which is in a phase of transition, to an order of equality and partnership continues to be the United Nations. The Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its will to support and strengthen the United Nations.
233.	The United Nations is more than a forum for the formation of international public opinion. It is called upon to act. It must become more capable of action. This applies above all to the important task of safeguarding peace. The Federal Republic of Germany feels that all Members of the United Nations should become more acutely aware of their responsibility for peace-keeping measures. No one should remain aloof where this central function of the United Nations is concerned.
234.	Furthermore, it is necessary to improve the instruments available to the United Nations for preserving the peace; for example, by providing training facilities for personnel required for peace-keeping operations and keeping the Secretary-General regularly informed of available units or logistic capacities for peace-keeping operations.
235. In other areas, too, we must strengthen and develop the institutions of the United Nations. This applies also to the task of the United Nations in establishing an independent institution for the protection of human rights. The stronger the United Nations, the stronger each Member State will feel in exercising its right of self-determination and the stronger every individual will feel in exercising his human rights. The United Nations must be the citadel of equality of rights in the face of hegemony and power politics in any form; it must be the champion of the poor against the rich, the weak against the strong. The United Nations will attain this goal only if it keeps itself free from sweeping judgements, propaganda and agitation, if it is a forum in which reason and the desire for justice prevail. We want to help the United Nations achieve its great aims: to preserve peace, to promote economic and social progress and to protect the human rights of all individuals and the right of self-determination of all nations.
 

﻿
1.	Mr. President, it is a pleasure for me to greet you as the representative of a continent with which we find that we have, through its Latin roots, long-standing affinities that are still very much alive. I also want to pay a tribute to you as an historian, economist and statesman whose training and experience will surely be invaluable to the pursuit of our work. I wish you, as indeed I wish us all, complete success in it and I assure you that you can count on our total co-operation.
2.	By recalling the eminent qualities of our Secretary-General and paying a tribute to his tireless dedication, I am not simply conforming to some kind of ritual. It is only natural that the outstanding debt the international community owes him should be acknowledged publicly and that we should tell him once again how grateful we are to him for serving the goals of our Organization with such wisdom, enthusiasm, energy and competence.
3.	One year ago from this very rostrum1 I observed that the world situation was neither good nor reassuring. Alas, the events that have occurred in the past 12 months are scarcely reason to alter that view. The main points of tension persist; new ones have emerged; still others have reappeared. Economic imbalances and inequalities remain and at times have even widened. While the guiding principles of our Charter are not contested, one has to admit that their application is still inadequate. Finally, human rights are still subject to many violations.

4.	That observation may seem severe but it is not intended to be pessimistic. The United Nations today is represents ? e of almost the entire world community. It has been enlarged again by the admission of Solomon Islands, which we are pleased to welcome. Mindful of the countless ties it has long had with the Pacific region, France hopes to enjoy the best of relations with that new State.
5.	As our Organization draws still closer to being universal it is acquiring growing influence in world affairs. As a founding Member of the United Nations, and having fully integrated its goals and principles into our own political philosophy, France welcomes this course of events. As we have shown just this year, we are prepared to associate ourselves directly with the efforts of our Organization on behalf of peace. Indeed, now more than ever France is convinced of the value of collective action and the need for genuine international co-operation, without which our quest for peace and prosperity would be but an illusion.
6.	France pursues that policy first and foremost in its natural environment, Europe. With its eight partners, France is continuing the work begun more than 20 years ago to build a prosperous and peaceful community able to make its own contribution to international life. The current President of the European Community has described to the Assembly our views on the main questions it is to debate this session [see 8th meeting, paras. 135-200]. He expressed our shared determination to steer the development of our peoples on a course that is more rational and more generously open to the world. The many countries of every continent that are associated with the Community, as well as those nearby that are preparing to join, are aware of the determination behind this endeavour. They know the price and appreciate the difficulties in the present economic situation.
7.	Beyond the context of the nine countries members of the Community, France applies in Europe the principles of detente which it helped define and to which it remains deeply committed. Whatever the vicissitudes or stumbling-blocks, that policy is still the only reasonable one; therefore it must be pursued and developed to the full dimensions given to it by the Final Act of Helsinki.2 It must also be extended elsewhere in the world, for clearly areas outside Europe must not become the object or stakes of a confrontation between the major Powers, or the very process of detente will be imperilled.
8.	Long ago we established without reservation ties with European nations having social systems different from our own, and my country reaffirms its commitment to co-

operation with the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe. In the same way, it welcomes the development of its relations with the People's Republic of China. It intends to make those relations commensurate with the physical, human and political dimensions of that great country.
9.	"To maintain international peace and security": that is the principal goal the Charter assigns to our States. Now, even more than last year, persistent tensions or current conflicts are jeopardizing international peace. We are all aware of them. They are located primarily in the Middle East, in Africa and in the Indo-Chinese peninsula. The draft text on peace-keeping, which my colleague from the Federal Republic of Germany presented on behalf of the European Community [A/SPC/33/L.19J, deserves the full attention of the Assembly, because it invites us at a very opportune moment to lend the Organization our assistance in this essential matter of collective security. Occasions for doing so, I am sorry to say, are not lacking.
10.	In view of the crisis provoked by the Israeli intervention in southern Lebanon, my Government decided last March to participate in UNIFIL. Its decision to make a contingent available to the Organization was a concrete expression of its often stated commitment to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of that friendly country and of its support for President Sarkis's efforts to Strengthen the authority of the State and reconcile the communities within Lebanon. Who can fail to see that a free and united Lebanon is an indispensable element for the equilibrium of the entire region? But who can fail to see also that its tradition of freedom and openness exposes it more than any other State to the impact of the tensions and crises that surround and penetrate it?
11.	It was therefore justifiable for the international community to give the people of Lebanon, who had already been so severely tried, direct evidence of support following the occupation of southern Lebanon by Israeli armed forces. The operation undertaken by the United Nations has unfortunately not achieved all the objectives set for it. Although the withdrawal of Israeli troops was achieved, they are still overtly supporting rebellious elements along the border which refuse to submit to legitimate Lebanese authority and keep tension alive by dangerous acts of harassment. Security has not yet been restored to the entire area, mainly because it has been impossible for the units of UNIFIL to deploy along the border.
12.	With regard to restoring the authority of the Government of Beirut, the obstacles to this are not ones that UNIFIL has the mission or the means to overcome. The Force cannot take the place of the Government in the exercise of its sovereignty. While the Force—and we should pay tribute to it since the difficulties of the task are unprecedented for an operation conducted by our Organization—may draw on all the resources available to it in the framework of its mandate, it is not its job to maintain law or to impose a settlement the implementation of which would require also the co-operation of forces outside its sphere of action.
13.	UNIFIL would be diverted from its real goal if the protection it provides permitted the status quo to continue
and the parties to become immured in their intransigence, deaf to the suffering of the people and blind to the dangers of allowing the wound to fester. This was the meaning of the Security Council's resolution 434(1978) of 18 September to renew the mandate of the Force for four months. The stability of the region requires measures to be taken without delay to restore the authority and sovereignty of Lebanon, and everyone who understands this will find encouragement in this extension of the Force's mandate. But the time-limit imposed on the mandate should serve as a warning to those who entertain the illusion that the presence of the Force will from now on be a permanent factor in the situation.
14.	I do not want to leave the subject of Lebanon without stressing my Government's concern at the persistence of tensions in other parts of that country, particularly in Beirut. I should like to remind you once again of our constant position: that there can be no solution to the crisis in Lebanon unless it is founded on respect for the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of that country. Any undertaking that did not recognize this requirement would be doomed to failure and would risk destroying, along with itself, the very cause it claimed to serve.
15.	The situation in Lebanon cannot be dissociated from the Middle East situation, which has greater repercussions on that country than on any other in the region. After the historic initiative taken by the President of Egypt, Mr. El-Sadat in going to Jerusalem last fall, a new situation emerged Both those who approved and those who disapproved recognized it. Everyone realized that what was at stake was no longer Israel's existence but the terms of its coexistence with the Arab countries.
16.	This breach in the wall of distrust that had separated Israel and its neighbours for 30 years was not turned to as much advantage as had been hoped; the process begun last winter stalled too quickly. The President of the United States, Mr. Carter, tried to inject new life into it, and I want to pay a tribute to his courage and tenacity in his personal involvement in the Camp David undertaking. This meeting, unprecedented in style, has ushered in a new phase. Clearly, there is still great uncertainty in it. But we would like to hope that under the. shadow of ambiguities, precaution and silence, the complex texts adopted by two of the parties directly concerned can be used to further progress towards the necessary settlement.
17.	We believe that, for this phase to be decisive and to lead to peace, it must pave the way to an over-all settlement, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), with which all the interested parties would be associated, including the representatives of the Palestinian people. This settlement, may I repeat, must be based on withdrawal from the territories occupied in 1967, on recognition of the right of the Palestinians to a homeland, on consideration for the legitimate concern for security of all the States in the region, naturally including Israel, as well as on the mutual recognition of boundaries and on the gradual establishment of peaceful relations among the States concerned. Only respect for these principles can bring about the just and lasting peace to which all the peoples of the region aspire.
18.	We deplore the fact that in Cyprus the renewed efforts of our Secretary-General have had little success in breaking the stalemate. In order to strengthen the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and to restore trust between the communities, these communities must resume their talks and must be prepared to conduct them on a reasonable basis. The de facto state of affairs must not become law; pre-conditions cannot lead to negotiation. My country is too closely linked with that part of the Mediterranean not to know how deep and firmly rooted the concerns of each party are, but our own historical experience has shown us how much can be overcome by the determination of leaders and peoples. It is this impetus that we urge the parties to find, and we are
always ready to encourage them to do so. 
19.	Africa has suffered new ordeals this year, without a settlement being found for certain problems too long discussed by our Organization. That continent, one of the cradles of humanity, has begun a new chapter in its history. Many recently independent States, which have not yet firmly established internal equilibrium, today find themselves involved in rivalries which are not their own and which thus hurt their chances in the only struggle that is worth while, the struggle for development.
20.	In Rhodesia the recent turn of events has increased the dangers. The illegal regime in Salisbury continues to defy the international community. The agreement reached last March between Ian Smith and certain nationalist leaders with the aim of promoting a so-called "internal solution" only deepened divisions and heightened tensions. The application of the Anglo-American plan drawn up last year at this time would doubtless have paved the way for Zimbabwe's independence to be accepted, but we see today that violence is on the rise. Only direct negotiations among all the interested parties under the aegis of the administering Power could make it possible for Zimbabwe to accede peacefully to independence. But time is passing, intransigent positions are becoming more entrenched, and a storm is brewing. It is high time to listen to reason.
21.	In rejecting the implementation of the plan to settle the question of Namibia-a plan it had accepted four months previously—South Africa has created a crisis that could have grave consequences if the Government in Pretoria does not reconsider the position it has taken in defiance of international opinion.
22.	France again asserts that there is no essential difference between Mr. Waldheim's proposals and the settlement plan of the five Powers. In finding fault with some adjustments that alter neither the spirit nor the basic terms, the Republic of South Africa seems to be looking for pretexts to back out. In agreement with its Western partners, France has asked that the Security Council meet as soon as possible in order to adopt the Secretary-General's proposals.
23.	Confident as it is of the support of the African countries and, above, all of those the front-line countries,
and mindful as it is of the suffering of the Namibian people, who have waited too long for the right to self-determination to be accorded them, and assured as it is, along with its four partners, of the support of the international community, France again most solemnly calls upon South Africa to refrain from setting out on a dead-end road which can lead it only to suicidal isolation. Let me add that Namibia's independence will be effective only if prepared in co-operation with the international community.
24.	In the Horn of Africa, where violent clashes occurred last year, the situation is still disturbing. It is high time that the disputes that are setting Africans against each other were left to the Africans alone, so that they may seek the paths of a settlement through procedures of their own. Accordingly, it falls to the Organization of African Unity [OAU] to continue its efforts at rapprochement, without which tension and resentment will persist.
25.	Three other situations especially hold our attention: they involve Chad, Western Sahara and Zaire. I will discuss these at somewhat greater length because France's position has not always been understood, nor has there always been a desire to understand it. Because France has on three occasions been led to give direct assistance to the countries concerned, it has been claimed in some quarters that France sought to play some kind of role as "gendarme of Africa". I want once again to refute these accusations, which show little understanding of the reasons for our policy, which is based on two principles that I have already explained on several occasions but that I should like to reiterate.
26.	First, it is for African countries themselves to settle their disputes. This means that their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity must be free from all interference that would make Africa the arena for rivalries from outside the continent; it means that they must remain free to decide their political options for themselves.
27.	Secondly, it is with strict respect for the sovereignty of States that France shows its solidarity with Africa. "Africa for the Africans" does not mean rejecting this solidarity or erasing friendships.
28.	Though France did intervene on the African continent, it was always at the express request of the recognized Government of the country in question, and the extent and duration of French assistance were limited according to the necessities of the situation. In each case France was responding to an appeal from States which were victims of aggression originating from or supported from the outside; these States were trying to defend themselves within their borders and did not yet have the military means to ensure their own security.
29.	Accordingly, my country remains true to the policy of non-interference and of co-operation that it has always followed; no one can accuse France of straying from it and following supposed neo-colonialist or other designs.
30.	These supportive actions do not of course imply that we have taken any position on the substance of the issues or made any attempt to impose a solution. To our mind, the settlement of disputes is the exclusive domain of the parties concerned.
31.	In Chad, unmistakable aggression developed this past spring in violation of the Sebha and Benghazi cease-fire agreements; this aggression was clearly backed from the outside and led the Government of Chad to request our support. The sole objective of our action was to make it possible to restore the security necessary to the quest by the people of Chad—and by them alone-for national reconciliation. Today this endeavour is well under way, as everyone can see.
32.	In the different situation that prevails in the western reaches of the Sahara, France similarly answered an appeal from Mauritania, a country without substantial material resources or military forces which was the victim of aggression supported from the outside on uncontested national territory. In this matter France, which has longstanding ties with all the States involved in the conflict, has but one wish, and that is to see these States re-establish friendly and fruitful co-operation with each other. Accordingly, we note with interest the recent turn of events that is more favourable to restoring calm. We hope this trend grows. Since we had no part in the Madrid agreements, we would not be party to the dialogue that might begin. But we are prepared to encourage such a dialogue so that a peaceful solution might at last be found, with the help, if need be, of international organizations. As for us, it is in the forum of the United Nations that we have stated our commitment to the self-determination of peoples.
33.	For the second consecutive year, Zaire has had to endure bloody incursions in Shaba province by elements from the outside. To all indications, the toll of this attack in human lives, and material terms would have been even heavier without rapid international support. Since our soldiers have long since returned to their bases on our territory, who today can question the strictly humanitarian concerns that motivated us?
34.	France's action in Africa has never been aimed at jeopardizing the sovereignty or security of any country on that continent. Our sole ambition is to contribute, when the desire for this is expressed and when we are asked, to the development and well-being of the peoples of Africa, who have as much right as anyone else to stability and security.
35.	As for the Comoros, I emphasized last year that France had a feeling of solidarity with countries to which it was especially bound by history, and that we were ready to demonstrate this feeling toward the new State. I am therefore pleased that diplomatic relations have now been established between the Comoros and France and that the door is thus open for co-operation. Our co-operation can only facilitate better understanding between the Comorians and their neighbours in Mayotte, who have freely chosen a different path but who, I repeat, will have another opportunity to express their wishes regarding their future.
36.	Therefore, was it necessary to enter the question of Mayotte on our agenda again? Allow me to express some
doubt about the usefulness of such a debate if in fact the aim is, as everyone must hope and work for it to be, the restoration of an atmosphere of trust between the peoples in question.
37.	In South-East Asia, France can only deplore the fighting that has resumed on the Indo-Chinese peninsula, so long afflicted by war. This fighting is between two peoples with which we have historically had very close relations and for which we still feel deep friendship today. We hope that all the States of the region can devote themselves to the priority tasks of development and establish true cooperation between themselves, with respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of each of them, free of all undue interference from Powers outside the area.
38.	One of the most painful consequences of the situations of confrontation that we deplore is the exodus of part of the population. France, traditionally a land of asylum, could not remain unmoved, especially when this ordeal involves peoples that were once linked to it. This is why we took in 150,000 refugees, nearly one third of whom came from the Indo-Chinese peninsula; and we are keeping our doors open to other refugees, from this area to a limit of 1,OCO a month. Since this is an eminently humanitarian endeavour, we hope the burden can be shared to a large extent by the members of the international community.
39.	With the fate and protection of the human being at stake, how could we fail to mention the pledge made by our States when they adhered to the Charter, namely, to respect human rights?
40.	We mast be exacting in this, but also humble. Human rights are too sacred to be used for partisan ends; and they are precious enough for respect to be demanded for them everywhere.
41.	France has not forgotten that it was in Paris on 10 December 1948 that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted; we are celebrating its thirtieth anniversary this year. But who would venture to claim that this is also the anniversary of its application?
42.	In view of the continued violations of these rights, we are forced to admit that there is still a wide gap between the most solemn statements and actual behaviour.
43.	Political persecution, racial discrimination, torture and arbitrary sentences are still a painful reality today. The news offers too many examples of something that is all too common. There should be no hierarchy of arbitrary priorities in human rights, whether individual or collective. To tolerate selection would be to legalize all violations in advance.
44.	Unless there is respect for the supremacy of the individual, no progress can be made toward human equality and dignity; both would bet flouted, here in the name of economic imperatives, there in the name of security requirements. Neither the cause of peace nor the cause of development can justify the persecution of individuals or groups who ask only that international texts endorsing their basic rights be respected.
45.	In this connexion I should like to recall our staunch condemnation of the policy of apartheid. We denounce it not only as the manifestation of indescribable disdain for human beings but also as a potential detonator of dangerous conflicts. France has associated itself with the sanctions taken last November against a regime whose blindness makes a constant policy of such disdain. We therefore strictly apply the embargo on arms sales to Pretoria.
46.	Granting individuals and peoples every civil and political freedom and the means to enjoy it in peace was already the goal of our States a few decades ago. Today we all agree that it is important for them to have the economic means to exercise those freedoms. Furthermore, development, which should remedy the most blatant economic inequalities, is itself a factor for peace. Has it not been said at this very rostrum that development is the new name for peace?
47.	Nevertheless, when we speak of development, let us beware of taxing the peoples' patience. We are nearing the end of the Second United Nations Development Decade. What contribution has it made to the most impoverished among us? What has been its real impact on world hunger? Have we at least established the conditions that could, on the basis of national economic take-off, generate a process of self-development? Alas, that hardly seems to be the case.
48.	If public opinion in the developed countries and in countries benefiting from co-operation for development is not to become discouraged, the third development decade will have to respond in a more concrete manner to the needs of peoples and will have to be expressed more consistently in practical ambitions that mobilize support. It is important that the next decade attest to the commitment of the international community to deal realistically—that is, in the concrete terms in which they are presented—with the acute problems that confront a number of Governments daily and affect the lives of hundreds of millions of individuals. Therefore this decade must usher in, if not another type of development, at least a more pragmatic and diversified approach, and it must reject fruitless discussions on the nature of basic needs.
49.	In this regard we welcome the agreement reached recently at the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries in Buenos Aires; it opens up new prospects for international technical co-operation to further development.
50.	New elements may also be expected from the fifth session of UNCTAD, which is to be held in Manila next year, from the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development and the Third General Conference of UNIDO. Those elements should be integrated into a comprehensive whole and should be guided by master plans that serve to enlighten the mind and mobilize the spirit of determination.
51.	Instead of waiting passively for guidelines from the 1980 special session of the General Assembly, it is our duty to start thinking now, individually and collectively, about an outline for the third decade. While the objectives of the present Decade, which were defined globally [resolution
2626 (XXV)], will undoubtedly establish the general frame of action for the 1980s, changes in the world economic situation and the lessons learned from experience should none the less make certain priorities clearer.
52.	By the same token, the fight against the most dire effects of poverty is certainly a task in keeping with the possibilities of our Organization, and one that would enable it to respond to the hopes people place in it.
53.	The basis for such a project exists. It is the programme of action, adopted unanimously in 1976 by the tripartite world employment conference.7 But the programme should be expressed in terms of strategy by an effort of planning and by wide-ranging consultation, in particular with a view to eliminating any misunderstanding. The way was opened, inter alia, by the Conference of non-aligned countries which met last July in Belgrade. That Conference pointed out [see AI33/206] that the policy defined in Geneva - and I agree with this view—is based on the need to promote a new international economic order; it noted that such a policy did not dispense with the need for a global strategy designed to accelerate the economic growth of the developing countries; and, lastly, it stressed that those countries themselves were responsible in the first place for their own development and particularly for satisfying the basic needs of their peoples.
54.	I might add that that policy, rightly attentive to rural development and to the problems of unorganised urban concentrations, must not be used as an excuse for neglecting the indispensable geographical redistribution of industry.
55.	I have mentioned the necessary industrialization of the developing countries. I hope they will know how to control it and will avoid the mistakes we made in our own industrialization.
56.	Moreover, we, like the developing countries, are opposed to any international division of labour, old or new, that would imprison certain peoples in certain tasks. Faced with competition in some sectors from young industries in the third world, we decided, at the price of imposing real sacrifices on our companies and workers, to reject the facile solution of protectionist measures. We have allowed adaptations and reconversions to take place in the context of free trade and realistic pricing. We believe that by so doing -we have served honestly the interests of all.
57.	The third development decade, as 1 have said, needs some master plans. It also needs a sense of method and instruments for its implementation. With respect to this, the current restructuring of our Organization's machinery
in the economic and social domains, which has included the creation of a high office in the Secretariat, entrusted to Mr. Kenneth Dadzie, increases our confidence in the capacities of the system. The implementation of the General Assembly resolution [resolution 32/197] should be continued, especially with regard to strengthening the role and increasing the effectiveness of the Economic and Social Council.
58.	I should, however, like to point out one serious and paradoxical short-coming in our complex system, and that is the lack of any framework for genuine discussion on the fundamental issue of energy. By that I mean not the "energy crisis" that made headlines in the press but the crisis facing us, the one that must compel us all to adopt an active policy to conserve energy, which my country has embarked on with determination and success; the crisis that forces us to make a difficult, yes, but inevitable choice between various sources of energy with due regard for the balanced development of the entire planet, for the protection of our natural and man-made environment and for nuclear energy by guaranteeing that it will be used for peaceful purposes. To this end, while France has banned the export of sensitive equipment that could facilitate access to nuclear weapons, it is also anxious not to deprive any country of the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy or the advantages of the most promising technologies. For this reason we have agreed, pending the results of consultations under way in the framework of the international nuclear fuel-cycle evaluation programme, to provide our eventual partners with every service in the fuel cycle.
59.	The problem of energy, therefore, needs to be approached globally, without any spirit of confrontation, in order to take into consideration the interests of the international community as a whole. I thus welcome as a positive element resolution 1978/61 passed by the Economic and Social Council which retains the principle of an international conference on new and renewable sources of energy. The French Government will take an active part in preparing that conference.
60.	With regard to the 1980 special session of the General Assembly, we regret that the work of the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, known as the Committee of the Whole, is to be suspended, this being an irreplaceable forum for pursuing the North-South dialogue to which France is committed. Certainly starting such a dialogue on economic and development problems at the world level is an ambitious and arduous undertaking whose difficulties I underestimate less than anyone. Some divergences have become apparent on the interpretation of certain aspects of the mandate of the Committee. Nevertheless, the formula that found acceptance at the start of the month with a large majority of delegations is still entirely valid, in our view, and should enable the Committee, with the active collaboration of one and all, to tackle the main problems at last.
61.	Without the security to which our nations are rightfully entitled, no development is in effect possible. Yet security should not command an excessive share of our resources. In other words, the disarmament undertaking is an obvious necessity and one that should concern us all.
62.	The tenth special session of the General Assembly, by malting it quite clear that disarmament should be the affair of the entire international community and not of just a few State, has at last placed the debate in its real perspective.
This is not the only thing to its credit; it also provided us with the means to pursue the undertaking.
63.	In this matter, no one should entertain doubts about France's determination. The participation of the President of the Republic in person in the work of the special session attests to this. The presence of France in the place reserved for it in the new Committee on Disarmament, a presence that I now officially announce from this rostrum, confirms that this momentum will be maintained.
64.	The recognition of the central role that should fall to the United Nations and the concomitant reform of the machinery for negotiation and deliberation, with greater participation, better regional equilibrium and more democratic functioning through the dismantling of the co-presidency in Geneva, guarantee, in our view, that a new phase can now be entered. It has, therefore, become possible for France to join the Committee. It has become necessary for us to assume the role dictated by the importance of the stakes, for all our States.
65.	I should like to pay a special tribute at this point to the President of the special session, who was also the President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly, Mr. Lazar Mojsov, whose political understanding, dedication and great competence were invaluable to him in successfully carrying out the mission entrusted to him by the Assembly.
66.	With the help of revised machinery, the work envisaged last June could now begin. A set of principles and a time-table have already provided useful reference points, although we believe that in certain areas, notably in the nuclear domain, a different wording would have been better suited to the realities of the situation. This document, which is an attempt to cover a set of particularly complex and sensitive problems, nevertheless bears witness to a remarkable consensus within the community of nations on several key points.
67.	Let me mention: the right of all States to security; the special responsibility that must be shouldered by the great Powers in the area of disarmament, since they themselves recognize that they have arsenals far in excess of the requirements of strategic balance; the importance not only of nuclear but also of conventional disarmament, in view of the fact that the build-up of conventional weapons, particularly in Europe, constitutes an increasingly serious threat to peace; the need for effective monitoring of disarmament measures; and, finally, the allocation of funds thus freed for economic and social development.
68.	France has, moreover, presented concrete suggestions on some of these points which should be studied right here or in specialized bodies. I am referring to proposals for a satellite monitoring agency and a disarmament fund for development, as well as the establishment of an institute for disarmament studies, all initiatives whose usefulness has been widely recognized.

69.	The realistic approach to disarmament that should be encouraged leads us to recommend that measures of a regional nature be studied. It is within this framework that balanced solutions can be found which take into account the role deterrence plays in the security of part of the planet. We have therefore proposed to the countries interested in the security of the European continent that a conference on disarmament be convened.
70.	A regional consultation could also bolster efforts to limit the transfer of conventional arms. The geographical entity that a region constitutes is most often an arena for threats just as it is for co-operation. So it is at this level that the exigencies of each State's right to security and those of non-discrimination among partners must be assessed. Real progress cannot be made from the outside, by some cartel of producers or through unilateral actions. It can be based only on the common will of the interested States and their common understanding of the purpose and scope of a verifiable regional agreement. In this context the initiative recently taken by a group of Latin American countries sets an example and should be commended.
71.	I am addressing this Assembly as the representative of a country that is mindful of its independence and intent on preserving it. But mine is also a country convinced of the growing solidarity which links together all the countries of our planet. In the face of the crises, upheavals and threats of all kinds to which our peoples are exposed, none of us—whether a small, medium-sized or even very large Power-can expect to act alone and emerge unscathed. Co-operation is no longer a choice; it is a necessity that we must accept. Let us give it the means to grow stronger here.
72.	We must of course be realistic. Disunity too often pervades this privileged gathering place. Resistance to change is tenacious. And much imagination and political determination will be needed, it is true, to ensure that man, wherever he lives and whatever his race, religion or national origin, will enjoy personal dignity, a fair share of the world's resources and a part of the responsibility for decisions that concern him.
73.	"As the strange dawn of the third millennium draws closer", as the President of the Republic said in this very forum last May,12 the undertaking offers enormous scope for our intelligence and efforts. France for its part is determined to take part in it.
﻿107.	







108.	Mr. President, let me first extend to you my congratulations on your election. Your experience and skill will help to ensure a fruitful
Assembly session. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Mojsov of Yugoslavia, who ably led the Assembly through no less than four sessions during his year of office.
109.	When the United Nations was established at the end of the Second World War, the British Empire covered one eighth of the world's land surface and had a population of over 500 million. In the years since then, 35 independent States have emerged from among the people and territories that made up that Empire and have taken their place among the nations of the world. There can be no clearer testimony to the commitment of successive British Governments to the principle of self-determination.
110.	Today we are left with a handful of small dependent Territories which, because of their particular circumstances, have not become independent States.
111.	It has been the firm policy of the present British Government to give every encouragement and support to those Territories which seek independence. It was in fulfilment of that policy that Solomon Islands became an independent nation earlier this year and so the one hundred and fiftieth Member of the United Nations. In a few days' time, on 1 October, yet another country, Tuvalu, will celebrate its independence and will apply for membership in the specialized agencies. The Gilbert Islands have already reached the stage of full internal self-government, and we hope they will achieve independence in 1979. In the Anglo-French condominium of the New Hebrides, a programme has been agreed which will lead to independence by 1980. Among the West Indies Associated States, which are in voluntary association with Britain, Dominica will move to independence on 3 November this year. Discussions are continuing on the constitutional future of the other States.
112.	Our policy is to respect the wish of the peoples of our remaining dependent Territories to determine their own future in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter, to uphold that Charter in all its respects, and to put support for the United Nations at the centre of our foreign policy.
113.	People all over the world read in their newspapers day by day graphic accounts of systematic murders, cold-blooded tortures and the debilitating ravages of famine and disease. They watch pictures on television of grotesque sufferings caused by the dictatorial actions of Governments or by natural disasters. Most people hope that those countries and agencies which can do so well take practical steps to alleviate this misery; they do not want to find themselves in similar circumstances. Discussion and words of condemnation or sympathy are not enough. Ordinary people want to see real evidence that those who offend against the norms of civilized society are not accepted as members of it and that the effects of malnutrition and monsoon are mitigated for everyone. One of the United Kingdom's major aims is to encourage the strengthening of the United Nations capacity to protect human rights.
114.	In upholding our Charter commitments, we, the Member States, must pay more attention to the mechanics of how in our daily business we move from dialogue to negotiation, from general principles to specific detailed agreements, from rhetoric to action and from general support to binding commitments. No world organization can ever build up its strength, authority and effectiveness without developing and adopting a machinery which would enable its member States as a whole to make decisions sure in the knowledge that they will be carried out. It is, of course, not a new problem, but it is an urgent one. It is not enough to have a dialogue between rich and poor to redress inequalities. The millions outside looking in on our meetings, debates, special sessions and committees rightly expect progress. Most of them are realistic -- they recognize the limitations; but once year at least we should examine our record objectively and seek to learn from the past year to improve our performance for the coming year.
115.	It cannot yet be said our people have fully appreciated the immense importance of the relationship between the developed and the developing countries. The North- South dialogue in which we are engaged is not an elaborate stalking operation, where bureaucrats spend days and weeks locked in discussions which produce little agreement. It is potentially a deeply divisive issue and a central factor in world economic management. It can mean literally life or death for millions. There is a challenge here for the Governments of all countries. For the more developed countries the challenge is to be prepared for adaptation and change in the creation and distribution of new wealth in the world, and to generate the fullest public support for tackling the great disparity between the standards of life in fortunate countries, such as mine, and those which obtain over vast areas of the globe. For the less developed countries the challenge is to maintain the necessary disciplines both to enable them to achieve a rapid but stable expansion, with an equitable sharing of the benefits, and to continue to take part constructively in the search for an agreed approach to the problems and a shared responsibility for finding solutions.
116.	It would be a failure of statesmanship on both sides if the North-South dialogue, as in the early 1970s, became again an exchange of sterile slogans between spokesmen for the developing countries on the one hand and spokesmen for the developed countries on the other. Conducted in these terms the dialogue becomes a forum for rhetoric and confrontation instead of a co-operative enterprise from which all our countries and all our peoples will gain. We have risen above this, but we have not yet focused our attention collectively, and with understanding, on the specific problems: for example the optimal management .of the world's limited resources of raw materials, energy, finance, the transfer of resources from the rich to the poorer countries, and the problem of coping imaginatively with problems of adjustment so that the output of the newly industrialized countries can find its place in the world's markets. We will need more understanding, greater political resolve and imagination in the months ahead as we approach the fifth session of UNCTAD in May of next year and the special session in 1980. The United Kingdom recently decided that, as part of our aid policy, we would take immediate steps to relieve the debt burden of the poorest countries. The total amount of principal and interest involved in some £900 million, or $1.8 billion. This was a decision to give practical expression to the agreement negotiated within UNCTAD. It reflects our willingness to take action to show low genuine compromises can be achieved within the North-South dialogue. So far seven countries have taken a similar decision. For us it was a tough, political decision, which will undeniably cost jobs at home and be a charge on our balance of payments. There is no comfortable solution. Politicians will have to fight for these measures in the world; and then defend them at home.	
117.	Understanding and imagination will need to be shown by those relatively rich countries which at present stand aside from the common efforts of the rest of the world to help the developing countries. I believe that the Soviet Union and its partners are beginning to realize that there is a growing recognition among developing countries of the irrelevance of the time-worn excuse that the so-called "colonial legacy" of former imperial Powers means that the Communist countries can absolve themselves of any responsibility for helping the developing countries. I hope they also realize that the increasingly close economic interrelationships between countries of different systems and at different levels of development give all countries a- shared interest in helping the less fortunate to make progress.
118.	The divide between rich and poor is everyone's problem and everyone's responsibility. The economics of all countries are now so closely interlinked that none of us can find solutions by battening down the hatches and hoping to find some isolated-or protected-salvation. On the contrary, continued economic growth in the developing countries has an important part to play in supporting the health of the world economy. But the scope for sustained growth in the developing countries will of course be limited until the economies of the industrialized countries move out of recession- Recession in the West-or North—means receding hopes for the economies of the South. This is the reality and this is one of the reasons why my Government has spared no effort this year to bring about concerted action to restore confidence and growth round the world. The results of the July Bonn Economic Summit Conference show that there is a collective understanding at the highest level in the Western world of the need to stimulate growth, to make the most of our scarce energy resources, to avoid taking precipitate protectionist action and to get increased resources flowing 'to those countries where they are most needed.
119.	A major and acknowledged obstacle to these endeavours is the vast accumulation of military power which drains away scarce resources urgently needed for economic and social development. Four months ago here in this Assembly Heads of Government and Foreign Ministers attended the tenth special session on disarmament. We hoped to see moves to check this process of gathering and spending of money on armaments and take some practical action towards arms control and disarmament.
120.	Where did we get? While all States in the United Nations agreed on a Final Document [resolution S-10/2] expressing for the first time the views of all Member States on disarmament, much of it was so watered down that one gets the impression that everyone is in favour of disarmament until the moment that any proposal could actually affect them. The session admittedly encouraged more
States to take an active interest in disarmament. Two nuclear-weapon States which previously had not been involved in multilateral discussion of disarmament following the reform of the negotiating committee in Geneva will, it is hoped, now participate, and this is a welcome step. The involvement of non-governmental organizations in the debate was helpful and the special session stimulated greater public interest. The United Kingdom and other nuclear-weapon States gave the non-nuclear-weapon States important assurances that they would not be the subject of nuclear attack.
121.	The need for action to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons—one of the most crucial issues facing mankind- was recognized. But the dilemma of how to make available to all who need them the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear, energy without the risk of weapons proliferation was not squarely faced. My country has for some years made a financial sacrifice in not exporting some civilian nuclear equipment, materials and technology because of a fear of adding to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The existence of adequate safeguards to ensure that there is no fear of adding to the proliferation of nuclear weapons is also an essential condition of nuclear exports from the United Kingdom. But sophisticated countries still compete ruthlessly in the nuclear market place, and nuclear installations have become symbols of national sovereignty, so that any unwillingness to supply is wrongly seen as a political act. The Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1980 must look deeply at these matters, for I believe that it is possible for the equipment and services which are essential to a successful civil nuclear industry to be made available while minimizing the proliferation risk. Of course, one way to reinforce the non-proliferation regime is through the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones.
122.	It was natural that many countries at the special session should place the emphasis on nuclear disarmament. That must be the major concern. But let us not forget that four fifths of the military expenditure in the world goes on conventional forces and weapons. The system of nuclear deterrence has helped to keep the peace in Europe for over 30 years. But what has happened elsewhere? According to one estimate, there have been over 120 wars in the world since 1945. Not one day has passed in which a war was not being fought somewhere in the world. War casualties since 1945 number tens of millions, all caused by conventional weapons.
123.	We should give more attention to conventional arms control. The Final Document of the special session makes a negligible contribution to balanced reductions in military budgets and a halt to the world-wide build-up of conventional weapons. The brief and rather qualified reference to consultations on limiting transfers of conventional weapons is inadequate. The passage on reduction of military budgets is general and, unlike the Western draft programme of action, does not call for the testing of a means of measuring budgets so that actual reductions can be planned, with all the social and economic benefits that could ensue. In short, do not let anyone delude himself: an historic opportunity has been missed and we must resolve to achieve more at the next special session on disarmament. Otherwise another expensive session and a stream of words
will produce cynicism rather than commitment. A major reform is needed in the way we negotiate the final document. The political leaders make the speeches, but the final document is negotiated by officials. One senses in reading the words no clash of political view, no give-and- take. We appear to talk at each other rather than to each other, and so the bureaucratisation of international politics relentlessly proceeds. Declarations, principles abound, but action is relegated to second place.
124.	At least in the bilateral negotiations being conducted between the United States and the Soviet Union to achieve a second strategic arms limitation agreement, one is aware of a political debate at the highest level between Presidents and Foreign Ministers. This is a vitally important negotiation and needs to be followed as soon as possible by further reductions in strategic offensive weapons as well as by controls on qualitative improvement.
125.	My country, the United States and the Soviet Union are involved in negotiations on a comprehensive test ban. This would be entirely non-discriminatory; it could, if properly designed, curb the development of nuclear weapons and hinder their spread to more countries. We should like to see the widest possible adherence to the treaty, but that will only come if the non-nuclear-weapon States see the nuclear States as making a step-like change downwards in their development programme. There are some who want to take no action and to continue testing without any impediment to their scientific and technical plans- oblivious of the wider implications that would have for those States that need to be persuaded not to engage in testing themselves.
126.	Another priority is to maintain and accelerate the momentum injected recently into the Vienna talks on mutual and balanced reduction of forces in Central Europe. The Eastern response to the latest Western proposals has been encouraging, although serious difficulties remain unresolved. The Western participants will be ready at the right moment to propose that the talks be raised to ministerial level. Without this kind of political input, caution will predominate, the years will go by, and we shall all complain about the gap or the imbalance in forces while it widens before our very eyes, as it has done in every year that the negotiations have continued. The prize for us all is an agreement providing a more stable relationship and a lower level of military confrontation in Europe. It could be a major achievement in arms control and detente, but it will not be achieved at the present tempo and style of the negotiations.
127.	In one key area-peace-keeping—the United Nations has responded extremely well throughout the year. My Government is totally committed to the concept of United
• Nations peace-keeping. With our fellow-members of the European Community we shall be appealing to all members of the United Nations to reaffirm their support for United Nations peace-keeping measures. We have backed this support of principle with men, facilities and money.
128.	We have recently reviewed our own national capacity to assist in the preparation and conduct of peace-keeping operations, and I am pleased to be able to make the following offer of support, which is in addition to our current contribution to United Nations forces in Cyprus
and Lebanon. If requested, and subject to national commitments and exigencies, the United Kingdom will make available an infantry battalion group or a Royal Marine commando group for up to six months. The force will be available at seven days' notice and we shall airlift the force and its equipment to the area of operation. We shall also be willing to provide a small number of military personnel for duty as observers, and we shall consider as sympathetically as possible requests for other types of forces or forms of military assistance. In view of the experience which the United Kingdom armed forces have acquired in peacekeeping, we stand ready to share our knowledge and experience with others.
129.	When I addressed this Assembly a year ago,  I singled out Lebanon as an example of a situation where the United Nations should be involved in trying to resolve a major crisis before it occurred. In retrospect, I think we would all wish it had been possible to take more preventive action in spite of the difficulties. It took the Israeli military involvement in south Lebanon last March to make the international community fully aware of the vital need for the United Nations to play a part in that troubled country. Thereafter, the Security Council acted with admirable speed in securing the creation of UNIFIL to bring about the withdrawal of Israeli forces and to help the Lebanese Government to reintroduce its authority in the south. UNIFIL has undertaken its task with remarkable tenacity. It has faced great obstacles, but has nevertheless progressively fulfilled its mandate by military courage and skilful diplomacy. Already it has carried out the first part of its mandate; the complete withdrawal of Israeli forces has been effected. The difficult task of restoring the authority of the central Government in the south still lies ahead.
130.	But this is not a problem they can solve in isolation. A solution to the problems in the south depends on a solution to the larger political crisis which still racks Lebanon. All Members of the United Nations committed to the restoration of the authority of the Lebanese Government throughout the country should make a determined effort to work urgently for a political solution to Lebanon's problems. Only a political solution can guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon and put an end to the internal fighting which threatens to destroy the country.
131.	Peace in Lebanon depends also upon a solution to the wider conflict between Israelis and Arabs. The Camp David meetings have given renewed hope that a just, durable and comprehensive settlement can be achieved. Many major questions remain to be resolved, and I do not underestimate the difficulties. Nevertheless, the gap between the two sides has narrowed significantly. 1 believe that the success of the Camp David framework agreement  was because it did get into detail, not just declare principles, and because it involved the two Presidents and the Prime Minister. The detailed provisions in the Sinai Accord for demilitarization, force reductions and United Nations involvement  are something which my Government has long advocated. The Camp David agreements provide, too, a reasonable basis on which realistic interim arrangements for the most difficult problem, the West Bank, can now, given the will, be negotiated in greater detail.
132.	Those who condemned the agreements so hastily should, look at them again more carefully. They are based upon the principles of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and upon the international consensus in its favour. A perfect settlement cannot be achieved by exchanging declarations of principle any more than by making speeches at one another. Politicians have to be prepared to get down to what I term the "nitty-gritty" detail and then explain and defend the position to their own people. For our part, we have set out on a number of occasions—in particular in the statement on the Middle East made by the European Council in London on 29 June 1977-our views on the principles which should govern a peace settlement. The Camp David agreements are a positive step in that direction and they have our full support.
133.	Another major initiative has been that undertaken with regard to Namibia. We will be debating this issue in the Security Council, and I will reserve my remarks until then. But the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations Transition Assistance Group, the political commitment and atmosphere of patient diplomacy that has characterized the whole process, is an example of how the United Nations can act. At all times these negotiations have involved political leaders, whether foreign ministers or nationalist leaders, and their officials and supporters. African nations and leaders, as well as those of us outside Africa, have worked for an African solution and an international solution. It would be a tragedy for southern Africa if, at this late stage, the opportunity for Namibia to become independent was rejected. The alternatives—another Transkei, continued fighting and an escalating confrontation between South Africa and the world-would represent a shameful retreat from the ideals to which all parties have, I believe, been committed. Yet success here could not fail to have an impact upon the fundamental issue of racialism which haunts southern Africa, besides giving hope for a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia.
134.	Racism is one of the greatest evils which we face in the world community today and, in this International Anti-Apartheid Year, it is imperative that we should make clear our absolute, united condemnation of apartheid.
135.	Sadly, we see no real sign of movement towards fundamental change in South Africa since the General Assembly last met, but the message must go out again. Change is inevitable, and time is not on our side if that change is to be peaceful.
136.	At the time we meet, a new State President and Prime Minister are about to be chosen in South Africa. I
hope that these new leaders will respond to what I believe to be the true aspirations of the South African people for change, and will show courage and resolution in bringing that country back to its place in our community of nations. I believe that a united South Africa, through the efforts of all its people, can meet this challenge in the knowledge that failure will have the gravest consequences not only for the people of South Africa but for the world as a whole.
137.	Africa, and all of us outside Africa, are pledged to bring about majority rule, a return to legality, and independence in Zimbabwe. We want to do so without further bloodshed and in a way acceptable to the people as a whole. The objective for us all is a non-racial society in an independent Zimbabwe.
138.	The gravity of the present situation cannot be exaggerated. Deaths in the war have been over 3,000 this year. Civilian casualties since 1972 include nearly 3,000 Africans and some 600 whites. Intimidation and fear grow daily; atrocities have been committed on all sides. There is a growing refugee problem both inside and outside the country. One thousand people per week flee to Botswana. Inside Rhodesia the rural population affected by the war is fleeing to the cities, homeless and jobless. If the war continues, and the farmers do not plant and sow for next year, there are growing prospects of widespread famine in a country once endowed with plenty.
139.	The effect on the economic stability of southern Africa is now marked. There is a danger of foreign intervention and of embroiling the whole of Africa in a conflict out of all proportion to its original dimensions. The threat to the security of neighbouring States—Zambia, Botswana, Mozambique-is already only too evident, and has been highlighted by the latest raids into Mozambique.
140.	The < United Kingdom has never administered Rhodesia. In 1965 following the unilateral declaration of independence we came to the United Nations because we decided then, and have not shifted from that view since, that the United Kingdom acting alone could not end the rebellion and bring about majority rule. We accept our responsibilities and have tried to live up to them.
141.	We have striven for a negotiated settlement on the basis of the principles endorsed by the United Nations and the principles approved by the British Parliament. One of these principles is that, before granting independence, it must be established that any settlement is acceptable to the people of the country as a whole.
142.	Progress has been slow, but, encouraged by the support of many African States and the international community, we are urgently making every effort, together with the Americans, to bring about a satisfactory solution. But no one, including Britain and the United States, has a magic formula for peace in Zimbabwe. Ultimately it is for the people to decide the basis of their independence. It is not for any of us to impose a particular constitution or a particular leader on Zimbabwe.
143.	It is frankly recognized in private but often ignored in public rhetoric that, in contrast to most other liberation struggles, the Zimbabwean nationalist movement is not united. Its divisions are long-standing and have constantly bedevilled negotiations. It has been a major tactic of the regime to exploit these differences. It has never been part of our philosophy to seek to split the liberation movement or to widen divisions between the nationalists. Greater unity within the nationalist movement would make a comprehensive settlement far easier and a cease-fire a reality. The OAU has wisely endorsed the right of all the leaders to participate in elections. There must be no exclusions; we want an inclusive settlement.
144.	We are committed to working by persuasion and negotiation: we cannot impose, and this is a restraint which is not always recognized.
145.	Most of us in the United Nations support the objectives of freedom and of independence of the various liberation movements in southern Africa. Some support the armed struggle. My Government does not supply arms. To do so would gravely inhibit our ability to work for a negotiated settlement between all the parties to the conflict. I regret, though acknowledge, that many people have felt driven to take part in the armed conflict. No one can deny that this struggle has had a considerable effect, in addition to sanctions and diplomatic pressures, in making the possibility of majority rule a real one. Yet if the armed struggle continues with no negotiations it will result in massive damage to Zimbabwe: not just to its economy but perhaps above all to the chances of its being a non-racial society.
146.	Armed intervention by the United Kingdom ".vas ruled out in 1965 and there is no question of Britain or any other Western Power sending troops now to impose a settlement. We have committed ourselves to seek a solution through the international community and in the context of the Anglo-American proposals published on 1 September last year  and debated in the Security Council. Within that framework, we will honour our obligations, play a major part in any settlement, and contribute fully in terms of money, manpower and expertise. But we are not about to assume a colonial role which we have never exercised, which was rejected in 1965, and which is even more inappropriate in 1978.
147.	My Government's objective is to do everything possible to bring about a peaceful settlement through negotiations providing for majority rule and independence on a basis acceptable to the people of Zimbabwe as a whole.
148.	We have listened carefully to the criticisms of the detailed proposals we put forward a year ago. We have been trying to find common ground and, in elaborating and refining our proposals, we have had to take account of the strong views of those of the parties who wish to reduce the powers of the proposed resident commissioner. After the Geneva Conference i7 we thought that the inability of the parties to agree on a form of power-sharing could be quickly circumvented only by giving powers to the resident commissioner. Events have shown that judgement to be wise. We never sought those powers for ourselves; they were 
onerous and difficult. We willingly proposed that they should be exercised in concert with the United Nations. We advocated a special representative of the Secretary-General, a United Nations peace-keeping force and a United Nations civilian police element to monitor the existing police force. We have wasted a year arguing about the powers of the resident commissioner. I hope now, that after our consultations with the parties, we have found a workable formula for an executive and legislative council with powers on law and order reserved to the resident commissioner.
149. We now must agree on: the balance of representation on the council and the decision-making procedure; the appointment of a resident commissioner and the length of time he should remain; the timing of elections and the timing of independence; the details of the proposals put forward by the resident commissioner designate for the Zimbabwe national army and already explained in the presence of General Prem Chand to all the parties; the establishment of a unified command of all armies; the time-table for a cease-fire; and the structure of the United Nations Zimbabwe force.
350. We have presented some of these proposals to the parties in the form of options. We have not issued ultimatums. The detail is negotiable, but, if the parties continue to argue over the structure of a settlement, then-let us" be clear-the war will continue, and the bloodshed will increase; and neither the United Kingdom nor the United States will be able to prevent a fight to the finish.
151. All these preparations have been done in the belief that it is necessary to prepare the ground for final negotiations. Nothing has been pre-empted. The parties must decide for themselves; yet no decisions can be made without compromise. If they agree, then the United Kingdom is poised to enact the necessary legislation immediately. I hope the Security Council would then pass the necessary resolution for the establishment of a United Nations Zimbabwe force as speedily as in the case of Lebanon. In playing a neutral role as peace-keeper, the United Nations has never been partisan. The United Nations will stand up for the rights of all the people of Zimbabwe, as it will for the people of Namibia.
152.	This is a critical moment: if we are to prevent the escalation which could take all parties over the brink, then the voice of the international community must make itself heard in support of a negotiated solution and of our proposals. More insistent still is the voice of the people of Zimbabwe themselves, weary of war and seeking a just peace. They want a settlement; they want an all-party conference; they want majority rule; and above all they want peace.
153.	That is our commitment. We are actively preparing the ground now for round-table talks. I hope we can in the near future issue invitations to all the parties to come to negotiate a final settlement for an independent Zimbabwe. I hope that all of us as Members of the United Nations will do everything in our power to make such a meeting a success. The next few months in southern Africa are critical for us all, and the United Nations has, in my view, a major role to play. 

  





﻿




1.	Mr. President, may I extend to you on behalf of my delegation and myself our warm felicitations on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. Your elevation to this high office is as much a tribute to your diplomatic skill and eminence as it is a recognition of the constructive role played by your country, Colombia, in world affairs.
2.	We are glad to welcome on this occasion the Solomon Islands as the one hundred and fiftieth and youngest Member of the United Nations. We have every hope that this newest partner of the family of nations will make a useful contribution to the work of this world body.
3.	Enduring peace, the maintenance of which is one of the principal purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, is the age-old aspiration of mail. It is one of the abiding yearnings of the common man in all parts of our planet. It is both an elemental urge, like freedom from starvation and want, and the ultimate objective of every society. It is the yardstick with which to measure the excellence of any social organization; a happy society is where peace reigns supreme. That is why the prayers of all, irrespective of religion and belief, end with an invocation to peace.
4.	And yet, in spite of centuries of care and nourishment bestowed upon it, world peace still remains a tender plant buffeted by occasional whiffs of cold war, threatened by injustice and inequity, and dwarfed by the indignities that are still heaped by man upon man.
5.	Even though the clouds gathering over the international horizon have lifted of late and the process of detente,
6.	One of the principal causes of the continuing threat to peace is that world politics, as well as the world economy, are dominated by the interests of a few countries. That is not a new phenomenon; it has its roots in history. The compulsion to gain strategic advantages and the propensity to exploit differences continue to characterize the international climate. Institutions of multilateral militarism are being maintained and the urge to deploy them for sectarian purposes is growing instead of diminishing. Some of those institutions are known to have lost their relevance or usefulness, yet the political courage to bury them is lacking.
7.	There is no doubt that the big Powers could do a great deal more to improve the international atmosphere by exemplary behaviour and by displaying greater understanding of each other's legitimate interests, but that understanding must be within the framework of an equitable international order in which smaller and medium-sized countries would enjoy assured peace, equality and justice. Without a genuine acceptance of the principle of peaceful coexistence, the desire to live and let live and the determination to convert cold-war confrontation into competitive co-operation, the process of detente will not show the desired results.
8.	Detente is only a first step in creating the climate for finding long-term solutions to problems with a view to achieving durable peace. We welcome The process of detente because of its multiplier effect, if it is pursued in the right spirit. We have therefore been urging its extension to all fields of activity and to all parts of the globe.
9.	Each member of this body is endowed with its own national genius and its distinctive national personality and ethos. Each follows its own socio-economic system and has its specific pattern and strategy of development. Any attempts to impose conformity based on ideological and other considerations and to reduce the rich diversity of nations 
 to a common denominator will not only divest this world of its infinite variety but also pose serious threats to peace.
10.	The Charter prohibits the use of force save in self-defence or in the common interest and requires the settlement of disputes by peaceful means, yet nations have resorted to force against each other, quite often aided and abetted from outside with the consequent dangers of exploitation and domination. We have seen that, while such conflicts may sometimes be brought to an end as a result of external intervention, the cessation of hostilities is seldom followed by genuine peace. The root-cause of the conflict often remains unresolved while the strategic interests of outside parties become deeply entrenched.
11.	In the long run, disputes and conflicts can be amicably settled only through mutual understanding and accommodation. By building solid foundations, of mutual cooperation, nations can develop a stake in peace, stability and good neighbourliness which will be impervious to the outbursts of momentary differences, which are bound to apse from time to time,
12.	As recommended in the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers, for Foreign Affairs, of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Belgrade in July 1978 [A/33/206, annex I], governments involved in disputes should themselves make every, effort to reach a peaceful settlement through bilateral negotiations. Some regional organizations, as well as the United Nations, itself; provide- mechanisms for conciliation, although their efficacy obviously den-ends on the spirit, goodwill and mutual accommodation that the parties themselves, can show,
13.	Peace continues to be endangered also because the resolution of major international disputes has been delayed or neglected for far too long. Differences among nations, as among, individuals, if not resolved expeditiously, tend to erode trust, which is the basic pre-condition for resolving them.
14. By far the most potent threat to world peace is the continuing arms race, particularly in nuclear armaments. It militates against the fundamental objective of the United Nations "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". The arms race undermines the sovereignty and stability of nations. It goes against such principles of the Charter as refraining from the threat or the use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It is contrary also to the objectives of the international community to establish a New International Economic Order. We must keep reminding ourselves of the relationship between disarmament -- which could save up to 400 billion annually of unproductive expenditure - and development, which is chronically hampered by the lack of funds.  The contrast is unavoidable and the irony is inescapable. There is no greater distortion of resource allocation at the global level than that of those devoted to the arms race. 

15. Decades of efforts have yielded only a few arms limitations measures, such as the prohibition of certain kinds of nuclear tests, the agreement on the limitation of strategic arms and the prohibition of bacteriological weapons. 

16.	In spite of three rounds of talks on the Indian Ocean between the United States and the Soviet Union, there is no perceptible movement towards the goal of implementing the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)]. What is ironic is that the littoral countries, which are affected most by the big-Power rivalry in the Ocean, are not directly involved in those talks. We have been told that the talks will be resumed shortly and we trust that this will lead to the speedy elimination of big-Power rivalry and military presence in the Indian Ocean, thereby facilitating the implementation of the General Assembly resolution declaring the Indian Ocean a zone of peace.
17.	In the field of nuclear disarmament there has been little real progress. That is indeed disturbing because of the threat that nuclear weapons pose to the very survival of mankind. The nature of the current negotiations and their direction are not such as to assure mankind that the probability of a nuclear war will be reduced, even if not removed. We, the non-nuclear-weapon States, are entitled to that assurance, for the right to survival is basic to all other rights. We cannot, therefore, be indifferent to the outcome of the current negotiations. On the contrary, we would expect them to take fully into account the aspirations of the overwhelming majority for peace and security in a world free of weapons of mass destruction.
18.	India believes that partial measures such as the creation of zones free of nuclear weapons comprising the nuclear "have-nots" are not likely to generate any genuine feeling of security unless there is, at the same time, significant progress towards nuclear disarmament. Surely, the more urgent task is to reach agreement on measures for the non-use and the phased reduction and elimination of nuclear weapons and on a moratorium on all nuclear tests pending the conclusion of a genuine and non-discriminatory comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. It was with this in view that at the tenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, India took the initiative of submitting two draft resolutions covering these two aspects of disarmament.3
19.	The final objective must of course be to bring about general and complete disarmament under effective international control,, to which we, all subscribed in the historic resolution adopted by the General Assembly in November 1959 [resolution 1378 (XIV)]. It was obvious, then as it is obvious now that, disarmament should, be general in the sense of its universal application and it should be complete in the sense of its covering all weapon systems.
20.;	We. continue to believe that all aspects of disarmament both nuclear and conventional, are important. Yet, it has been our consistent, policy that nuclear disarmament must be given the topmost priority. The foremost task facing, humanity is to dismantle and to destroy nuclear weapon. The . concept of a security system of which nuclear weapons, represent the most dangerous and totally unacceptable component must be abandoned.
21.	We. must recognize and accept the primary role of the United. Nations in this field, It is a matter of great
satisfaction to us that the special session succeeded in bringing disarmament deliberations and negotiations squarely within the United Nations.
22.	It is the considered view of the Government of India that if we are to make progress in moving towards our goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control, we should implement the following six measures: first, the cessation of the qualitative improvement and development of nuclear weapons, including, in particular, the early conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty, pending the achievement of which there should be a moratorium on the further testing of nuclear weapons; secondly, the cessation of the production of nuclear weapons and of fissionable material for nuclear purposes; thirdly, the reduction and eventual elimination of existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons within an agreed timeframe; fourthly, the conclusion of a convention oh the non«use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances; fifthly, the elimination of all other weapons of mass destruction; and sixthly, the limitation and gradual reduction of armed forces and conventional weapons within the framework of a comprehensive programme of disarmament.
23.	Apart from the disarmament problem, there are other major issues of global concern which, if not resolved expeditiously and in a just and fair manner, could tear asunder the fragile fabric of world peace.
24.	In the Middle East there are at present some new moves and counter-moves and in the current fluid situation, when the parties themselves are engaged in reassessing developments, it would be premature for us to pronounce any judgement. Suffice it to say that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) and the relevant General Assembly resolutions on the Palestine question constitute a principled basis for a comprehensive and lasting peace settlement. We should like to reaffirm in this connexion certain principles that are fundamental for the establishment of enduring peace. These are  the non-acquisition of territory by force and the vacation of Arab and Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967; the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and to a nation-State of their own; and the right of all States in the Middle East to exist in security and peace within internationally recognized boundaries.
25.	The situation in Lebanon is a source of continuing concern for all of us. Here is an unfortunate country which has fallen prey to the power politics of the Middle East and where at the moment, by a strange twist of fate, Arabs are killing other Arabs, encouraged and assisted by outside forces. There is no doubt in our mind that, first and foremost, national reconciliation in Lebanon must be achieved in order to immunize the country from external pressures. I am glad that the parties concerned have responded positively to the Security Council's call for an immediate cease-fire. It is important that the cease-fire should be scrupulously maintained. I hope that initiatives for a just and honourable reconciliation will be supported by all peace-loving peoples.
26.	Although the situation in divided Cyprus has remained peaceful during the past year, chiefly due to the presence of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, there
has been no progress either in regard to the withdrawal of foreign forces or in the search for an agreed basis for the resumption of the intercommunal negotiations. The dimensions of the Cyprus problem, both the external and internal aspects, are such that the problem can be solved by peaceful means provided that the parties concerned recognize the legitimate rights and interests of each other and are willing to display a spirit of mutual accommodation. However, no solution will last unless it respects the unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and non-alignment of Cyprus.
27.	The Preamble of the Charter reaffirms "faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations, large and small". This objective is directly related to the purpose of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. For peace does not He in a mere cessation of hostilities or a containment of conflicts, or even in disarmament measures concluded in a general environment of violence, coercion and subjugation. As Gandhi said: "The way to peace is the way to truth." Truth lies in equality and justice. An individual cannot pursue truth, the highest urge of his soul, unless he is able to exercise his fundamental freedoms and human rights.
28.	Nothing is more degrading to human dignity than the practice of discrimination on the ground of race. Similarly, a first step towards ensuring equality among nations is to take the process of decolonization to its logical conclusion.
29.	In southern Africa we continue to witness the most pernicious combination of colonial domination and racial discrimination. The minority white regime of South Africa, in a bid to preserve its privileges, has been subjecting the majority population to the worst forms of human degradation, including torture, brutal repression, slavery and the denial of all fundamental freedoms.
30.	The United Nations has been seized of this matter since India raised it for the first time in the first session of the General Assembly in 1946.4 Since then, the South African Government has openly and flagrantly flouted all United Nations resolutions, decisions and sanctions. It has done so partly e cause of the supporting defiance of United Nations resolutions by other countries. We must not let our reiteration of opposition to this racist policy become a mere ritual at annual sessions of the General Assembly. The international community cannot evade its responsibility for taking effective measures to liquidate the dehumanizing practice of apartheid.
31.	With the adoption of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) on 29 September there is some hope that the illegal occupation of Namibia by the South African Government can be ended peacefully. Namibia can emerge as an independent country with majority rule, not through the sham internal settlement whose promotion is sought by the South African regime, but only through full implementation of the Security Council resolution. If the South African Government rejects the plan approved by the
Security Council5 and reverts to its familiar path of intransigence and defiance of world public opinion, the armed liberation struggle is bound to be intensified. The Security Council would then be fully justified in invoking the application of measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.
32.	We believe that the present stalemate in Zimbabwe is largely due to the ambivalence of some Powers on the question of the internal settlement.6 The only effective way to end the stalemate and perpetuation of the illegal regime of Ian Smith is to transfer power to the elected majority on the basis of "one man, one vote", and an agreed plan for the transition to a genuine independence. Meanwhile we should continue the sanctions against the racist regime, widen their scope and apply them more rigorously.
33.	Decolonization, the elimination of racism and racial discrimination, and the economic liberation of peoples are essential pre-conditions for securing the fundamental rights of peoples and for the promotion of human dignity and the free exercise of human rights. Equally important is the need for national Governments to assume primary responsibility for safeguarding and promoting the fundamental freedoms of the individual.
34.	The historic mandate of the Indian people in favour of fundamental freedoms left no doubt regarding the deep-seated and basic commitment of our people to human values and human rights. We therefore attach great importance to the activities of the United Nations devoted to this important issue of our times.
35.	We cannot achieve a durable and just peace until there is a transformation of the very quality and structure of the present world order. Characterized by glaring inequalities and imbalances among nations and the widening chasm between the rich and the poor countries, the existing order works inexorably against the interests of the poorer countries.
36.	The prevalence of mass poverty among a sizeable portion of the world's population living in developing countries-as many as 800 million persons—is in large part attributable to the inequities of the present international economic system. Poverty breeds tension, debases human personality and makes a mockery of the achievements of science and technology.
37.	Recent developments have shown that basically there is an unwillingness on the part of the major developed countries to begin serious negotiations to restructure the world economic order. The Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, also known as the Committee of the Whole, was expected to be the supreme United Nations body to monitor, supervise and impart momentum to negotiations on major development issues in all United Nations forums. But, almost a year after its creation, it has not even got off the ground. We hope that
following a discussion of this subject in the plenary meetings an agreement will soon be reached enabling the Committee to resume its work on the basis of its original mandate.
38.	The developed countries have till now not agreed even to discuss at the international level the question of bringing about structural changes in their economies to achieve optimal utilization of world resources and specifically to facilitate increased imports from developing countries.
39.	Some of the developed countries have recently refused even to reiterate their commitment to attaining the target of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade (resolution 2626 (XXV)] of providing 0.7 per cent of their gross national product as official development assistance to developing countries.
40.	There is, on the other hand, a resurgence of protectionism in the developed market-economy countries in the form of an increase in the incidence and scope of selective non-tariff barriers as well as of anti-dumping duties.
41.	The measures that the developed countries are prepared to adopt are still in the nature of tinkering with the present world economic order and hesitant ad hoc concessions.
42.	The developed countries have sought to justify these retrogressive actions as a means of dealing with their admittedly real problems of unemployment and "stagnation". It should, however, be obvious that these short-term and short-sighted measures, apart from having disastrous consequences for the development prospects of the developing countries, are neither conducive to healthy growth of the world economy nor in their own long-term interests. No lasting solution to the malaise afflicting the world economy can be found until a concerted effort is made to provide adequate purchasing power to two-thirds of the world population. It is therefore incumbent upon the developed countries to adopt a global, comprehensive and long-term approach to deal with their present economic problems.
43.	This Assembly's call for the ushering in of a new era of international economic relations has given rise to worldwide expectations. We therefore cannot afford the present stalemate in the negotiations between the developed and the developing countries. We must exercise our collective will to continue the onward march towards our common goal. It is necessary: first, to conclude, well before the fifth session of UNCTAD, the ongoing negotiations to establish the common fund, adopting a code of conduct for the transfer of technology to developing countries for the extending of special preferential trade concessions to developing countries within the framework of the multilateral trade negotiations; secondly, to arrest the present protectionist trend by strictly adhering to the commitment not to raise fresh barriers, to dismantle existing protectionist barriers and to take positive steps to improve the access of the exports of developing countries to the markets of the developed countries; thirdly, to commence negotiations within a time-bound framework on other key issues having a vital bearing on the restructuring of the international economic system, such as concluding a comprehensive series of commodity agreements, ensuring an adequate flow of financial resources on a dependable basis and on the softest of terms and conditions, evolving a multilateral framework for debt renegotiation, reforming the international monetary system, formulating a code of conduct for transnational corporations, and so on; fourthly, to initiate negotiations with a view to adopting an international programme to set in motion an adjustment process in the world economy and to bring about structural changes in the economies of the developed countries geared to utilizing fully the development potentialities of the developing countries; fifthly, to formulate a new international development strategy conceived within the framework of the New International Economic Order embodying a set of consistent and interrelated goals and objectives and commitments to adopt time-bound means of attaining these objectives; and, sixthly, and finally, for the developing countries to go ail out to utilize the vast potentialities of mutual co-operation by strengthening existing links and forging new links of economic, commercial and technical collaboration.
44.	The negotiations which have been going on for about five years at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea have far-reaching implications for the efforts of the international community to evolve a new world order. While it has been possible to make headway on certain important issues, the main problem, that of establishing a regime for the exploitation of the resources of the sea-bed area lying outside the limits of national jurisdiction, remains unsettled. This is mainly due to the persistent hesitation of the major developed countries to recognize fully the legitimate interests of the developing countries in this common heritage of mankind. It is incumbent on all of us to ensure that the work of the Conference comes to a successful conclusion as expeditiously as possible. If, at this critical stage of the work of the Conference, any State adopts unilateral mining legislation, it will seriously affect the future negotiations to the detriment of the interests of the world community as a whole.
45.	On all these important issues, the non-aligned nations have always adopted a consistent and principled approach. From a small beginning in 1961, this movement has grown, within the span of two decades, into a mighty force, encompassing almost two-thirds of the countries of the world. The non-aligned movement not only has enabled the newly-independent nation's to consolidate their political freedom but has also given them the strength to resist all forms of foreign domination, overt and covert, obvious or subtle. It has thrown its weight in favour of international peace and justice.
46.	It is indeed heartening to note that some of the big countries that earlier used to frown upon the movement now recognize its role and its validity. The movement has been able to preserve its unity—despite multitudinous diversities of geography, race, language and religion, differing social and political systems and varying stages of economic development-because of its strict adherence to the principles of the equality of nations, large and small, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of others, and non-interference in the internal affairs of others.
47.	As a signatory of the United Nations Charter and as a founder member of the group of non-aligned nations, India has assiduously tried to conduct its international relations in a manner Intended to promote peace, understanding and co-operation throughout the world. India has taken a number of significant initiatives towards stability and peace in the South Asian region. In this we have accorded the highest priority to improving the climate of co-operation with our neighbours. We sincerely hope that our endeavours will ultimately overcome the old suspicions and irritations, thus paving the way to undertaking new ventures of mutual co-operation. With the vast majority of the developing countries we have joined hands in trying to shape a world free of want and injustice.
48.	Our policy is to develop bilateral relations with a11 nations on the basis of the imperative of close economic co-operation and shared ideals. It is our firm belief that the tapestry of world peace can be woven only with the strands of such bilateral relations.
49.	We are in favour of an ever-expanding role for the United Nations and of bringing within its purview all issues of universal concern so that it may be instrumental in the promotion of international peace, justice and co-operation. We reaffirm our commitment to making this body a more effective instrument for bringing about a qualitative change in the world situation. We attach great importance to the role of the United Nations as a forum for formulating, negotiating and supervising the implementation of global development strategies. We may not, in the foreseeable future, be able to establish a world government; but we can at least move towards the realization of the goal of one world by devising and implementing, under the aegis of the United Nations, international development plans and programmes - both overall and for as many sectors of human activity as possible.
50.	We must build, on the foundations of the United Nations, a better world for all of us. Modern science and technology have opened up immense opportunities which can either be used for jeopardizing the very future of our planet or be harnessed to bring about progress and prosperity. Instead of wasting our energy on petty squabbles and frittering away our resources on the piling up of arms, we must employ them for wiping every tear from every eye and eliminating every ache from every heart. I trust that in the critical years ahead of us we shall demonstrate our determination, realism and sagacity to realize the dreams of our saints and savants for universal peace based on freedom and justice. I should like to conclude by reciting a quotation from Thiruvalluvar, one of the most famous ancient poet-saints of South India:
 "Where there is no terrible famine, no cruel pestilence, no foreign enemy to invade and ravage, where peace always reigns, that is the ideal land."
Hail one world!















﻿70.	Mr. President, permit me to join the representatives who have spoken before me in this general debate by offering you the congratulations of the delegation of Israel on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. My delegation is confident that you will guide this session with fairness and wisdom.
71,	It is my pleasure also to congratulate Solomon Islands on its independence and admission to the United Nations.
72	As we reflect upon the work of the United Nations over the past year one undertaking stands out above all others: it is the noble attempt to reach an agreement on disarmament, to divert precious resources to improving the lot of the common man
73	In the Middle East we recently witnessed an unprecedented escalation in the quantity of weapons purchased by the Arab States, amounting to $11 billion in orders since the beginning of 1977. Indeed, over the past five years the arms agreements signed by those States mean that they have outstripped both the countries members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the countries members of the Warsaw Pact Organization in the ratio of their arms build-up.
74.	Israel is prepared to play its part in the reduction of the arms race and it remains ready to enter into agreements on arms limitation with all States in the Middle East. There is no doubt, however, that the appropriate way to bring about an arms reduction in the Middle East is through peace treaties which would include limitations on armaments within their framework Indeed, the mere transformation from a state of war to one of peace will move the States involved to dedicate their resources to economic development rather than military aims.
75.	Terrorist groups continue to threaten the lives of innocent men, women and children in different parts of the world. Once again it must be emphasized that terrorism could be virtually eliminated if certain countries did not continue to provide arms, training and refuge to its practitioners. Yet we are gratified that States which once stood helplessly by have begun to assert themselves.
Mention should be made, for example, of the Federal Republic of Germany's rescue operation in Mogadishu and of the joint statement on international terrorism of the Heads of State 'or Government at the recent Bonn Economic Summit Conference,6 wherein they recognized the need for immediate action to cease all flights to and from a country which refuses to extradite or prosecute hijackers of aircraft. It is only through such concerted and effective action that the world can be freed from organized terrorism.

76.	In the field of human rights no State should ignore a violation of human rights wherever it may occur in the world.
77.	Israel continues to follow closely the situation of Jews in the Soviet Union. We welcome the recent increase in the number of exit visas issued, although a large number of Jews are still denied the elementary human rights to emigrate. In addition, administrative obstacles and arbitrary restrictions still threaten the social and economic livelihood and personal freedom of Jews seeking to emigrate.
78.	We have been particularly concerned by the harsh prison sentences passed this year on Jews whose only crime is their desire to rejoin their families in Israel-Grigorij Goldstein, Iosif Begun, Ida Nudel, Vladimir Slepak, Simon Shnirman and Anatoly Scharansky. Those sentences caused bitter protest and indignation throughout the world. The Soviet Union should release these and other prisoners of conscience and allow those who want to emigrate to Israel and rejoin their families to do so.
79.	We cannot be silent in the face of the increasing incitement of feeling against and defamation of the State of Israel and the Jewish people, their religion, culture and national movement, manifested day after day in the official Soviet media. Those anti-Semitic attacks, unprecedented in their intensity, may have most dangerous consequences. In this regard it must be noted that the Soviet authorities still do not permit Jews to practise their ancient traditions and culture, and in fact take severe measures against Jews who wish to do so. We appeal Jo the Soviet Union to allow Jewish culture to be expressed freely.
80.	We also deeply regret that the Syrian Government continues to violate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other relevant international conventions by refusing to permit its Jewish citizens to leave and be reunited with their relatives residing in other lands.
81.	One of the most important trends in world , politics today remains the determined aspiration of the new and under-developed nations to take their place in the international political and economic arena. Being a developing nation itself, Israel strongly identifies with the aspirations of nations in Africa, Asia and Latin America to transform their political independence into a full and equal economic partnership with the older-established nations of the world.
82 To that end the North-South dialogue, with its guidelines on the transfer of resources, marks an important
beginning, and the Government of Israel appreciates the efforts of the United Nations and its agencies in encouraging this process. My Government particularly welcomes the results of the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries in Buenos Aires, where Israel proposed a voluntary agreement for the exchange of technical assistance among developing countries. Israel has been co-operating for more than 30 years with other developing nations in fields such as irrigation techniques, seed production, desalination, solar energy and the agricultural development of arid and semi-arid zones. We view the expansion of such co-operative efforts as vital if the serious food shortages that still exist in so much of the world are to be overcome .
83.	A year ago I addressed this Assembly on the prospects of launching a peace process in the Middle East. Today I have the satisfaction of being able to address the General Assembly on the new and positive developments that have taken place recently.
84.	As all members of the Assembly know, a few weeks ago at Camp David two framework agreements8 were signed by President Anwar El-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel and witnessed by President Jimmy Carter of the United States of America. Within a very few days from now negotiations will start between Israel and Egypt for the conclusion of a peace treaty between them.
85.	It is my hope that these negotiations will be successful and that before the year is out we shall witness the beginning of a new era in the Middle East. It is our desire that the peace process should eventually embrace the other States that are our neighbours—Jordan, Lebanon and Syria-so that we may achieve a comprehensive settlement in the area.
86.	The gratitude of my country goes out to President Jimmy Carter, whose devoted efforts have made the Camp David developments possible When this achievement ends with an Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty, President Carter's name will be recorded in history as that of a great peacemaker.
87.	I also wish to express my country's deep appreciation to President Anwar El-Sadat of the Arab Republic of Egypt for his wisdom and faith. His visit to Jerusalem in November 1977 turned a new page. He decided to enter into negotiations with Israel, to recognize Israel and to make peace with Israel. This change in policy ushered in a historic change in the relations between Egypt and Israel. The previous policy based on the "three Nos" of Khartoum 19679—no negotiations, no recognition and no peace with Israel—prevented any progress towards a peace settlement.
88.	Now the road to peace lies open. The warm reception accorded to President El-Sadat by the people and Government of Israel constituted an acknowledgement of this change in the Egyptian policy. A new era of peace, for which Israel has been longing since its establishment, has started. Prime Minister Begin's courage and leadership were a decisive factor. Without his readiness and ability to assume responsibility for very painful decisions, the achievements reached at Camp David would not have been conceivable.
89.	Not only since the founding of the State of Israel but since the very beginning of the Zionist movement our dream has always been of a Middle East in which Jew and Arab would live in harmony and co-operation for the mutual advantage of both peoples.
90.	The Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel is a step in this direction. It provides for a withdrawal of Israeli armed forces and civilian population from Sinai; for the establishment of normal relations between the two countries, including diplomatic, economic and cultural relations, and full recognition; the termination of economic boycotts and of barriers to the free movement of goods and people, and mutual protection of citizens by due process of law. It also stipulates that there shall be free passage of Israeli ships through the Gulf of Suez and the Suez Canal, and that the Straits of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba are international waterways to be open to all nations for navigation and over flight.
91.	In view of the several wars launched by our neighbours, we are conscious of our security needs. Therefore, in addition to the establishment of normal relations between the two States, there will be security arrangements concerning the limitation of armaments and forces in the different areas on the basis of reciprocity.
92.	Moreover, the framework for the conclusion of a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel also provides for the stationing of United Nations forces at Sham el Sheikh to ensure freedom of passage through the Straits of Tiran. Similarly, there is a provision for their being stationed in northern Sinai, thus creating a "buffer zone" between the forces stationed in El-Arish and those in Gaza. These forces will not be removed unless such removal is approved by the Security Council of the United Nations. It should be noted here that in recent years the United Nations forces in the Middle East have played a constructive role with the framework of the various agreed arrangements in the. region.
93.	It has never been the wish of Israel to exercise control over the lives and activities of the Arab inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza.
94.	We want to live as equals with the Arab inhabitants of those areas. We want to live with them, not to replace them; but at the same time we do not regard ourselves as foreigners in those areas. The Israeli settlements in Judaea and Samaria and in the Gaza district are there as of right. It is inconceivable to us that Jews should be prohibited from settling and living in Judaea and Samaria, which are the heart of our homeland.
95.	We maintain our army positions in those areas in order to ensure the security of the population of Israel, the majority of whom live in the Mediterranean coastal area. The Israeli forces are there in order to protect Israel and not in order to interfere in the lives of the Arab inhabitants. Under the agreement for the Framework for Peace in the Middle East, the Israeli military government and its civilian administration will be withdrawn from those areas once a self-governing authority is freely elected by their inhabitants. The Israeli defence forces will be redeployed in those areas and maintained for security purposes. The final status of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza and their relationship with their neighbours will be negotiated during a period of five years following the establishment of the self-governing authority.
96.	One of the subjects that will be discussed between the parties will undoubtedly be the question concerning Jerusalem. For us, the city of Jerusalem is the one and only eternal capital of Israel. We have not, and we shall never have, any other capital city, whether or not others recognize it as such. This eternal city is holy to three religions—Judaism, Christianity and Islam. However, our connexion with it is not just religious, but derives from the totality of Jewish national history. Jerusalem is the heart and soul of the Jewish people. It is now united once again, as it should be, free and open for all to come and go. All religious communities should be in complete control of their own holy places and of their own religious life, and all should enjoy the rights of free worship. The inhabitants of the city should live together in harmony with a representative municipal council supervising all essential functions. We have resolved never again to compromise the unity of Jerusalem, and it is our hope that other peoples will share our position.
97.	It was agreed at Camp David that a peace settlement in the Middle East should be based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) of the United Nations Security Council. Resolution 242(1967) is a carefully worked out set of principles establishing a framework of peace to be negotiated among the contending States. It makes clear mat the final borders must be negotiated bilaterally among the States concerned.
98 Let us hope that all those whose co-operation is essential in obtaining peace in the Middle East will not short-sightedly remain outside the peace process. We have to find agreed and appropriate ways for Jews and Arabs to live together in equality, trust and mutual respect.
















﻿
















25.	
26.	It is my great pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly and to wish you well in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities.
27.	I also extend a special welcome to the newest Member of this Assembly, Solomon Islands, whose application for membership New Zealand was privileged to sponsor. We are neighbours in the South Pacific, members together of the South Pacific Forum and the Commonwealth. In those settings, and now in this one, New Zealand looks forward to a close, warm and co-operative relationship with Solomon Islands.
28.	New States enter upon their nationhood today at a difficult time. As an international community we face enormous political and economic problems. If the measure of a healthy civilization is its ability to govern itself, to match its demands to its resources, to manage its technology and its institutions in a sane and rational way, then we are heading for trouble. The problems we face as a global community, as a group of "united nations", are both menacing and daunting: issues of peace or war in many parts of the world, the crippling and dangerous arms race, the risk of nuclear catastrophe by deliberate decision or mischance, the widespread denial of human rights, food shortages, energy problems, population pressures, dwindling non-renewable resources and a whole range of economic ills, including high rates of inflation, unemployment and protectionism, low levels of investment and unstable commodity markets.
29.	It is not altogether surprising that, confronted with these awesome and intractable problems, some countries, in effect, opt out. Consciously or not, they decide to hold on to what they have, to settle for the protection and enjoyment of whatever resources they possess without too much regard for the effects of that policy on others. If, by way of regional or other association, this self-interest can be reinforced, then the wider grouping is pursued, with great emphasis on the value of regional co-operation. The motive in fact is national self-interest, and the manifestations of such groupings are high walls and barriers of one kind or another to keep the world at bay.
30.	This is not, in New Zealand's view, the way to deal with the great issues of the day. Self-indulgence and self-interest proved fatal to earlier civilizations; they may well, unchecked, be fatal to ours. The international community, of which the United Nations is the symbol, cannot survive let alone prosper if we, the members of it, withdraw into our shells. The agenda of international problems, however frightening, needs to be addressed by all of us squarely and determine and, mindful of course of our responsibility for the security and welfare of our own people but mindful also of the needs of the global community. We need, in short, fewer barriers between us, better machinery for consultation in the economic, social and political spheres, and above all the political will to engage in the sort of co-operation which allows us at least to make a start towards correcting the gross social and economic injustices that now prevail.
31.	This is not simply an economic issue. If we are to move in a discernible way to cure current ills the issues of national security, of international law, of intergovernmental organization—all the major political issues of the day—are of paramount importance. Solutions to those problems will determine the freedom of States to make the appropriate responses in the economic sphere. Nor is it, as I have pointed out, the concern of just a few States; the problem is an immediate one for all pf us.
32.	The great Powers, however, have a primary role. Their attitudes to each other condition the environment in which we all live and operate. What the great Powers do, and what they do not do, carry consequences for all of us. We welcome therefore those co-operative arrangements that betoken an effort to contain crises, to co-operate in the avoidance of nuclear war, to reach agreement on arms- control measures, to extend relations over a broad range of social and cultural fronts and to reduce the harshness of the rhetoric between them.
33.	It is not, of course, only up to the great Powers. International relations are both intricate and complex and there are opportunities for constructive contributions from the small and middle-sized Powers as well as from the great.
34.	These opportunities would be immeasurably enhanced if the smaller States learned to work together. In New Zealand's part of the world, the south Pacific, we are making an effort to do so and we are attempting to build up a sense of partnership in the region. I have just come to
New York from a meeting earlier this month of the South Pacific Forum-a regular conference of the Heads of Government of all the independent and self-governing States of the south Pacific. Among the major topics discussed at the Forum was the enactment of legislation creating a 200-mile exclusive economic zone by the countries of the region. This offers to many of these smaller island States an opportunity, for the first time, to capitalize on what is in some cases their only substantial resource. These Pacific island States, together with New Zealand and Australia, have decided to move at once to set up a Forum fisheries agency to advise their Governments, many of whose scientific resources are slender, on the conservation, utilization and management of the living resources, including highly migratory species, of their 200-mile economic zones. At the same time, they are continuing to explore the question of what kind of long-term regional fisheries arrangements will serve the Pacific best.
35.	Another major topic discussed at the Forum was economic development and ways of minimizing the twin evils of protectionism and declining terms of trade. We suffer from these in New Zealand and we understand the difficulties facing developing countries and in particular our south Pacific neighbours, most of whom have an even narrower range of export products and less stable markets than we do. To tackle these problems we have together established an industrial development scheme to provide financial backing and incentives for companies to develop manufacturing industries in the islands. In addition, we are currently reviewing the numerous factors affecting entry of island exports to the New Zealand market. Our bilateral aid programme continues to have its primary focus in the south Pacific and this year 60 per cent of New Zealand's bilateral aid will be directed to the region. In the fields of shipping and civil aviation substantial progress has been made. A regional shipping line started operations in May and the number of direct air services between countries of the region is increasing.
36.	These are practical issues-a serious effort on the part of all the regional States to stimulate new thinking and to create greater opportunities for the development of trade and economic advancement in our part of the world. Their purpose, however, goes beyond mere economic considerations. Solutions are vital if democratic processes and political stability are not to be placed in jeopardy.
37.	In New Zealand's view, the same sort of co-operative effort—and for the same reasons—is needed in the global arena. As I see it, the world's economy today is distinguished by two rather paradoxical characteristics-its interdependence and its diversity. We have to grapple with both. Take interdependence. I do not question the argument for individual countries fostering a degree of economic self- sufficiency. There are certain skills and certain industries which every country needs to have even when the cost of establishing those skills is, by international standards, high. I believe, however, that most countries, including my own, have far snore to gain from participating in the international economy than from standing outside it. Decisions made in the world's major trading nations have a critical effect on the economic well-being and on the development patterns of the more peripheral economies. In the reverse aspect, recent years have shown that the world's major trading
countries also depend, to varying degrees, upon economic events in the less economically powerful countries. Raw material supply is an obvious area. Another is the importance of some developing countries as sources of demand and as areas of investment for the products and capital of the richer nations. There is evidence stretching back over a long period of the economic benefits for richer countries of increasing their imports, particularly of labour-intensive goods, from the newly industrializing countries. For these countries political stability is inseparable from economic stability.
38.	If countries are to produce and export those things which their human and material resources and their historic development priorities suggest as logical and economically efficient, they must do so within an international economic environment that allows scope for their diversity. That means an open international trading system. Protectionism must be resisted, especially in the area of agricultural commodity, trade, where there is a dangerous disposition among the richer developed countries to apply more restrictive policies than in the industrial commodity area. I recognize that the principles of an open multilateral trading system raise difficult domestic political problems, but economic development is about change and innovation and we need to look at today's problems with our eyes very firmly fixed on the longer term. These wider principles are very much at stake in the current series of the GATT negotiations. Only to the extent they are recognized, and acted upon, will the Tokyo round of negotiations be judged successful.
39.	The maintenance of an international trading system is not, by itself, enough. An international economy to which all countries and all people are contributing to the maximum extent possible needs to take account of the diversity of the international economy in another sense too. We need to recognize that there are very different kinds of economies. I do not mean that we should endeavour to come up with a new and sophisticated classification; rather that we should recognize, in the interests of the international economy, as well as in the interests of peace and justice, that some countries will need special assistance on a long-term basis, the world's poorest nations will need special aid and trade measures; so might the land-locked countries and the developing island countries. The aid and trade policies of some. countries, including my own, are already taking account of these special requirements, and the more advanced developing countries are following suit. Technical co-operation among developing countries, a concept which the United .Nations had done much to promote, has in this last month been the subject of a world conference in Buenos Aires.  It is a most welcome development and one which exemplifies the sort of practical co-operation I have been advocating.
40.	This sense of community, of co-operative partnership, of working together to discuss and solve problems, not only must underpin our aid and trade initiatives; it must be demonstrated also in our- treatment of political problems if our systems and institutions are not to become irrelevant.
There are few people in the world who do not wish for peace. There are even fewer who believe that peace can be secured other than through the co-operation and partnership l the people concerned themselves. Enforced solutions rarely endure. The only sure foundation for the peaceful settlement of disputes is the will of the parties involved to work for reconciliation and peaceful co-operation.
41.	This is surely the lesson of what is now happening in the Middle East New Zealand has no special knowledge of the Middle East question nor would we presume to offer an answer to the tangled web of issues at stake. But it does seem to us that certain fundamental principles need to be accepted if the will to reconcile and co-operate, which has been demonstrated in a dramatic way by the leaders of Egypt and Israel over the past year, is to be turned into a fair and lasting peace. Above all, we believe that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) contains the essential elements which should form the basis for a negotiated settlement. But just as our support for Israel's right to exist as a sovereign State within secure and recognized boundaries is fundamental to our approach to the dispute, so we are convinced that the rights of the Palestinians, including the right to self-determination and to establish an independent Palestinian State if they so desire, must be recognized. It is clear that a settlement which meets these -two criteria requires that Israel withdraw from areas occupied in 1967, so as to permit the Palestinians full freedom to exercise their right of self-determination. A Middle East settlement would not only confer inestimable benefits on Israel and its Arab neighbours, but would remove a potential and ever-real danger to world peace. We have therefore been tremendously encouraged by the will for peace and reconciliation displayed at the recent Camp David summit meetings. Early progress in pursuit of the agreements reached at Camp David by the leaders of Egypt and Israel, with the active partnership of the United States, must be our common hope in this Assembly.
42.	It is true also that these lessons of co-operation have still to be learned in southern Africa. The history of relationships between black and white in that continent, between those who exercise power and those who, though in an overwhelming majority, have had no say in their destiny, is one - of so many opportunities lost to work together in harmony and co operation. In Namibia recently, it is true, there has been encouraging progress towards independence as a result of the persistent efforts of the five Western members of the Security Council and the front-line African States. It would be tragic if progress were to be held up now by intransigence on the part of any of those involved. It is New Zealand's hope that free elections will be held at the earliest practicable date and that Namibia will soon be able to take its rightful place as a Member of this Organization. New Zealand is anxious to support this process in practical ways. Most recently my Government has contributed substantially to a Commonwealth fund for the education and training of Namibians who will soon be in a position of responsibility in their own country.
43.	In Rhodesia it is clear from the increasing scale of the armed conflict that the "internal settlement" introduced in March of this year  has failed to produce the cease-fire that
the Salisbury regime predicted. On the contrary, there has been an escalation of violence, with innocent people as the not infrequent victims. These senseless and tragic killings must be stopped. The only way is through the speedy conclusion of a negotiated settlement. The best hope is for all the elements in Rhodesia and the Patriotic Front to come together in an all party conference on the basis of the Anglo-American proposals.  This is a course which we urge as the first step towards a cease-fire, the holding of fair and fair elections, and ultimate independence for Zimbabwe and its people.
44.	Other States, and especially the neighbouring African States, can play a constructive part in creating the climate for a settlement through mediation and diplomatic support. Or they can meddle, as some States far from Africa have chosen to do in various parts of the continent, by encouraging divisions and even by direct intervention. That is a prescription for conflict, not for settlement. We trust that the pattern we have already seen in some African countries will not be repeated elsewhere.
45.	Even after peace is established in other parts of southern Africa, the most difficult problem of all will remain in South Africa itself. It is there that a co-operative effort, even a dialogue, is most desperately needed. The institutionalized racism which is apartheid offers no hope of a peaceful future for South Africa. It must be abandoned. Change must come. There is no other way. A policy of apartheid is not only wrong; it is suicidal. It seeks to impose what cannot be imposed, to deprive people of rights and freedoms that cannot be denied. The delusion of those in power in South Africa that they can succeed in their purpose if they are tough enough and determined enough is a delusion common to Governments which refuse to listen to the voices of those they oppress. Sooner or later those voices make themselves heard and the result is both predictable and destructive. There is still time to avoid that result in South Africa, but not much. New Zealand is and always will be utterly opposed to apartheid. We want to see justice and common sense prevail. This is the oily way to prevent conflict.
46.	Our concern for human rights in southern Africa must not blind us to deprivations that occur elsewhere. New Zealand upholds the principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, proclaimed 30 years ago by this Genera] Assembly—among those rights: freedom of movement, the right to leave one's country and to return, the right to a nationality, the right of freedom of opinion and expression. We are concerned when these rights are denied, wherever that denial takes place, and it is shameful that, 30 years on, there are countries, including some who were founder nations of this Organization, who still deny their millions of citizens these basic human rights. How can the international community ignore that?
47.	In New Zealand this year the Human Rights Commission Act came into force, establishing a national Commission on Human Rights to deal with complaints of racial, religious or sexual discrimination, in conjunction with the
Race Relations Act of 1971. This new legislation codifies that respect for human rights which has had a central place in our traditions. We have regarded the two International Covenants on Human Rights as legal documents of substantial value and importance, and have not wished to ratify them merely on the basis of our general attachment to the principles they enunciate. We have now completed a comprehensive review of our legislation and are satisfied that our laws are in compliance with the requirements of the two International Covenants. I am pleased to announce therefore that New Zealand will ratify the International . Covenant on Political and Civil Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide during this session of the General Assembly.
48.	I want before I close to turn very briefly to two major issues that have preoccupied the international community, and this Assembly in particular, over the past year—the law of the sea and disarmament.
49.	On 1 April of this year New Zealand brought into force its jurisdiction over a 200-mile exclusive economic zone. Some 330 foreign fishing vessels from three countries are now licensed, pursuant to agreements with New Zealand, to catch fish which is surplus to the capacity of the New Zealand fishing industry. The expansion of the New Zealand industry, upon its own initiative and through joint ventures, represents a significant economic opportunity for us.
50.	I want to emphasize therefore the importance for New Zealand, and for very many of the small and middle sized countries in the Pacific and elsewhere, of a speedy and successful conclusion to th3 Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The adoption of a widely acceptable international convention will give us and many other countries a secure and stable basis upon which to plan and develop the utilization of the resources within the 200-mile zone. It is in no one's interests that the oceans should become a battleground for competing claims and the focus of conflicts over the extraction of resources. Both our national interest and a wider interest in the rule of law and a stable regime for the oceans lead my Government to attach great value to the achievement of a wide-ranging treaty along the lines on which the Conference is now working.
51.	In last May and June this Assembly met in its tenth special session in an attempt to stem the arms race and to begin, in a real sense, the process of disarmament. There will be differing views on the success of that session. New Zealand's view is that we have made a small beginning, that the special session has given a modest impetus to the disarmament cause and that the establishment of machinery for discussion and negotiation marks a step forward. We hope that other steps will soon follow, among them the early conclusion of a treaty putting an end to nuclear- weapon testing in all environments. Time is short, but it should still be possible, in New Zealand's view, to present this treaty to this thirty-third regular session of the General Assembly.
52.	My Government sees disarmament as among the most urgent requirements of our time. Progress has been slow.
We must do better, not by calling for far-reaching measures that have no hope of acceptance, but by working for and participating in a realistic short-term programme of action which will result in agreements that are balanced, practicable and verifiable. Between now and the next special session, New Zealand will support each and every measure of disarmament that meets these criteria.
53.	The world is an increasingly complex place. Within our own societies, and in our international life, there are forces at work that are changing our perceptions, altering our values and demolishing our traditions at a bewildering pace. There are many competing interests to be accommodated, conflicting philosophies and approaches to be reconciled. We can accommodate and reconcile them only by being honest, understanding, straightforward and fair with each other-not only with our friends, for that is relatively easy, but more importantly with those with whom we may disagree. If we can work towards this sense of co-operation and partnership as a world community we can, I believe, if not solve all our problems at least reduce them to a manageable dimension. For its part my Government pledges itself to work with others in this spirit and to this end.
﻿35.	Mr. President, the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics wishes to congratulate you on your election to the post of President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and to wish you full success in that high office.
36.	It has become customary for representatives of practically all States to expound the views of their Governments concerning the crucial issues of war and peace at regular sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. Indeed, the United Nations, the most representative international forum, is the right place to raise in their full dimensions issues on whose solution largely depends the future of mankind.
37.	The United Nations was established specifically for that purpose. It emerged immediately after the fiery steamroller of the Second World War had driven over Europe and a considerable part of the rest of the world. Today, memories of those days are still fresh in our minds. Words fail to describe fully what that war visited upon mankind.
38.	Both the generation that had to live through the war and the present generation realize that the victory won over the forces of fascism and aggression is of historic world significance. It changed the political image of the planet and brought to an unprecedented pitch the activities of forces working for peace, national liberation and social progress. The sword of justice smote those who had instigated the aggression. Such are the lessons taught by history itself-history, the most authoritative teacher.
39.	Looking back over the path traversed in international affairs over the post-war decades, including the troubled years of the "cold war", peoples, Governments and political figures—unless of course they are laymen in politics—cannot afford to ignore the major imperative of bending every effort to prevent another military catastrophe which would be even more disastrous for mankind than the two world wars taken together.
40.	The fact that it has proved possible to avoid a major war for almost a third of a century is undoubtedly a great achievement of the peoples. They are increasingly showing that they hate war, reject and curse it as a means of resolving international disputes and controversies.
41.	Representatives of the Soviet Union, speaking in various international forums on behalf of our people and of the Communist Party, which is the nucleus of the political system of Soviet society, have always emphasized the theme of peace, and will continue to do so. The fundamental law of the Soviet State, its new Constitution, declares: "The USSR steadfastly pursues the Leninist policy of peace and stands for strengthening the security of nations and broad international co-operation."
42.	We are implementing that policy, hand in hand with our friends and allies. The recent meeting in the Crimea of Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev with the leaders of fraternal parties and States has shown with new strength that the socialist community firmly follows the course of peace, detente and international co-operation.
43.	The fraternal socialist States are justly proud of the fact that through their consistent activities year after year, month after month, almost day after day, they are making no small contribution to preserving peaceful conditions for the life and creative work of peoples on earth.
44.	Yet it would be naive to deny another thing: peace will not become more durable, detente more reliable, unless the efforts of socialist States are reciprocated by other countries. That in turn calls for a willingness, despite differences in social systems, to resolve controversial issues at the negotiating table, without seeking unilateral advantages.
45.	The participants in this General Assembly session will probably agree that we have not gathered here merely to express our satisfaction at the fact that, so far, peace has been preserved. What is much more important is to mobilize additional efforts and find new possibilities of shielding the peoples from aggression and from a world conflict in the future as well.
46.	The will of the Soviet people and the policy of our State was expressed in a penetrating and meaningful manner by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev in these words:
"The major thrust of our struggle for peace in the present conditions is to lessen the risk of another world war, of the mass annihilation of people through the use of nuclear weapons."
47.	It is indeed true that all peoples are inspired by one idea, one aspiration: peace. Yet the situation in different parts of the world is taking shape differently, for the world is full of contradictions and the influence exercised by those forces which are working for stronger international security and the freedom of peoples and that exercised by those who on the contrary are attempting to encroach on them is felt differently in various parts of the world.
48.	The continent of Europe has made the greatest headway towards establishing durable peace. It is in Europe that major moves towards peace on a collective and bilateral basis have been accomplished in recent years. Several hurdles have been surmounted, one after another, in improving relations between countries with opposing social systems. The political climate in Europe today is clearly healthier than before.
49.	The results of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe have been a fresh and considerable impetus. It is no secret that from time to time attempts are made to put the durability of those results to a test. However, detente has been and continues to be the dominant trend in European international life. And surely this is demonstrated by the development of relations between the Soviet Union and other socialist countries on the one hand and France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Finland and the Scandinavian and many other States on the other.
50.	Europe now appears to have reached a stage where the opponents of detente are hard put to it to reverse the course of events. However, this does not mean that (he fruits of improved relations between States will fall by themselves into the hands of the peoples. On the contrary, sustained efforts are required, and. provided States are on the side of detente, they have great opportunities for mutually beneficial co-operation in the most diverse fields. For its part the Soviet Union will spare mi effort to this end.
51.	Close attention is riveted today on the continent of Africa. Africa, with its 400-million population, is seething, Newly-liberated States are in the process of self-assertion, shedding the last shackles of colonialism. Following the adoption by the United Nations in I960 of the historic Declaration oil the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples almost all of them hare gained their national freedom almost all, but not all. The colonial order still persists in Rhodesia, Namibia and the Republic of South Africa, with its barbaric forms of racial discrimination.
52.	How many words and how much paper are wasted in casting aspersions on the policy or the Soviet Union and other socialist countries in connexion with the situation in some parts of Africa. And who is doing all this'? Those who are clinging to the remnants of colonialism and racism. Aware that what they are doing is hardly popular, to say the least, they are attempting to cover up their neo-colonialist moves and to deceive the peoples. Apparently such devices will be resorted to m the future as well. Yet, deceit will get no one very far; the peoples will know how to tell the truth from a lie.
53.	Colonialism and racism must be fully and irrevocably eliminated from the African continent too. Those who want to preserve the racist regimes, which are so odious to the peoples of Africa, must realize that their cause has been lost, and lost irretrievably.
54.	As in the past, we make no secret of the fact that our sympathies are tin the side of the peoples fighting for their national independence and social progress. But we are not seeking any advantages fur ourselves either in Africa or in the developing countries in other continents. The Soviet Union does not covet political domination, concessions or military bases.
55.	When the States of Africa or other parts of the world request aid to repel aggression we repeat, aggression or an armed attack, they have every right to expect support from their friends. Or perhaps the provision of the United
Nations Charter on the "inherent right of individual or collective self-defence" is no longer valid?
56.	The objective, inexorable laws of historical development will prevail. The day is not far off when the hour of independence will strike for the peoples of southern Africa, too. and when the entire African continent to the last inch will become free.
57.	There is an area at the crossroads of three continents which could be described as a "powder keg", as the Balkans once used to be called. That area is the Middle Hast. Hardly anyone would dare to say that the situation in the Middle East is not fraught with the danger of another explosion.
58.	What is the root-cause of such a situation? It lies in the fact that 10 years after the aggression its consequences have still not been eliminated, while the aggression itself goes unpunished. Israel continues to hold sway over territories it has seized. Unfortunately, even in the Arab world there are some politicians who display no concern about Arab lands and who are inclined to neglect the legitimate rights of the Arabs, especially the Palestinian Arabs, and to cringe and surrender to the demands of the aggressor and those who protect him.
5V. The Soviet Union has repeatedly stated its willingness to play a part in ensuring peace in the Middle East and to participate in the most stringent international security guarantees for alt States of that area. Israeli spokesmen contend that they have no use for international guarantees. This is no more than empty polemical bravado. If Israel genuinely cared for its security - real, not illusory, security it would seek a political solution. For the fact is that with existing means of warfare the distance from the borders to which a neighbouring State has withdrawn its guns is of little consequence. What is required here is a radical breakthrough towards a situation in which the guns would be altogether silent.
60.	Only a solution that would guarantee the right to independence and security of all States and peoples in the Middle East, including the Arab people of Palestine, who are fully entitled to a national home, a State of their own, can lay the foundations for a lasting peace in that part of the world.
61.	All the accumulated experience, particularly recent experience, indicates that a radical and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East can be achieved only oil the basis of joint efforts by all the parties directly concerned. Separate deals at the expense of the Arabs have only side-tracked the solution of the problem.
62.	And such, precisely, is the nature of the understandings reached at the recent three-sided meeting at Camp David. If one looks at things realistically, there are no grounds for believing that they, as claimed, bring a Middle East settlement closer. On the contrary, what this is all about is a new anti-Arab step making it more difficult to achieve a just solution of this pressing problem. That is why a campaign of artificial and affected optimism can mislead no one.
63.	There is machinery specifically established to achieve peace in the Middle East, and that is the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. The sooner an end is put to attempts to keep it in a state of paralysis, the nearer will be the moment when the solution of the Middle East problem can be tackled with a chance of success.
64.	For many years, many decades, the peoples of Asia, the most heavily populated continent in the world, have been concerned about how to ensure peace, security and possibilities for development and progress in that area. The key to this, in our view, lies in joint action by all Asian States without exception. This is particularly urgent in the present conditions when developments in Asia are revealing certain disquieting traits. It is not fortuitous that among Asian countries there is a growing realization of the fact that conflicts, crude pressure and interference in internal affairs, which not so long ago went so far as to assume the dimensions of military intervention, and attempts to pit Asian States one against the other should give way to a stable peace.
65.	It is in this perspective that the creation of a unified Viet Nam, which had expelled the aggressors from its territory and is today pursuing a peace-loving policy, is of tremendous importance. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has heroically lived through all the hardships of a long and bitter war, is now courageously defending its sovereignty. From the United Nations rostrum the Soviet Union once again declares its solidarity with Viet Nam and states that the hegemonistic claims with which it is being confronted are totally inadmissible.
66.	The Soviet Union favours good relations with those Asian States which in turn seek mutual understanding and good-neighbourly relations with us. Such are our relationships with most Asian States, and in several cases they go back a good many years. Along with equal and mutually advantageous co-operation based on the principles of mutual respect, strict observance of sovereignty and the principle of non-interference in each other's internal affairs, we are united with those countries by our common concern for strengthening peace and security in Asia, our joint struggle against the designs of the forces of imperialism, colonialism and racism.
67.	One striking example of multifaceted friendly cooperation, of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems, is the relationship between the Soviet Union and India. This relationship, with long-standing traditions of good-neighbourliness, is steadily on the rise, in its development on the firm basis of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Co-operation.  It is consonant with the vital interests of the peoples of the two countries and constitutes an important and effective factor for peace on the Asian continent and throughout the world.
68.	If we do not have such relationships with all Asian States, the responsibility for that is not ours. It rests squarely on those who persist in following a hostile line with regard to our country, a line which is hostile to the cause of peace in general. Those who, while themselves pursuing hegemonistic aims, try to peg the label of hegemonism on others are making a travesty of the facts.
69.	Of course, it is not immaterial to the interests of peace in the Far East and the Pacific to note what policy is followed by Japan. Unfortunately, its policy has been showing some disquieting trends. One may well wonder whether that country might not eventually step on to the path that has led in the past to enormous sufferings for other peoples and plunged Japan into catastrophe. I should not like to draw any final conclusions; yet serious attention should be paid to all this. We believe that our concern is shared by many.
70.	Our policy with regard to Japan has been and will remain a policy of principle. We stand for good relations with that country, for genuinely good-neighbourly relations. However, appropriate moves by Japan are also required.
71.	Let us now turn to another continent, Latin America. Its role in world affairs is on the rise, and what is particularly noteworthy is that Latin American countries increasingly seek to have an independent voice. Accordingly there are growing opportunities for co-operation between those countries and States in other parts of the world. This is a positive and important factor of international life. The Soviet Union wishes the countries and peoples of Latin America nothing but good.
72.	During the current session of the General Assembly another independent State, Solomon Islands, has become a Member, the one hundred and fiftieth Member, of the United Nations. Oceania is very far from us, but we wish to maintain normal and, where possible, friendly relations with the countries of that area as well. Here, too, we regard with sympathy the aspirations of the peoples to gain independence and to free themselves from foreign tutelage, in both the literal and the figurative meaning of the word.
73.	In this connexion, one cannot ignore the actions of the United States in respect of Micronesia in a bid to lay its hands on a Territory which is temporarily under its trusteeship and to make those islands serve its own military and strategic plans in violation of the United Nations decisions and in circumvention of the Security Council.
74.	What follows from this review of the state of affairs in the world, brief as it is? First of all, despite the contradictory nature of the current world developments, the international situation on the whole is better than, say, 10 or 15 years ago.
75.	At the same time, it is clear that the international situation does not depend solely on the state of affairs in this or that area of the world. There are international problems which it is difficult or even impossible to fit into a geographical framework. The most crucial, most burning and most truly global problem affecting all countries and peoples is the ending of the arms race and disarmament.
76.	The truth which is recognized today by all is that enormous resources are being spent to manufacture engines of destruction. It is indeed a fact that in this time of peace more than 25 million men are in military uniform; and there are many more people who are directly or indirectly engaged in military production. All this represents a colossal drain on the material and intellectual resources of mankind.
77 There are those who may say that something is nevertheless being done to contain the arms race. Recently, for example, a special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament was convened. It reflected the determination of peoples to do away with the arms race and to direct the course of events towards disarmament and eventually general and complete disarmament. The session did adopt a comprehensive Final Document [resolution S-10/2/ which on the whole is a good one.
78.	The Soviet Union can note with satisfaction that many ideas that it proposed became an organic part of the Final Document. Like all those who are not merely paying lip- service to disarmament but are actually seeking disarmament, we believe that the decisions taken at the special session must be translated into the language of practical deeds by States, failing which they will remain empty phrases.
79.	If one is to take a sober view of things, one must recognize, however, that the arms race has not diminished one whit. A group of States and everyone knows which- has decided to earmark huge additional appropriations for an arms build-up over many years to come. The decision taken by the North Atlantic Council session of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Washington and the subsequent steps to intensify military preparations in a number of countries can only be interpreted as a challenge to those who are working for disarmament.
80.	Regardless of all the attempts of the instigators of the arms race to make things look as if the security of States will be all the more reliable the bigger their military arsenals are, the facts are quite different. As the number of weapons grows, as new and ever more destructive types of weapons emerge, the risk of war also increases. People will not accept any excuses such as references to a "threat from the USSR". Such references are completely spurious.
81.	Who but the Soviet Union is making one proposal after another designed to halt the arms race, to check it from this or that angle, and to prevent the development of new means of warfare? And who is rejecting these proposals out of hand0 The opponents of disarmament are doing this.
82.	By now and Western statesmen recognize this-there exists an approximate equality or parity in weapons. The Soviet Union-and we reaffirm this does not intend to change this correlation in its favour. What is more, we have been and are proposing now that the levels of military confrontation be reduced that is, that the security of each and every one be ensured with lesser quantitative and qualitative parameters of armaments and armed forces.
83.	As was clearly emphasized by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, ". .. there is no type of armaments, and above all weapons of mass destruction, that the Soviet Union would not be prepared to see limited and banned reciprocally, in agreement with other States, and then eliminated from the arsenals".
84.	Our country has a comprehensive programme for curtailing the arms race. Our proposals were put forward here in the United Nations only a few months ago. It will be recalled that they will remain the subject of further discussion in various bodies dealing with disarmament. We shall never tire of taking such initiatives, and they will not become tarnished because of this, since the need for specific action in all the sectors of the struggle for disarmament, for the prevention of another war, is increasing rather than diminishing.
85.	In circumstances where the arms race is being stepped up and the world is sliding downhill in this respect, the first thing to do is to stop completely and further quantitative and qualitative build-up of arms. Clearly, this applies above all to States with large military potentials.
86.	It will be recalled that on a practical plane the Soviet Union has urged the discussion of a set of sweeping measures which could be carried out within a. specified limited period; cessation of the production of all types of nuclear weapons; cessation of the production, and prohibition of, all other types of weapons of mass destruction; cessation of the development of new types of conventional armaments of great destructive capability; renunciation by the permanent members of the Security Council, and by countries which have military agreements with them, of the expansion of their armies and the build-up of their conventional armaments. We expect those proposals to be treated seriously and to be examined in practical terms.
87.	The greatest threat to peace-and this is something that is now recognized everywhere-stems from the nuclear- arms race. Consequently, priority should be given to nuclear disarmament. On this matter we see eye to eye with most States of the world, including the developing countries.
88.	Why is it not possible to couch in treaty language an obligation by States to discontinue the production of all types of nuclear weapons so as to move then to a gradual reduction of their stockpiles, and all the way to their complete destruction? But such obligations cannot materialize out of thin air; they are produced in the course of negotiations-and we have been insisting on the necessity for such negotiations.
89.	In the opinion of the Soviet Union, what is required is that all the nuclear Powers as well as a certain number of non-nuclear States get together at a conference table and that an exact date for the beginning of the negotiations be set And this session of the General Assembly should have its say in this regard and make an appropriate appeal to all the nuclear Powers in the first place.
90 Any major task, and particularly that of nuclear disarmament, calls for maximum realism once you have begun to tackle it. In the world of today it is inconceivable that such a task can make any headway unless action is taken at the same time to strengthen political and international legal guarantees for the security of States. In this connexion, the proposal to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations is becoming ever
more urgent.
91.	While emphasizing as a great achievement of the peoples the fact that peace has been preserved for more than a third of a century now, we should not forget even for an instant how great are the dangers that lie in wait for mankind. Fully to deliver the peoples from the threat of nuclear war: this is what underlies our proposal.
92.	The same purpose is served by concrete initiatives of the Soviet Union, and today we are stressing them again, expecting that they will elicit the understanding and support of the General Assembly.
93.	What is involved here in the first place is the strengthening of security guarantees for non-nuclear States; and secondly, the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territory of States where there are no such weapons at present.
94.	It will be recalled that recently our country has taken a step conducive to instilling among non-nuclear States greater confidence in their security. The Soviet Union has declared that it will never use nuclear weapons against countries which renounce the production and acquisition of nuclear weapons and which do not have them on their territory.
95.	Following our lead, the United States and the United Kingdom, for their part, have made declarations to the effect that they would not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States. On the whole, this could be regarded as a positive fact, were not such declarations replete with all kinds of reservations rendering them valueless.
96.	The Soviet Union has not confined itself to a solemn declaration regarding the non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States which renounce the production and acquisition of nuclear weapons and do not have them on their territory. We have expressed our readiness-and this still stands—to enter into special agreements to that effect with any of those countries. The USSR calls upon all the other nuclear Powers to act in a similar manner and to assume corresponding obligations.
97.	At the same time, it is clear that, if the problem of safeguarding non-nuclear States from the use of nuclear weapons against them is to be tackled in the most effective manner, agreed guarantees on the part of the nuclear Powers and a multilateral arrangement are required. In other words, it is necessary that we have an international agreement based on a pledge by those Powers not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States parties to such an agreement provided the latter do not produce, acquire or have such weapons on their territory. A similar obligation could be extended to armed forces and installations under the jurisdiction and control of non- nuclear States—that is, to make it even more sweeping in scope.
98.	Do non-nuclear States stand to benefit from their participation in an international agreement of this kind? Of course they do. They would be provided with security guarantees universally formalized in international law, whereas they themselves would not be required to do anything but strictly to observe their non-nuclear status. At the same time, this would be to everyone's advantage, for the threat of a nuclear conflict would diminish, and the climate throughout the world would improve.
99.	Taking all this into consideration and in response to a relevant appeal of the United Nations General Assembly at its tenth special session, on disarmament, the Soviet Union has proposed the inclusion in the agenda for this session, as an important and urgent matter, of an item entitled "Conclusion of an international convention on the strengthening of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States" [A/33I241 J. Seeking to put things on a practical footing from the outset, we have also submitted the draft text of such a convention [ibid.].
100.	We feel that one of the merits of our initiative is that, given the goodwill of States, and of course of the nuclear States above all, it may yield practical results fairly soon. Following discussion on this question at the current session of the General Assembly, the Committee on Disarmament could immediately proceed to negotiate the text of the convention so that it would as soon as possible be open to signature by all States of the world.
101.	I should like to turn now to our second proposal, concerning the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there are no such weapons at present. It can hardly be disputed that this is a reliable way to prevent nuclear weapons from spreading all over the globe.
102.	Here, too, we take into account the point of view expressed by a large group of States. Many countries are becoming increasingly aware of the risks stemming from nuclear weapons and they are not at all eager to have them on their territories.
103.	In our view, this could be achieved through an international agreement to be based on a clear and simple pledge by the nuclear Powers not to station nuclear weapons on territories where there are no such weapons at present. Such an obligation would cover all types of nuclear weapons—warheads, bombs, shells, mines and so on— whether deployed as combat systems or kept in depots and storage facilities. At the same time, non-nuclear countries would formalize their intention to refrain from any steps which directly or indirectly could lead to the presence of nuclear weapons on their territories.
104.	If all the nuclear Powers were to agree not to station nuclear weapons where there are no such weapons at present—and our country has already declared its willingness to do so—it would not be too difficult to reach international agreement. The Soviet Union would like to hope that the United Nations General Assembly will respond favourably to its proposal.
105.	The implementation of the initiatives which we are putting forth at this session would also result in a much stronger regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons without affecting in any way the possibilities of using nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. By the same token, our proposals, which are consonant with the idea of creating nuclear-free zones, provide even greater leeway for putting these ideas into practice through the collective or individual efforts of States.
106.	The need to prevent the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction is being increasingly felt. Upon our initiative, the Committee on Disarmament has started negotiations to that effect; but these negotiations are proceeding very slowly. The Soviet Union is in favour of the reaching of agreement on this extremely important matter and of the stepping up of the preparation of special agreements on individual types of weapons wherever necessary.
107.	This applies first and foremost to such inhuman weapons as the neutron weapon. The situation would become much more dangerous if the plans for its production, stockpiling and deployment materialized. It is in the interests of peace that those plans be irrevocably abandoned.
108.	Rapid progress in military science and technology- this frenzy of armament, so to say is increasing the risk that a point could be reached beyond which it would become absolutely impossible to verify compliance with the existing arms limitation agreements or those in the process of preparation.
109.	Wherever disarmament negotiations are taking place and whoever the participants arc, our line is directed towards achieving concrete results. An early conclusion of the Soviet-American talks on limiting strategic offensive arms is of particular importance. The essence of the problem lies in setting limits for the deployment of the most dangerous and destructive types of armaments, to be followed by negotiations with a view to a substantial decrease in their levels.
110.	It is to be hoped that a sober-minded and well- considered line in United States policy with regard to this extremely important matter will prevail, because a new agreement is needed equally by the Soviet Union, the United States and the world at large.
111.	Many countries on various continents welcomed the beginning of negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States on certain questions related to the problem of disarmament and the cessation of the arms race, including the talks on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in the Indian Ocean and on the limitation of the sales of conventional weapons.
112.	Positive results could have been achieved long ago at the talks concerning the Indian Ocean. However, ever since last February they have been "frozen" -through no fault of ours. This is giving concern to many States which cherished hopes that the talks would help turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace.
113.	What is required, in the first place, to limit the sales of conventional armaments and their transfer to other countries'' The political basis for solving this question is to be found in criteria of international law which would take care both of the task of limiting arms sales and of the legitimate interests of peoples fighting against aggression, for their freedom and independence.
114.	Of late, some progress has been achieved at the negotiations between the USSR, the United States of
America and the United Kingdom on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. It has been agreed that the treaty under preparation must impose a ban on any test explosions of nuclear weapons in any environment. It is all the more important to bring these negotiations to a successful conclusion. But for some reason or other our negotiating partners are stalling,
115.	It is in all earnestness that the Soviet Union has been raising the question of limiting conventional armaments and armed forces. Even today the role of conventional armaments is quite important, while the efforts by States to limit them are insufficient.
116.	No real headway has yet been made at the Vienna talks on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. Throughout the talks we have witnessed one and the same line pursued by our Western partners: "You socialist countries", they say, "should reduce more and we less". Of course there is no proof—there could not possibly be any proof-that such a unilateral approach is justified. This is nothing but an artificial piling up of obstacles.
117.	Our position is simple: without effecting any changes in the correlation of armaments and armed forces, their level should none the less be reduced by both sides. Some people who want to inflict damage on the socialist countries by changing the ratio of forces in favour of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ought to curb their appetites.
118.	The socialist countries have recently put forward in Vienna new proposals whose constructive nature is recognized even in the West. We are expecting a practical and positive response to them.
119.	In connexion with the problem of disarmament, it is appropriate to stress how acute are the problems of economic development of many countries which are asking for assistance. They are compelled to overcome great difficulties. Suffice it to say that according to United Nations data 1.5 billion people, that is to say over one third of mankind, are deprived of elementary medical attention, while some 700 million people suffer from systematic malnutrition. At the same time, enormous amounts of money, unprecedented in history, are being wasted on war preparations. And, what is more, military appropriations continue to swell.
120.	The Soviet Union has for a long time been proposing that military budgets, primarily those of the States which are permanent members of the Security Council, be reduced by a certain percentage, and that part of the funds thus saved be used to provide assistance to developing countries. This would be a major step of tremendous importance. Yet, what are we told in reply is that before cutting down military budgets they should be made the subject of study. But such a study could last for decades, and go on and on. To reduce means to reduce military budgets without any red tape-even under a pseudo- scientific cover. This calls for a political decision.
121.	In order to overcome the stalemate, we propose that an agreement be reached on the reduction by States having 
a large economic and military potential of their military budgets, not in terms of percentage points but in absolute figures of analogous magnitude. Such reduction could begin as early as in the coming fiscal year and cover a period of three years, with 10 per cent of the funds released as a result of reductions being channelled towards increasing aid to developing countries.
122.	It must be emphatically stressed that the reduction of military budgets is being given priority not only as an urgent task but also as one which can fairly easily lend itself to solution—provided, of course, there is a desire to solve it.
123.	The peoples of the whole world would heave a sigh of relief if the burden of taxation were reduced. Today, many are reflecting upon the causes for which some States - and not least the economically developed ones-are experiencing economic upheavals. Our answer is as follows: instead of throwing away immense material values on the conveyers which are continuously producing missiles, tanks, planes, guns and other means of killing people, these resources should be diverted to peaceful purposes. The resources thus released could be used to improve the living standards of the peoples of the world, to satisfy their primary needs such as housing, better medical care, education and science, and finally simply to combat famine.
124.	All this emphasizes the great responsibility for solving the problems that face mankind in the field of disarmament, a responsibility which rests primarily with those who determine the policies of States and their line in international affairs.
125.	So, from whatever angle one views the problem of ending the arms race and of disarmament, the Soviet Union is ready to seek appropriate international arrangements. We have submitted concrete proposals to that effect. Naturally, we shall be willing to consider the proposals of other States, too, aimed at achieving this historic task.
126.	The Soviet Union appreciates the efforts by non- aligned States to help get the disarmament problem off the ground. The activity of the non-aligned countries in this direction, just as in other areas of the struggle for peace, is growing, and that is a positive phenomenon in international life.
127.	The General Assembly can do a good service to peace if it facilitates the convening of a world disarmament conference. It is at such a forum that decisions binding on States could be adopted.
128.	It is all to the good that the United Nations is now more actively involved with questions of disarmament. This helps to put the relevant talks more in the limelight of public opinion. Let those who are spurring on the arms race, contrary to the will of the peoples, feel ill at ease. Everywhere in the world a moral atmosphere should be created which would make the opponents of disarmament feel pilloried.
129.	There is no people that does not crave peace. As to the Soviet people, we can say with full responsibility that it does not seek war, nor will it start one. This applies fully to our friends and allies as well. But outside the socialist community, too, there is no people that does not want peace. We are convinced of that. In States that pursue a militarist course the watershed lies not between the peoples themselves, but when the peoples, on the one hand, and the leaders at the helm of policy-making in these States, who have sold their heart and soul to the interests of small groups which are deriving profits from military production.
130.	States are faced with a great many international problems, whose number and complexity are unlikely to diminish with time.. But what are the conditions and what is the atmosphere in which it is easier to solve those problems'? Clearly, it is easier in the atmosphere of detente in the world, not in conditions of an aggravated situation, in a heated atmosphere. This is proved by the experience of many years.
131.	The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, no matter what contrived pretext is used to violate it, has been and remains a corner-stone of international life, of the further progress of detente. Every people that respects itself and every State with self-esteem has given and will always give decisive rebuffs to such attempts. The Soviet Union has not tolerated and never will tolerate interference in its internal affairs.
132.	The course of Soviet foreign policy for peace, detente and disarmament is a firm course. It stems from the fundamental requirements of the social system of our State, expresses the will of the entire Soviet people, and translates into reality the directives and principles adopted by congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
133.	Despite the complexity of the international situation, the Soviet people are looking to the future with optimism. Our confidence rests on the fact that the will of the peoples for peace is indomitable, that the forces favouring the maintenance and consolidation of peace prevail over those who would like to turn the course of world events in the opposite direction.
134.	Assessing world developments in this manner, we ourselves are ready to work without respite, and we call upon all other States to be ready to do the same, notably within the walls of the United Nations, to bring all peoples closer to a reliable peace and to make impregnable and invincible the buttress built against war.















﻿103.	Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to this important office.
104.	We all learned this morning with shock and sadness of the sudden death of Pope John Paul I. His passing deprives the world of a wise and compassionate leader whose brief ministry had already given promise of greatness.
106.	A generation ago the United Nations was created by men and women who shared a vision. They saw the need in the wake of war to create stronger international institutions that could dampen the flames of conflict and life nations and people to a new level of material well-being; they saw the need to afford self-determination to millions; and they saw the need for the world community to take a compelling stand against repression, discrimination and the denial of the rights of man.
107. The men and women who gathered in San Francisco in 1945 raised their sights above the differences and divisions of the moment. They dared to see the world as it could be—a world where- those who are hungry are fed; where those who are poor have escaped the degradation of poverty; where diplomacy among nations is a pervasive substitute for violence among nations; and where the resources of the world are used effectively and shared equitably.
108.	In the years since, the record of the United Nations in working towards that vision has been one of accomplishment. It has played an indispensable part in the process of peaceful decolonization, in defusing tensions among nations through its peace-keeping missions, and in promoting , genuine economic and social progress.
109.	Today the Members of this body still share that common vision. And we understand far better than ever before our common destiny: that no nation acting alone can assure for its people peace and economic security; that the future of each of our nations depends upon the future of all of our nations.
110.	Our challenge today is to summon the political, will to act in concert towards the goals we share, to go beyond the rhetoric of interdependence and to begin to recognize its inescapable implications for the national interests of each of us.
111.	We must build a new consensus on this proposition: that in this new era each nation must weigh more carefully than ever before its long-term interest in a healthy global community when making decisions about its immediate concerns. For only through co-operation and compromise in the short run can we assure our longer-term future.
112.	On crucial issues, the coming months will present turning-points of incalculable importance. In negotiations on the Middle East, on southern Africa, on trade, on arms control and on many other pressing problems, genuine progress has been made. Without continued progress, the gains we have already made can be lost.
113.	This point applies not to any single nation nor any group of nations but to every nation, including my own.
114.	The resolution of dangerous regional disputes and progress in limiting weaponry must always be at the top of the immediate international agenda. I shall return to these issues later. But we cannot so concentrate our energies on the political diplomacy of international peace, essential as it is, that we discover too late that international inequities and poverty and injustice within nations make peace among nations impossible.
115.	So let me concentrate my comments today on those issues that so centrally touch people's lives around the globe-economic security, the equitable development of the earth's resources and individual freedom.
116.	Shared economic progress requires a global consensus on the benefits of co-operation among nations. Cooperation and compromise are often difficult. The economic problems we share require long-term efforts, but we are all constrained by domestic concerns which call for immediate attention; the problems we share are so widespread in their impact that solutions cannot be found by a single nation or group of nations; and these problems require more than general agreements. The application of substantial technical and financial resources is necessary. Debate over sterile texts will neither feed the hungry nor create new jobs for the unemployed. Only common action can be effective. And each must contribute if all are to benefit.
117.	Only three or four years ago there was extraordinary tension between North and South. Each side was deeply suspicious of the other's motives. Each held sharply different perceptions of global needs and priorities. But these differences have been narrowed. From the seventh special session of the General Assembly through the fourth session of UNCTAD, the Conference on International Economic Co-operation and the meetings of this Assembly, and through other serious efforts in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development and the economic summits, agreement has been achieved on several basic issues relating to a new international economic order.
118.	We are agreed on the need to work towards the elimination of poverty in all countries. Concessional aid flows have been increased. More attention is being devoted to food production. Satisfying basic economic needs is becoming a greater priority of the international community.
119.	We are agreed on the urgent need to accelerate equitable non-inflationary growth. The round of multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of GATT now proceeding at Geneva are in their final stages. We are discussing guidelines for international investment. Private capital flows are increasing. The facilities of IMF have been expanded, and discussions are under way to expand the facilities of the multilateral development banks.
120.	We are agreed on the need to reduce economic instability and uncertainty. The IMF is playing a major role in providing balance-of-payments financing to those most severely affected by recent disruptions in the world economy. We are engaged in serious discussions on a variety of commodity arrangements, including a system of internationally co-ordinated national grain reserves.
121.	And we are agreed on the need to facilitate smooth adjustment for workers and businesses that have borne the brunt of changing economic circumstances. The Bonn Economic Summit Conference this year made clear that we must intensify our efforts in this area.
122.	Because we have come far, the road ahead will be even more challenging, for the most difficult issues remain. To maintain our progress, we should be guided by three fundamental principles in the North-South discussions over the coming months. First, every nation must resist the temptation to solve its own economic problems at the expense of others. We must fashion our domestic policies on the basis of global as well as national needs. Secondly, all nations which bear their fair share of responsibility should benefit from a healthy world economy. And, thirdly, all nations must enter international economic negotiations in a spirit of accommodation.
123.	These principles will not by themselves solve the problems we face. But without their general acceptance, there can be no genuine progress. Adherence to them will prevent critical negotiations from turning into polarizing and self-defeating tests of will.
124.	Let me discuss several major issues where the application of these principles can make the difference between success and failure.
125.	First I shall speak of the "Committee of the Whole" that is, the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174. One of our most recent collective efforts to address the economic challenges we share was the establishment of that Committee. The Committee has the potential to look at economic issues comprehensively and to identify longer-term priorities. The United States strongly supports that forum. At its meeting in May it made progress in identifying some important areas of agreement between the industrial and the developing countries. Substantive discussions in the Committee had an important impact on the Ministerial Meeting of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, held on 14 and 15 June, and on the Bonn Economic Summit Conference. We of course shared the disappointment of other representatives that a procedural impasse earlier this month interrupted the Committee's work.
126.	Since the September meeting, we have carefully examined the statements made by others on this issue. We have noted in particular statements made by the Chairman to the Committee on 8 September and to the press on 11 September, and have taken into account subsequent consultations. It is now generally agreed that the Committee would not seek to provide specific solutions to problems outstanding in other bodies. Rather, it would achieve agreed conclusions on fundamental or crucial underlying issues, and only to the extent that all members agreed to decide on them.
127.	We are satisfied that on the basis of these statements sufficient procedural agreement now exists to resume substantive work in the manner suggested by the Chairman at the end of the informal consultations on 6 September [see A[33/34, part two, annex A].
128.	I turn now to the question of trade. The spirit which must guide our work in the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174 applies as well to our policies on trade. The developing world is no longer on the periphery of world trade. Increasingly, growth in the developing countries is important to the health of the industrial countries.
129.	Commitment to open trade, however, is extremely fragile. It is tempting for one nation to use trade restrictions to export its economic difficulties. It is often easy to avoid adjustments which are beneficial in the long run, but which in the short run present difficult problems for workers and for industry.
130.	We must be concerned about rising protectionist pressures, but we should also recognize that world trade has expanded remarkably well in recent; years. Despite a deep recession in the early 1970s, we not only avoided the trading wars of the 1930s, but we continued negotiations to liberalize and to improve the world trading system. Our ability to conclude these trade negotiations successfully this year is a critical test of our commitment to an open trading system. An agreement will stimulate production, it will provide jobs, and it will help reduce inflation.
131.	Beyond our efforts to expand trade, the United States will fulfil our commitment to assist developing nations through differential measures, including, where appropriate, special and more favourable treatment. We, in turn, expect those developing countries which can do so to contribute to trade liberalization by improving access to their markets. Improved access will not only benefit the industrial countries; it will be even more important to many developing countries.
132.	Finally, we believe that in trade, as elsewhere, the developing countries should have a voice in determining the policies which affect them. We have encouraged their full involvement in the Geneva multilateral trade negotiations. We urge developing countries, especially those which play a large role in international trade, to participate actively in
GATT and in the agreements that result from the Geneva negotiations so that their interests are fully represented.
133.	I turn now to the question of commodities. An essential element of trade for most developing nations is their export of basic commodities. At the fourth session of UNCTAD we agreed to intensify our collective effort to address commodity problems. Progress has not always been as fast as we all would like, but this has generally reflected the technical complexity of commodity issues rather than the lack of political will or good faith. We will continue to work for stabilization agreements and other measures that strengthen commodity markets.
134.	Let me affirm that we believe a soundly designed common fund could play a useful role in alleviating commodity problems. A well-structured fund will provide economic benefits to participating countries. We also recognize that the establishment of a fund is of major political importance to the general North-South dialogue.
135.	We will co-operate with others to bring the common fund negotiations to a successful conclusion. Recent consultations have identified a convergence of views on some issues. All agree that a fund could play a useful role in reducing the over-all financial costs of supporting buffer stocks, which effectively stabilize prices.
136.	In addition, there is a growing recognition of the importance of encouraging improved productivity and more effective marketing of many commodities. A separate "second window" of the common fund, based on voluntary contributions and operating under agreed guidelines, might be an appropriate mechanism. We are-prepared to negotiate flexibly on this issue, as on others, if there is a similar approach on all sides.
137.	While progress has been made on some issues, important differences still remain. Movement on all sides of the conference table will be necessary. But we are convinced that with mutual accommodation a workable agreement can be achieved.
138.	As with trade, increased resource flows to the developing world must be part of an international system of shared responsibility.
139.	We ought not to think of resource transfers as a sacrifice for donors or a unilateral benefit for recipients They are an economic investment in the future of all countries. They will contribute to global economic growth, greater trade and enhanced prosperity for us all.
140.	My country is committed to increasing our contributions to both multilateral and bilateral development efforts. We have" done so in the past year: our multilateral commitments increased by 31 per cent and our bilateral programme expanded by 20 per cent. And, because we are determined that United States aid funds will be used effectively, we will concentrate our efforts in countries where programmes are aimed most directly at meeting the essential needs of their people.
141.	The United States believes strongly that a key objective of foreign assistance should be to help meet basic human needs. We recognize that nations will have different development priorities in approaching this goal. Whether emphasis is on enhancing the productivity of the poor, increasing food production, improving health or expanding industry which creates jobs, the critical ingredient in every nation is to have all its citizens—men and women—as active participants in and beneficiaries of their nation's growth.
142.	Finally, we recognize the debt problems that many of the least developed countries face. We will soon have authority from our Congress for retroactive adjustment of certain aid terms which would permit us to help those most in need.
143.	As we work together to promote economic development, we must also ensure an equitable sharing of the world's resources. Four issues demand our immediate attention. Our first urgent priority is ensuring adequate food and stable agricultural prices for all people. Four years have now passed since the World Food Conference, where we agreed on measures we must take for the future.5 But despite our efforts the fundamental problems remain: food production is hardly keeping pace with the growth in population; food deficits in many countries are increasing; and negotiations on grain reserves have dragged on without success. We believe progress must be made.
144.	The United States has created a 9-million-ton farmer-held grain reserve. We have proposed to our Congress the establishment of an international emergency wheat reserve of 6 million tons to provide food for emergency needs in developing countries. We intend to maintain our food aid level at a fair share of the target set at the World Food Conference.
145.	We will continue to support the activities of international organizations devoted to food production such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development. And we intend to make food aid a more effective tool in support of development.
146.	I propose that this Assembly review the world food situation to identify the current obstacles to progress and to restore a sense of urgency in meeting mankind's most basic need. We must not be lulled by good weather and plentiful harvests. Another tragedy is inevitable unless we act now.
147.	Secondly, we must act now to develop new energy resources so that we may avoid a harsh transition to the time when fossil fuels will no longer be plentiful. This task has several dimensions.
148.	There must be an expansion of oil and gas production, and we need to improve our conservation of these energy resources, especially in my country, the United States. The World Bank has expanded its lending to help developing countries increase their fossil fuel supplies. We welcome this, and we also encourage the regional development banks to assist.

149.	The development of nuclear energy will also be central to the future of many countries. We hope the' International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation will provide a consensus on nuclear technologies free from the serious risk of nuclear-weapon proliferation. My Government supports the development of safeguardable nuclear power, including assured nuclear fuel supplies. The developing nations should, of course, participate in the design and management of the institutions which form the basis of an international nuclear energy regime.
150.	Priority attention must be given to the development of renewable energy resources. Many technologies already exist for harnessing solar, wind and geothermal power. All of us can benefit from these technologies, but a special effort should be made to meet the needs of the poorer countries.
151.	Two opportunities now exist for the United Nations to continue to play an important role. The United States supports the proposed United Nations conference on new and renewable sources of energy.  Such a conference could result in a more co-ordinated United Nations energy effort and clearer priorities. It could also provide up-to-date information on renewable energy technology, and examine the role of the private sector in energy development. UNDP might also expand its efforts to help nations assess their own renewable energy possibilities, finance the testing of new technologies and provide training and technical assistance for effective energy management.
152.	The United States is willing to contribute to a major global effort to develop new energy resources. We will intensify our assistance programmes in this area. We will increase domestic research, which can benefit all nations. And we will expand co-operative energy programmes from which we, too, stand to benefit.
153.	Thirdly, we must strive to conclude successfully the negotiations on the law of the sea. At stake is whether that vast expanse of the globe will be an arena of conflict or of co-operation. Considerable progress has been made on a number of issues in these negotiations. These achievements have been obscured, however, by continued stalemate over sea-bed mining. The basis for an equitable solution already exists and is widely accepted. It permits all sides to benefit fully from sea-bed mining, with- private firms as well as an international enterprise being allowed to mine on a competitive basis. A mutually acceptable solution is imperative, and it is, we believe, possible. Time is running out for reaching an agreed solution. Without it, sea-bed mining will inevitably take place, but in the absence of an international agreed framework. That would be less satisfactory than a widely supported international regime.
154.	Fourthly, and finally, there is the critical question of how best to harness technology and science for the benefit of mankind. We hope that the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, to be held next year in Vienna, will focus attention on how all countries can contribute their knowledge to global development. It will be particularly important to find ways for developing nations to enhance their capacity to generate, select and apply technology for their own development priorities. We will contribute to the work of the Conference, and we hope to benefit from it.
155.	Furthermore, to help mobilize the technical talents and knowledge of our nation on behalf of the development of others, we intend to establish during the coming year a new foundation for international technical co-operation.
156.	The ultimate purpose of all our policies is the enhancement of human dignity. The rights to food, to shelter, to a decent education, to adequate health—the' rights which lie at the heart of our approach to economic issues—are hollow without political and civil freedoms: freedom from torture and government mistreatment, freedom to worship, to travel and to speak without fear, freedom to participate in the affairs of one's Government. There is no incompatibility among economic, political and civil rights; no choice that must be made among them. They reinforce one another.
157.	We commemorate in this Assembly the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Dag Hammarskjold described the Declaration as a living document. We have a continuing obligation to keep that document alive in our own nations. And as Members of the United Nations we must strengthen the international machinery that serves to promote the full range of human rights, including political and economic rights.
158.	We have made significant progress in the past year. Concern for human rights is more central to international discourse today than ever before. But more needs to be done. This Assembly should review the activities of the various United Nations human rights institutions. We must resolve in this Assembly to make torture alien to the experience of every nation and to conclude an international agreement to outlaw it. We need to ensure that we are doing all we can to end conditions which are tantamount to genocide. And we must ask what more each of us can do to ensure the vitality of the Universal Declaration, to provide amnesty to prisoners of conscience, to ensure due process for all and to advance social justice and equity for our people.
159.	In addition, the plight of one group of individuals, refugees, demands our special compassion. We urge all nations to increase their support for the vital humanitarian work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
160.	The refugee problem is not confined to any single region. In Africa alone, some 2 million individuals are now outside their native lands. We must do more to offer them sustenance, security and a realistic hope of resettlement or return to their homelands.
161.	In South-East Asia hundreds of new refugees from Indo-China appear daily, some risking their lives to cross borders, others challenging the sea in every form of vessel. We urgently need greater efforts to provide them with sanctuary. We hope that the High Commissioner will consider convening an international conference in the very near future to seek humane solutions to the desperate plight of these refugees.
162.	We propose that consideration also be given at a later date to a general conference on the world-wide refugee problem.
163.	Let me now turn to international peace-keeping. Too often the anguish of the uprooted is grim testimony to our collective failure to achieve international peace. War and strife are the enemies of the fundamental rights I have discussed. Today my Government and many of those assembled here are actively pursuing the path of peace in troubled areas of the world.
164.	The accords achieved at Camp David  offer hope that at long last a turning-point has been reached in the Middle East. The agreements achieved between Egypt and Israel, with active American participation, constitute a framework for a comprehensive peace settlement. Much remains to be done in the ensuing stages of negotiations, but a major step has been taken in resolving the difficult issues that lie at the heart of 30 years of Arab-Israel hostility. As negotiations are pursued on the basis of the Camp David framework a dynamic process will be set in motion that can profoundly change attitudes on the issues that remain to be resolved. That process will significantly advance legitimate Arab objectives while protecting Israel's security. It is our hope that the Members of this body will lend their full support to the task of building a just and lasting peace upon this framework.
165.	In his address before Congress on 18 September  President Carter reviewed the main elements of the Camp David agreements. As the President said, our historic position on settlements in occupied territory has remained constant. As he further said, no peace agreement will be either just or secure if it does not 'resolve the problem of the Palestinians in the broadest sense. We believe that the Palestinian people must be assured that they and their descendants can live with dignity and freedom and have the opportunity for economic fulfilment and political expression. The Camp David accords state that the negotiated solution must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
166.	The Camp David accords make a solid start towards achieving these goals for the Palestinians in real terms. In the West Bank and Gaza, the framework provides that Israeli occupation shall end and a self-governing authority shall be instituted. This can be achieved within a few months. Thus, for the first time the Palestinians have the prospect of governing themselves within the framework that has been agreed.
167.	The Camp David framework also gives the Palestinians a vital role in shaping their destiny by recognizing them as participants in all aspects of the negotiations that determine their future. The Palestinians will participate in the negotiations to set up their self-governing authority, in those to determine the final status of the West Bank and " Gaza, and in those leading to a Jordan-Israel peace treaty. Finally, the agreement on the final status of the West Bank
and Gaza will be submitted to a vote of representatives of the inhabitants for either ratification or rejection. These steps set in motion a political process of the utmost importance to all Palestinians.
168.	The Camp David accords concentrate on the means by which self-government can be established for the Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza, but there was also clear recognition by all three leaders at Camp David that the problem of the Palestinians living outside these areas must also be addressed. We recognize that this problem has political as well as humanitarian dimensions which must be resolved as an integral part of a durable peace settlement. When the Camp David accords call for the resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects, they acknowledge and embrace that central fact. As the political institutions of self-government take shape, West Bank and Gaza through negotiations among parties, the relationship between those institutions and the Palestinians living outside the area should be defined, including the question of admission of Palestinian refugees to the West Bank and Gaza.
169.	The framework provides for the establishment of a committee to decide on the modalities of admission to the West Bank and Gaza of persons displaced in the 1967 war. For the first time the parties to the conflict, Egypt and Israel, have agreed to work with each other and with other interested parties to establish agreed procedures for a prompt, just and permanent resolution of the refugee problem.
170.	As President Carter stated in his address to Congress, the United States is irrevocably committed to bringing about a satisfactory solution to the problem of the Palestinian refugees. We will play an active role in the resolution of this problem. A solution must reflect the relevant United Nations resolutions relating to the refugees. We urge the international community to support Egypt and Israel in establishing procedures urgently to address this issue in all its aspects. And the international community should contribute to a programme to promote economic development in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as to assist those refugees residing elsewhere.
171. We are determined to achieve a fair and just
settlement of the Middle East question in all its parts, and
we hope the Palestinian people will seize this historic
opportunity. It is our hope that the people of the Middle
East will agree that it is imperative to begin the negotiating
process now and not to stand still until every last issue is
resolved. We urge the other interested parties to join the
negotiations without delay.
172. As the Middle East peace process moves forward, it is
vital to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations
peace-keeping role there. It is critical that the mandates of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Forces in the Golan
Heights [UNDOF] and Sinai [UNEF] be renewed this fall.
Those Forces have thus far helped all sides avoid renewed
hostilities; they must now remain to help achieve a stable
peace.
173. Let me briefly review several other regional disputes
of major importance. 
174. In Lebanon, the fighting and tragic loss of life
continue. UNIFIL in southern Lebanon has done much to
stabilize the situation in that part of the country, and we
call on all to support this effort to help reassert Lebanese
authority. Elsewhere in Lebanon confrontation and tensions
continue at a high pitch. President Carter made clear
in his address to the joint session of Congress following the
Camp David summit meetings, and again yesterday, his
determination to spare no effort to assist in finding a
solution to the Lebanese tragedy. As the President said
yesterday, it is time for us to take joint action to call a
conference of those who are involved and to try to reach
some solution. It may involve a new charter for Lebanon.
175. In Namibia the world community faces a fundamental
challenge. I will be commenting on this more
fully this afternoon in the Security Council. Let me
simply say now that "the United States is determined to see
Namibia achieve independence in accordance with the
contact group proposal and Security Council resolution
431 (1978). We call upon South Africa to co-operate fully
with the United Nations so that this critical opportunity for
a peaceful settlement will not be lost.
176. In Rhodesia, time may be running out for the
possibilities of diplomacy. But we will continue to work
with the United Kingdom Government, the Governments in
the region and the parties to seek a negotiated solution, We
condemn the murder of innocent civilians as a matter of
both conscience and reason. The prospects for peace in
Rhodesia will diminish if violence increases.
177. On Cyprus, an opportunity now exists to help the
two communities narrow their differences and achieve a
just and lasting solution to this long-standing problem. The
United Nations has done a commendable job of nurturing
an atmosphere which should now make possible productive
intercommunal negotiations. To grasp this opportunity, we
would welcome and. actively support a renewed effort by
Secretary-General Waldheim to help the parties reach
agreement on a sovereign, bicommunal, non-aligned federal
Republic of Cyprus which would meet the concerns of the
people of Cyprus.
178. In this Hemisphere, we must respond to the agony of
those caught up in the violence and bloodshed of
Nicaragua. We and several countries in Latin America have
offered to assist in the mediation of Nicaragua's internal
crisis. It is our hope and expectation that all parties
concerned will accept these offers and 'agree to a fair
mediation process in which all can have confidence. Only a
democratic solution in Nicaragua-not repression or
.violence-can lead to an enduring stability and to true
peace.
179. As we work together to find peaceful resolutions to
the most dangerous regional disputes, we must also seek in
this Assembly to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping
capability.

180. And while this Organization works to limit violence
among nations, we must not lose sight of the havoc
wreaked by those who perpetrate terrorist acts on innocent
persons. No sin(;k' nation, acting alone, can deal adequately
with this serious problem. Collective action is essential.



181.	We are beginning to make some progress. Last year the General Assembly adopted a significant resolution on aircraft hijacking resolution 32/8. The Joint Statement on International Terrorism adopted on 17 July 1978 at the Bonn Economic Summit Conference  produced a much needed agreement on the harbouring of hijackers. We strongly urge all nations to subscribe to this Statement.
182.	The pursuit of peace and security must go beyond resolving conflicts and preventing violence. The security of all is enhanced if nations limit the weapons of war through mutually negotiated arms control agreements.
183.	We are engaged with the Soviet Union and other nations in a broad range of arms control negotiations.
184.	The conclusion of a strategic arms limitation agreement with the Soviet Union is a fundamental goal of the United States. We hope that we may conclude an agreement as a result of the second series of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks before the end of this year.
185.	The United States hopes that early progress can be made in concluding a comprehensive agreement to end the testing of nuclear weapons.
186.	Increased efforts are critically needed to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It is important to prepare fully for the 1980 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; to continue to make progress in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation; and to recognize one of the important achievements of the tenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament: the decision by several nuclear Powers to pledge, under specific circumstances, to refrain from use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States. We suggest that the Security Council take note of these pledges.
187.	The United States will also work to ensure compliance with the call in the Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action of the special session on disarmament [see resolution S-10/2] for restraint in the transfer of conventional arms. We are actively discussing with the Soviet Union how our two nations might encourage restraint in consistency with the legitimate right to self-defence and international obligations. We are encouraged by the new initiatives already being taken to promote restraint on a regional basis in Latin America and we stand ready to support similar efforts by countries in other regions.
188.	In conclusion, let me emphasize that on all the issues I have addressed today what we share is greater than how we differ. We share the same small planet. We share human aspirations—for better lives, for greater opportunity, for freedom and security. And because we share a common destiny, we are compelled to resolve our differences.
189.	If we focus on these common interests, we can begin to find the common ground for global progress. We can, as Jean Monnet said, "put our problems on one side of the table and all of us on the other".
190.	The measure of our progress will not be whether we achieve all our goals in this generation, for that will surely not be possible. It is whether we can now summon the will to move forward together so that our children may benefit from our efforts and our vision.











﻿223.	I would like to begin my speech by congratulating Mr Indalecio Lievano on his election as President of the current session of the General Assembly. I would also like to take this opportunity to extend warm congratulations to Solomon Islands on its admission to membership in the United Nations and sincerely to wish it new successes in advancing independently along the road to progress.
224.	Since the thirty-second session of the General Assembly last year, there have been new developments and changes in the international situation. The struggle of the people of all countries to win and defend national independence, safeguard international peace and security and oppose imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism has developed vigorously and scored new victories. In this struggle the countries and people of the third world have played the major role. Some Asian and African countries
and peoples have succeeded in defending their national independence and territorial integrity by repulsing military intrusions engineered by a super-Power and frustrating its schemes of subversion and sabotage. The African countries have voiced strong opposition to foreign interference in African affairs. The struggles of the people in southern Africa against racism and for national liberation have developed in depth. The people of the Arab countries and Palestine have fought persistently and resolutely against Israeli Zionism and the rivalry between the super-Powers in the Middle East. The people of the Latin American countries have achieved important successes in safeguarding their independence and sovereignty, developing their national economy and strengthening regional co-operation. The non-aligned movement, withstanding super-Power pressure, has maintained its basic orientation and become an important force in the present struggle of the people of the whole world against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. There is a clear trend growing among the Western European and other second-world countries towards strengthening their unity, expanding their cooperation and opposing super-Power interference and domination. All these are signs that the international situation has continued to develop in a direction favourable to the people of the world.
225. However, we must not fail to notice that over the past year there has been great turbulence in the international situation, and world peace and international security have been seriously threatened. The two superpowers have intensified their struggle for world hegemony, with one striving to preserve its vested interests and the other trying hard to extend its spheres of influence. Strategically the, focus of their rivalry is in Europe, where the two sides are locked in sharp confrontation as before. To outflank and encircle Europe, social-imperialism has stepped up its aggression and expansion in Africa, the Middle East and the Gulf region, seizing positions and resources of strategic importance and trying to control transportation routes, and this constitutes an important component of its strategy for world domination. Meanwhile, in an effort to strengthen its position in seeking domination in the Asia-Pacific region, it has stepped up its expansion and infiltration, created frictions and conflicts, and thus posed a direct threat to the security of the countries involved. In this period, the salient features of the tactics used by this super-Power in its offensive were as follows: in an increasingly flagrant way it has employed agents, has organized mercenaries and has incited Africans against Africans and Asians against Asians so as to make them pull its chestnuts out of the fire for it. It even has no scruples about using terrorist means of assassination and creating shocking incidents of subversion and disturbance. The social-imperialists' unbridled acts of aggression and expansion constitute a new trend in the international arena which calls for attention. They prove once again that social-imperialism is the more aggressive cid adventurous of the two super-Powers and is the major threat to world peace and security.
226. As a result of the intensified rivalry between the two hegemonist Powers and the accelerated global strategic deployment of social-imperialism, there have been more local wars and the danger of a world war has increased. Therefore, putting off a world war and maintaining world
peace has now become an important task for the people of all countries.
227.	Over the past year, the people of the world, in the face of the threat of a new war, have been increasingly awakened and have waged struggles in many fields. In order to safeguard their independence and security, many countries have been striving to strengthen their defence capabilities. People all over the world have condemned the super-Powers for their arms expansion and war preparations and have voiced a loud demand for a halt to the arms race. A growing number of discerning persons have urged a sharper vigilance against war. All this is no doubt of positive significance for preserving peace and delaying war.
228.	The super-Powers are busy spreading illusions of peace to lull the people of the world in an effort to cover up their plans for war. The social-imperialists babble that "detente has been a dominant feature" in the international political climate. If this were so, why should they spend colossal sums of money every year hectically expanding their arms? Why should they desperately seek an edge in nuclear weapons after establishing a superiority in conventional armaments? Clearly, the social-imperialists have ulterior motives when they foster a false sense of detente.
229.	A correct path must be followed in order to win and maintain world peace and put off the outbreak of war. The approach we stand for is that, first, it is necessary to tell truthfully the people of all countries about the growing danger of war, so that they may heighten their vigilance and make all preparations to comb t the aggressor. Secondly, efforts should be made to reinforce the struggle against the warmongers, frustrate every act of aggression and expansion of theirs, and upset in good time their deployment for war. Thirdly, there should be continued opposition to the policy of appeasement, which means compromises and concessions in dealing with the aggressor. Because, like rearing a tiger and suffering for it later on, such a policy is harmful and simply augments the danger of war. China has been acting on these three principles and will continue to do so in the future.
230.	The super-Powers are outwardly strong but inwardly weak. The more aggressive they are, the stronger the resistance they meet from the people of all countries. Over the past year, social-imperialism has stepped up its aggression and expansion only to teach the people of all countries by negative example and arouse them to a more resolute struggle against it and to bring about the further consolidation and broadening of the international anti-hegemonist united front. Such is the logic of history. The strength of the people is great. It is entirely possible to put off the outbreak of a world war so long as the people of the world get united, wage a tit-for-tat struggle against the superpowers' war plans and constantly thwart their schemes of war.
231.	The rivalry between the super-Powers endangers world peace and poses a direct threat to the independence and security of various countries. So it has become an urgent task for the people of all countries to defend national independence and State sovereignty.
232.	At present, the countries of the third world find themselves in a new and complex situation in their struggle to safeguard national independence. To further its aggression and expansion, social-imperialism is trying to fool people by flaunting a signboard saying "a natural ally of the developing countries" who "supports the national liberation movements". Besides, it is doing its utmost to sow discord among third-world countries. It confers on you the title "progressive" one day, but labels you "reactionary" the next. Now supporting one against another, now the other way round, it stops at nothing in creating dissension and undermining the unity of the third-world countries. The people of the third world have come to realize through their own experience that upholding unity and struggling jointly against the enemy are an important guarantee for victories in the fight to defend national independence. Over the past year, when confronted with the arch-enemy, they have attached importance to the general interest and have sought common ground on major issues while putting aside minor differences. They have upheld unity, opposed division and foreign interference, and have persevered in the struggle against hegemonism. At the fifteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU in Khartoum in July and the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Belgrade also in July, satisfactory results were achieved in the teeth of super-Power interference and sabotage. The Khartoum summit meeting strongly condemned any foreign interference in the internal affairs of the African continent, decided to strengthen African-Arab co-operation and laid stress on the peaceful settlement of disputes between the member States of the OAU and on strengthening unity and economic co-operation. The Belgrade Conference maintained the unity of the non-aligned movement by frustrating super-Power designs to split it. The Conference once again affirmed and safeguarded the nature and principles of the movement, stressed the fight against "all forms of foreign domination and hegemony" [see A/33/206, annex I, para. 10] and kept to its anti-imperialist, anti-colonialist and anti-hegemonist orientation. The two Conferences fully demonstrated the great vitality of the non-aligned movement and the OAU as well as their significant roles in current international relations, and they were an important indication of the further development of the united struggle of the people of the world against hegemonism.
233.	The grave danger of social-imperialist aggression and annexation has also prompted the countries of the second world to pay ever greater attention to the defence of their national independence. Faced with this super-Power's military threat and divisive schemes, the Western European countries and some other second-world countries have further built up their national defences, harmonized their mutual relations and strengthened their economic, political and military alliance. This not only conforms to the interests of these countries in safeguarding their independence and security, but it is also in the interests of the people of -all countries.
234.	The situation in the Middle East merits serious attention. The Israeli Zionists now still adamantly refuse to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories or to recognize the national rights of the Palestinian people, and they are carrying out new threats of war against the Arab and Palestinian peoples. Such truculence on the part of the Israeli Zionists is closely related to the support and abetment given them by the two super-Powers. One super-Power has always been shielding Israel. The other
super-Power, while trying hard to maintain a state of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East, has been stirring up trouble and sowing dissension among the Arab countries in order to undermine their unity and sap their fighting strength so as to fish in troubled waters.
235. The Chinese Government and people have always held that the Arab and Palestinian peoples are the immediate victims of the fierce rivalry of the super-Powers and the aggression and expansion committed by Israel. The settlement of the Middle East question can be realized only when it truly leads to the recovery of the lost territories of the Arab people and the restoration of the national rights of the Palestinian people, and only thus can it bring peace to the Middle East. The struggle of the Arab countries and people against Israeli Zionism is perfectly just, and it is closely linked with the struggle against hegemonism. The Chinese Government and people consistently and resolutely support the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their struggle to recover their lost territories and to regain Palestinian national rights, and we are firmly opposed to the two super-Powers competing for hegemony in the Middle East and grossly trampling upon the interests of the Arab people. We strongly condemn the Israeli Zionist policies of aggression and expansion. We do not recognize Israel and will have nothing to do with it. It is our sincere hope that through patient consultations the Arab and Palestinian peoples will eliminate their differences, ceaselessly strengthen their unity, gradually overcome the difficulties on their road to progress and finally win great victories in their struggle against aggression.
236 Southern Africa remains the biggest colonial region in the world today. Abetted and backed by the imperialists, the reactionary regimes in South Africa and Rhodesia are still zealously pushing their colonialist and racist policies. This state of affairs must not continue but must be thoroughly changed. Under heavy blows from the Zimbabwean and Namibian peoples rising in armed struggle, the racist regimes are h ding for their doom, but they are still putting up a last-aitch fight by pressing ahead with such political tricks as the so-called "internal settlement and making incessant incursions into neighbouring African States in an effort to maintain their reactionary rule. Moreover, there is no slackening in the rivalry between the two super-Powers in this region. The late-coming superpower, in particular, is carrying out infiltration and expansion by every possible means. We have always held that all countries which uphold justice should strongly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azama in their struggle for liberation. Zimbabwe and Namibia should attain genuine national independence free from any outside interference and on the basis of territorial integrity and unification. South Africa's policy of apartheid must be abolished. The United Nations must follow the historical trend and perform its bounden duty of putting an end to the colonialist and racist rule in southern Africa in accordance with the eager desire and just demands of the African people. China firmly supports the just struggles of the Azanian, Zimbabwean and Namibian peoples. We are sure that the great African people will shatter the last stronghold of colonialism and racism and win .complete independence and liberation for the whole of Africa.
237. The Korean people's just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland has won
the sympathy and support of the people of the world. At present, the key to a solution of the Korean question is that the United States must withdraw all its troops and armaments from South Korea and that the so-called "United Nations Command" must be disbanded. The United States and the Park Chung Hee clique of South Korea must stop all their scheming activities to create two Koreas". We firmly support the position and efforts of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to achieve the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. The resolution for promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session resolution 3390 (XXX)] should be implemented in earnest and without delay. The Korean question should be settled by the Korean people themselves free from any foreign interference.
238. Disarmament is' one of the important items on the agenda of the current session. The tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly on disarmament, convened not long ago on the proposal of the non-aligned countries was the first of its kind in the history of the United Nations. At the session, many countries strongly condemned the imperialist and hegemonist policies of aggression and war. Rightly pointing out that the real cause of the intensifying arms race between the super-Powers was their increased rivalry for world hegemony, these countries demanded that the super-Powers carry out genuine disarmament. They also put forward a number of reasonable ideas and proposals. The special session on disarmament has a positive significance inasmuch as it exposed the superpowers' arms expansion and war preparations and demanded that they be the first to carry out disarmament. But the super-Powers were very obdurate. They rejected any genuine nuclear or conventional disarmament. The facts show that the struggle for genuine disarmament is most arduous.
239. Under the pressure of the people of the world for disarmament, the super-Powers have been playing the tricks of sham disarmament to deceive the public. Recently, the Soviet Union put before the current session a new proposal entitled "Conclusion of an international convention on the strengthening of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States". Under the signboard reading "guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States", this proposal is designed to bind hand and foot the numerous small and medium-sized countries and deprive them of their capabilities for self-defence. Not contented with the large amount of nuclear weapons in its possession, the Soviet Union is desperately expanding its nuclear armament. Instead of undertaking the obligation not to use nuclear weapons under whatever conditions against the large number of non-nuclear countries, the Soviet Union wants those countries to abandon their right of possessing nuclear strength for self-defence. This proposal of the Soviet Union is simply designed to allow itself alone to possess large numbers of nuclear weapons, while forcing the non-nuclear countries to act according to its dictates in all docility. Otherwise, those countries would be exposed to its nuclear attacks at any time. Is this not pure gangster's lope, undisguised nuclear blackmail and nuclear threat? We have consistently held that the most effective means of eliminating the danger of a nuclear war and of guaranteeing the
security of all countries is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. Moreover, we have reaffirmed on many occasions that at no time and under no circumstances shall we use nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear countries. If the author of the proposed "international convention" had the slightest concern for the security of the non-nuclear countries and for international peace, it should at least undertake the obligation not to use nuclear weapons under whatever conditions against the non-nuclear countries, instead of playing tricks of one kind or another.
240.	During the current session, a further decision is to be taken on the machinery for disarmament. It is entirely legitimate for the numerous small and medium-sized countries to demand strongly a change in the super-Power manipulation of the disarmament negotiations and a reform in the disarmament machinery. The decision of the tenth special session to reform the disarmament machinery reflects to some extent the aspiration of these countries. However, the new negotiating body still falls far short of the demand of many countries, and it can hardly free itself entirely from super-Power control and ensure the realization of the reasonable propositions of various countries on disarmament. Of course, the progress of the struggle for disarmament does not depend entirely on the negotiating body; rather it depends essentially on whether the superpowers can be forced to change their intransigent stand. The struggle for disarmament must be closely linked with the struggle to safeguard national independence, defend state sovereignty and territorial integrity, and combat hegemonism. We are ready to continue to work together with the large number of small and medium-sized countries for genuine disarmament.
r
241.	In the past year, the third-world countries have continued their unremitting struggle for the establishment of a new international economic order. United as one, they have made great efforts for the realization of their just proposals in disregard of the threats and promises of the super-Powers. They have greatly expanded their economic and technical co-operation, and various organizations of raw-material-producing countries and regional co-operative bodies have been established and steadily consolidated. The third-world countries have also increased their economic and technical co-operation with many second-world countries. Some developed countries have taken measures to reduce or cancel some debts owed by developing countries. All this has a positive effect on the reform of the old international economic relations and the establishment of a new international economic order and on ,the development of the national economies of the third world.
242.	However, owing to super-Power obstruction and sabotage, no real progress has been made in destroying the old and establishing the new in the international economic field. One super-Power is playing with the words "new order" but is in fact still obstinately defending the old order. The other super-Power has put up the slogan of "democratic reform" but has tried to make international economic relations serve its interests in gaining world hegemony so as to extend and aggravate exploitation and control of developing countries: This is the main obstacle to the establishment of a new international economic order.
243.	The urgent desire of the developing countries for establishing a new international economic order has become a great historical trend. At the same time, it must be noticed that arduous and complex struggles have to be waged before this goal can be attained. We believe that, so long as the third-world countries keep to the correct principles and orientation of the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, persist in solidarity and unite with all forces that can be united and wage a long and unremitting struggle, they will surmount all difficulties and win successive victories. The Chinese Government resolutely supports this just struggle as well as the reasonable proposals of the developing countries, such as an integrated programme for commodities and its common fund, the reduction or cancellation of debts, an increase in funds for development, and better conditions for the transfer of technology so as to promote production and scientific and technological progress in the developing countries. It is also our hope that the second-world countries will all adopt a correct attitude to strengthen their co-operation with developing countries on an equal footing and contribute to the establishment of a new international economic order.
244.	At present, China is in a new period of development. Following the behests of our great leader Chairman Mao Tsetung and beloved Premier Chou En-lai, the Chinese people have set off on a new Long March and are determined to turn China into a prosperous socialist country with modernized agriculture, industry, national defence and science and technology by the end of the century. In high spirits, the Chinese people are working hard to attain this magnificent goal.
245.	In international affairs, China will pursue, as always, Chairman Mao's revolutionary line in foreign affairs. Firmly adhering to Chairman Mao's theory of the three worlds, we will strengthen our unity with the oppressed peoples and nations of the world and with all third-world countries, and unite with all countries which are subjected to super-Power aggression, subversion, interference, control or bullying to form the broadest possible united front against super-Power hegemonism. We will establish or develop relations with other countries on the basis of the Five Principles: mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity; mutual non-aggression;  non-interference in each other's internal affairs; equality and mutual benefit; and peaceful coexistence. We support all the oppressed peoples and Nations in their revolutionary struggles and all countries struggling to safes their independence and sovereignty and to defend international peace and security, and we are opposed to all forms of foreign rule, domination and hegemony.
246.. The past year has witnessed great progress in our friendly relations with many countries. We have warmly entertained on-friendly visits many State leaders from , whom we have received much encouragement, sympathy and support. In the current new situation, our State leaders, -out of a sincere desire for friendship, peace, understanding and co-operation, have taken the initiative of visiting many countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe. Our friendship with many countries and our mutual understanding have been enhanced through sincere and candid talks based on mutual respect. With joint exploration and endeavour, our economic links, scientific and technological co-operation and Cultural exchanges with them have been
markedly strengthened. Our friendly contacts with other peoples have also become more frequent. The Chinese people, and people of other countries likewise, are happy to see mo growth of friendly relations between them. We will continue our efforts in this direction.
247.	This year, our supreme leader, Chairman Hua Kuo-feng, has visited Korea, Romania, Yugoslavia and Iran. These visits, which have had satisfactory results, constitute a major event in China's relations with foreign countries, have received wide attention and have been given a positive appraisal by international opinion. These historic visits have greatly deepened the sincere understanding between China and the countries concerned, have opened up broader vistas for bilateral friendly co-operation, and are conducive to world peace.
248.	Recently, China and Japan signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship after making prolonged efforts and overcoming various obstacles. This treaty records the desire of the Chinese and Japanese peoples to live in amity from generation to generation. It includes the explicit stipulation that "... neither of them should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region or in any other region and that each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony". This is the first time that such a stipulation is included in an international treaty. The treaty is of great importance both to the development of relations of peace and friendship between China and Japan and to the defence of peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region.
249.	The Chinese people ardently love peace and are opposed to a new world war. Moreover, we need an enduring, peaceful international environment in which to build up our country. Faithful to Chairman Mao's teachings, China will never seek hegemony or act like a super-Power, neither now nor in the future, when China becomes a powerful modernized socialist country. Confronted with the growing danger of war, we are determined, while engaging in peaceful construction at home, to do our part, together with the people of all other countries, to safeguard peace and put off war.
250.	Reviewing the international developments of the past year and looking ahead into the future, we see that countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want revolution-this historical trend is irresistible though the road may be tortuous and the sky may be overcast from time to time. The world belongs to the people, and the future of the world is bright. Of this we are fully confident.




















﻿135.	The Federal Republic of Germany at present holds the presidency of the European Community and in the European Political Co-operation. Therefore, I should like to begin, Sir, by addressing you in my capacity as the spokesman of the nine member countries of the European Community. Let me first carry out a particularly pleasant duty by congratulating you on your assuming your high office. In you we greet the distinguished representative of a country with which the members of the Community maintain close and friendly relations. I am confident that you will give the thirty-third session of the General Assembly firm and effective leadership.
136.	We also congratulate the outgoing President, who was probably the first to preside over four General Assembly sessions-the thirty-second regular session and the eighth, ninth and tenth special sessions. During those sessions we were able to admire the skill with which he guided the proceedings and conducted negotiations.
137.	Our Community also thanks the Secretary-General, who has continuously and untiringly placed himself at the service of the United Nations. We appreciate his efforts to manage the many divergent trends and currents within our Organization for the benefit of us all.
138.	It gives me special pleasure to welcome a new Member in our midst—Solomon Islands. With the admission of every new Member we are moving ever closer to our common aim of the universality of the United Nations.
139.	The world today is in a state of transition, with two realities and philosophies in conflict with one another. The one reality is that of power politics. It finds expression in a gigantic arms build-up, which is constantly escalating and spreading to more and more regions, including regions of the third world. Behind this is the obsolete idea that a State can best safeguard its interests by force and by striving for predominance.
140.	The other, the new, reality is global interdependence. Today, all States need reliable access to the markets of others, to the technology of others, to the raw materials of others. They all need the growth of others to stimulate their own growth. They need co-operation in the fight against international terrorism. They need co-operation to protect the threatened ecological balance.
141.	In our complex world, however, this cannot be achieved by means of power politics. Force means chaos and destruction; force means bondage and loss of freedom for all. But co-operation for everyone's benefit can result only from an order that is accepted by all nations because all nations consider it to be just and because it is in their own interest to contribute to it.
142.	It is this perception that engenders a new international consciousness and awareness. It is nourished by respect for the independence and equality of States, by joint decisions and joint responsibilities of all, by the settlement of conflicts through negotiation and the reconciliation of interests.
143.	It is this consciousness that will determine the future. No one can turn back the wheel of history, however strong and powerful he may be. This world of ours, confronted as it is with huge common tasks, cannot but drift into self-destruction if countries still persist in trying to steer its fortunes by outmoded power politics.
144.	This new consciousness, this awareness of interdependence, gave birth to the Europe of the Community, which believes in a future of equality and partnership all over the world. The Europe we are building aims at realizing the great idea of the dignity and rights of man. It is by its very nature a democratic Europe. It is open to other European democracies, and we are looking forward to the accession of Greece, Portugal and Spain, making the Community of nine members soon a community of twelve. We feel ourselves linked with those European democracies which for reasons of historical tradition or other reasons have not, or have not yet, become members of the Community.
145.	However, the Europe of the nine is not an inward- looking community. Indeed, it endeavours in the wider world as well to promote peace and the welfare of all. It is the biggest trading partner in the world, especially for the third world, and it is the biggest donor of development assistance. It wants to be a centre of co-operation in the world, and it sees itself on the side of those who seek to create an order for that co-operation founded on equality and partnership.
146.	We want one world in which the nations will meet the challenge of global interdependence through global co-operation. But we by no means want a uniform world—quite the contrary; we want a world in which all nations can themselves determine their political, economic and cultural ways of life. Mankind needs diversity if its creative forces are not to fade away.
147.	The European Community is founded on respect for the equality of all its members and on the principle of joint decision-making. On the strength of these qualities and principles it can serve as an example for a global order giving all States, big and small, the same right and the same opportunity to play a part in the shaping of their common future. It can also serve as an example of the countries of a region forming an association and combining their efforts so as to accomplish the tasks at hand and to strengthen the independence, the political stability and the economic growth of that region.
148.	We are glad to see that the idea of regional association among States with equal rights is gaining ground in all parts of the world, and we support this trend.
149.	Under the Lome Convention we are co-operating with 53 African, Pacific and Caribbean States. Another expression of the new form of interregional co-operation is the Euro-Arab dialogue, with which both sides are pursuing the common goal of placing the interdependence of the two regions on a stable basis of comprehensive and long-term co-operation. In Asia, the Europe of the Community is establishing ever closer links with the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
150.	We follow with great interest also the work of other regional organizations, in particular, the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American States.
151.	The Europe of the Community welcomes the fact that the People's Republic of China is becoming more outward-looking, as is in keeping with its size and its political weight. The trade agreement between the People's Republic of China and the Community expresses the desire of both sides constantly to expand their economic relations and exchanges.
152.	It is now my privilege to describe the role of the Europe of the Community in the world and thus our
position on the central issues up for discussion at this thirty-third session of the General Assembly.
153.	As in previous years the conflicts in Africa and the Middle East again figure prominently on the agenda. With both those regions the Europe of the Community is most closely connected. We have a vital interest in the peaceful settlement of those conflicts.
154.	In large parts of Africa peace has been seriously disrupted. Many African States are in the difficult process of nation-building. In southern African an end to racial discrimination and independence for Namibia are still to be achieved. Thus Africa is confronted with the difficult task of settling internal and external conflicts by peaceful means and at the same time promoting its economic development. The rest of the world must assist Africa in this task. But, instead, conflicts are being aggravated by outside Powers which use the opportunities provided by those conflicts to establish new spheres of influence in Africa. Africa needs peace and Africa needs economic development. It needs, as the Nigerian Head of State said at the Fifteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held at Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978: ".. . massive economic assistance ... and not military hardware for self-destruction and sterile ideological slogans",
155.	We, the members of the Community, support the countries of Africa in their quest for peaceful development. We do not seek to impose our political and social system on Africa. We want to see an independent and united Africa whose nations will find African solutions and answers to African questions and problems. And with that Africa we want to co-operate on a basis of partnership, that is, on a basis of equality.
156.	In Namibia—after a hopeful development had begun-we are now confronted with a serious situation. The nine members most deeply regret the decision taken by the South African Government to hold elections in Namibia without the United Nations being involved. We are disappointed at this unilateral step taken by the Government of South Africa. Its action brings forth great dangers for Namibia and, beyond that, for the whole of southern Africa. South Africa in this way is playing into the hands of those who advocate violent solutions in southern Africa.
157.	Over the last 18 months efforts have been made in dogged and persevering negotiations within the framework of the United Nations to pave the way for Namibia to gain independence by peaceful means. Thanks to the understanding and goodwill of all parties concerned it has proved possible time and again to overcome deadlock, crises and setbacks. The South African Government has now conjured up a new serious crisis which calls into question all the efforts undertaken so far. Where the negotiations had helped so far to develop an atmosphere of confidence, understanding and readiness for compromise, the old differences are now re-emerging. The results achieved in laborious and complex negotiations involving African States as responsible participants-in particular the front-line States-are in jeopardy.
158.	The Europe of the Community supports the appeal made by the Secretary-General to continue efforts to achieve a peaceful solution to the Namibia problem on the basis of Security Council resolution 431 (1978) and on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General.  We are convinced that the report by the Secretary-General is in line with the Western plan for Namibia.
159.	The Community urgently appeals to the South African Government to consider the far-reaching consequences of its action. The new South African Government to be formed in the next few days is faced with a historic responsibility. The five Western members of the Security Council-Canada, France, the United Kingdom, the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany-yesterday decided to ask for a meeting of the Security Council in the course of this week and they expect that at that meeting the Waldheim report will be accepted. Such a decision should give an opportunity to the new Government of South Africa to reconsider its position, as we have requested it to do. It will then have an opportunity to put developments back on the right track, on a positive track. Without the participation of all political forces in Namibia and without the involvement of the United Nations, a peaceful, internationally recognized settlement is not possible.
160.	The dangerous situation produced by South Africa constitutes a challenge to the people of Namibia, to the United Nations and to all those who struggle to achieve a peaceful and internationally recognized solution to the Namibia problem. Furthermore the opportunity—and nobody should overlook this-to set an example for the peaceful solution of other problems in southern Africa would be missed.
161.	With regard to Zimbabwe, the members of the Community hope that in spite of all difficulties it will still be possible even at this late hour to arrive at a peaceful settlement with the participation of all parties involved. We are convinced that the British-American plan for Rhodesia still offers the most realistic possibility for peaceful transition to independence. The European Community is ready to offer its aid for development to a Zimbabwe which will substitute for the present minority regime an internationally accepted democratic majority Government.
162.	The nine members of the Community are urgently pressing for peaceful and rapid change in the system of apartheid in South Africa itself. That system of racial discrimination is contrary to everything in which the Europe of the Community believes. South Africa is a multiracial society. That society can find a peaceful future only in a State that guarantees the enjoyment of human rights to all and ensures that all can live together as equal citizens.
163.	We appeal to the future Prime Minister who will be elected shortly to make a new beginning here, too. The nine members of the Community are using the influence they have to bring about a change in this direction. We are still waiting for others to follow the code of conduct for companies of the Community in South Africa'0 which is designed to ensure equal treatment for black and white employees. We have furthermore supported the Security Council decision to impose an arms embargo on South Africa.
164.	The eyes of the world are also on the Middle East.
165.	The events that have occurred since the last session of the General Assembly, especially the courageous initiative of President Fl Sadat and the Camp David meetings, have renewed hope for a settlement to the bitter Middle East conflict which has threatened the security of the world for the past 30 years.
166.	In view of the close ties between Europe and the Middle East, efforts to achieve a peace settlement in that region are of vital interest to us, too. This is reflected in our determination to support all efforts to bring about such a settlement.
167.	The nine member States of the European Community have therefore paid a tribute to the achievements of the participants in the Camp David meetings and its successful conclusion. They have expressed their hope that the results of those meetings will represent another important step on the path to a just, comprehensive and therefore lasting peace settlement.
168.	If such a peace settlement is to be achieved it is imperative that all parties concerned participate in its negotiation and completion. Meanwhile no obstacle should be placed in the way of this process, which should be kept open and should through further development and wider participation lead to a comprehensive settlement.
169.	Proceeding from Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338(1973), which would have to be applied in all their parts and on all fronts, the nine members of the Community continue to believe that the settlement should be founded on the principles which they last set out in their declaration of 29 June 1977 in London, namely: the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force; the need for Israel to end the territorial occupation which it has maintained since the conflict of 1967; respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of every State in the area and its right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries; and recognition that in the establishment of a just and lasting peace account must be taken of the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. It remains our firm view that all these aspects must be taken as a whole.
170.	We uphold the view that a peace settlement in the Middle East will be possible only if the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to give effective expression to its national identity is translated into fact. This would take into account the need for a homeland for the Palestinian people.

171.	In this context it is important that Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) have been accepted by both Israel and its neighbours. This must be the starting-point for any progress in the peace-making process.
172.	The situation in the Middle East is inseparably linked with the situation in Lebanon. After three years of crisis and conflict the restoration of peace and order and the rebuilding of that country still seem remote. The members of the Community are still deeply concerned about this situation, which threatens not only the existence of Lebanon but the stability of the entire region.
173.	Once more they appeal urgently to all who have an influence on developments in that country to be fully conscious of their responsibility for peace, and they hope that all parties concerned will support efforts to strengthen the authority of the Lebanese Government in the whole territory, as called for in the Security Council resolutions on Lebanon. The members of the Community welcome the fact that the Security Council has renewed the mandate of UNIFIL. They appeal to all parties to give that Force their full support in exercising its mandate.
174.	On the Cyprus question there has still been no breakthrough, A solution to the conflict must be based on the principles of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It can be achieved only through direct negotiations between the two communities in Cyprus. The United Nations can facilitate such negotiations, but can be no substitute for them. The Republic of Cyprus is linked with the European Community by an association agreement. The Community will continue to give every support to the efforts of the Secretary-General to bring the parties together for constructive negotiations.
175.	The efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Africa, the Middle East and Cyprus have demonstrated time and again how indispensable is the role of the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
176.	The members of the European Community as well as other responsible Members of the world Organization have consistently contributed to the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations by providing troops, logistic support and financial assistance. They regard it as an urgent task to appeal to the sense of responsibility of all Members of the United Nations and ask them to increase their readiness to support peace-keeping measures. They are for this reason preparing a proposal to that effect for submission to the General Assembly. 
177.	The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has provided us with a broad basis on which to shape relations between the Governments and peoples of Eastern and Western Europe. What is important now is to work for the implementation of the Helsinki Final Act in all its parts. The Belgrade follow-up session in 1977 has shown the shortcomings in its implementation, and the Community will call persistently for these to be made good.
178.	The Helsinki Final Act is not important for Europe alone, for detente in Europe and in East-West relations can and should release new political and economic energy to master the great challenge of our times, the elimination of hunger and want from the third world. The developing countries need the support of the Western and of the Eastern industrialized countries. There is nothing they need less than a transfer of the East-West confrontation to their regions.
179.	This year's tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, which was devoted to disarmament was an expression of the awareness that all nations of the world have a vital interest in the success of the efforts to achieve arms limitation and disarmament. The members of the Community participated in that session with joint statements and contributions and attach great importance to its results. That session has strengthened by means of institutional reforms world-wide co-operation in pursuit of disarmament, and the Declaration and Programme of Action included in the Final Document of the session [resolution S-10/2] have established a broad framework for that co-operation. The task now is to develop further what has been achieved so far and use it to establish concrete arrangements. The Community will be playing an active role in these efforts. I shall be setting out the position of my own country in detail later on.
180.	I should now like to turn to economic issues.
181.	In the world of today growth and development have come to be a joint objective and a joint responsibility of all States. We are confronted with the following challenge: to build up an order of co-operation for the purpose of joint management in global economic interdependence, an order towards the establishment of which all States and all groups of States will make a contribution of their own so as to be able to achieve the dual aim of sustained non-inflationary growth in the industrialized countries and an accelerated and proportionately higher rate of growth in the developing countries.
182.	The establishment of such an order specifically requires the reshaping of North-South relations. In line with the present division of labour, the developing countries are supplying mainly raw materials, and the industrialized countries, above all, finished products. But what we need is an order designed to replace this traditional pattern of exchange by increasingly balanced co-operation and a greater degree of equality in this co-operation, and to provide the countries of the third world with more favourable external conditions for their development.
183.	In concluding the Lome Convention the European Community and the States of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group have in a regionally oriented approach undertaken to remould their relations with these objectives in mind. The Convention has already proved its value in practice, and the contracting parties intend to carry it forward in a new, further improved agreement.
184.	Within the framework of the North-South dialogue the Community is, furthermore, willing to help on a global scale to accelerate development and to establish a balanced pattern of North-South co-operation. It reaffirmed its willingness to work towards the achievement of these goals at the meeting of the European Council held in Bremen from 6 to 7 July 1978.
185.	The European Community is committed to free world trade and is ready to accept the structural changes resulting from open markets and to master the problems they create. It will help to ensure that the negotiations within GATT are brought to a successful conclusion by the end of this year. The purpose of these negotiations is unmistakably to pave the way for further liberalization and once more to create a climate of long-term security for international trade. The negotiations are, furthermore, intended to create favourable conditions, in particular, for an expansion of trade between industrialized and developing countries. The Community intends to keep its markets open and to continue widening access within those markets to products, including finished products, from the developing countries.
186.	We are determined to fight protectionism, which is a manifestation of short-sighted self-interest and is particularly detrimental to the third world. The import planning of the Communist industrial countries is also a form of protectionism, which explains why these countries account for only 4 per cent of the third world's exports.
187.	Within the framework of UNCTAD the Community is helping to achieve constructive results as regards a common fund and individual commodity agreements.
188.	On the question of investment in the field of commodities, new forms of co-operation between industrialized and developing countries must be developed. We must prevent any further shift of the exploration and development of commodities to the industrial countries, something which is happening even though in many cases the developing countries have lower-cost deposits at their disposal.
189.	Within the framework of its comprehensive development strategy, the Community and its member countries will increase the volume of their assistance and improve its quality. The poorest developing countries especially must receive an increasing share of official aid. We also seek to meet the needs of middle-income developing countries. This is why we must soon arrive at satisfactory decisions on replenishing the resources of the World Bank, of IDA, and of the regional banks and funds.
190.	It is due largely to the efforts of the member countries of the Community that the ministerial meeting of UNCTAD  was in a position to take a decision on the question of indebtedness [see A/33/15, part two, annex I, resolution 165(S-IX)]. The Community is promoting the transfer of private capital, which is an indispensable means of maintaining an adequate supply of investment capital for the developing countries and is encouraging the developing countries' access to its own capital markets.
191.	In order to ensure that direct investments contribute fully to the development process, we must at long last evolve reliable guidelines for this field of activity. These guidelines must be designed to meet the host countries' requirement of full control over their economies and the investors' requirement of legal security.
192.	In the field of energy the international community is confronted with the challenge of smoothly leading the world out of the era of oil into an era of new and renewable energy sources. This challenge can only met on the basis of world-wide co-operation. Hence the community welcomes the resolution adopted at the sixty fifth session of the Economic and Social Council recommending that a conference on new and renewable energy sources be convened.
193.	Simultaneously with the objective of establishing a more equitable international economic order, nations should pursue the objective of translating an equitable order into reality at home is well. It must be the primary aim of every development policy to satisfy the basic needs of all human beings. The poorest, too. must he given the ability and the opportunity to do productive work
194.	The Community considers the acceleration of that development process and the continuous reduction in the gap between rich and poor countries to he the central task of international politics in the last quarter of this century. We will fully contribute to the solution of these problems and we hope that (lie Communist industrialized countries, too, will begin to provide assistance on a scale commensurate with their economic potential and will open their markets to the manufactures of the developing countries
195.	The Community offered constructive co-operation at the last session of the Committee established under General Assembly Resolution M?4. or the Committee of the Whole and regrets that the Committee was not vet able to fulfil satisfactorily the tasks assigned to it, but hopes that it will soon be able to continue its work in a constructive manner.
196.	In the view of the Community it is. furthermore. important that we take a decision at tins session of the General Assembly on how to prepare the development strategy for the 1980s. The nations of the third world cannot wait any longer
197.	In December the United Nations will be celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We are conscious that we arc still far from translating that Declaration into reality all over the world. Millions of people are hungry in main parts of the world; millions arc oppressed on account of their race, sex or creed. Tens of thousands of political prisoners languish in camps and prisons. Others are deprived of their citizenship and exiled. And among those persecuted are main whose only "crime" was that they invoked their human rights. This is the reality in the year 1978.
198.	None the less, we must not lose sight of the long-term trend of fusion. Since the proclamation of human rights, people all over the world have increasingly come to demand the realization of their rights, and today human rights are enshrined in the constitutions of most States. But in many countries there is a sharp contrast between constitution and daily practice.
Through the United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenants cm Human Rights, and a number of other obligations, including the Final Act of Helsinki, the rights of man have also become an international concern. Today they are one of the major issues of world politics.
200.	Human rights comprise civil and political as well as economic, social and cultural rights. Freedom from want is no less a human right than freedom from fear, and vice versa. The United Nations has created a number of institutions and procedures to protect human rights. The Community urges that they should be used more effectively, that they should be developed and unproved. It urges also that those countries which have ratified the International Covenants on Human Rights adopted by the United Nations (resolution 2200 A) should indeed implement the provisions of those Covenants. Signature without corresponding action is worth little, The will to implement a treaty must be recognizable to the world public arid to the citizens of the country concerned.
201.	I should like now to add some remarks on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany.
202.	liver since it came into being, the Federal Republic of Germany has pursued a foreign policy for peace. All democratic parties in our country champion the cause of peace. We have a comprehensive understanding of peace: as a guarantee of peaceful, stable co-operation and of the common responsibility of all States, without which the problems facing mankind today cannot be resolved.
203.	The Federal Government's policy is embedded in the nine-member European Community and the alliance with the democracies of North America. Democracy, freedom and human rights are the unmistakable characteristics of this partnership. The close link between free Europe and the United States and Canada is the indispensable prerequisite for our security. This is a factor of world stability, and it is the hope of all who put their faith in freedom and not in oppression and predominance. This transatlantic partnership is more than a community thinking solely in terms of its own security interests. It is based on the great common aims; freedom, independence, the right of self- determination and human rights, not only for ourselves but for all individuals and all nations. That is why this partnership is irreplaceable - no less so than are our values. Upon these foundations we are helping to build bridges of co-operation across the ideological gulf between East and West. We want also to play our part in steadily reducing the disparity in levels of development between North and South.
204.	European union and Atlantic partnership are indispensable prerequisites also of our realistic policy of detente and a reconciliation of interests with the countries of Eastern Europe, a policy which we pursue together with our Western partners. The Federal Republic of Germany, by means of the Treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague,  has helped to further the process of detente in Europe and in East-West relations and since the conclusion of those treaties has always been ready to assist in seeking further progress. The Federal Government will continue that policy, which of course is a long-term policy. The policy of detente must take account of the indivisibility of peace all over the world.
205.	The development of the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union is of special significance for continuing detente in Europe. During the state visit which the Soviet Head of State paid to the Federal Republic of Germany last May, both sides reiterated their determination to raise the quality and level of their relations in all fields. By means of a joint declaration and an economic agreement they have again emphasized the long-term character of their relations.
206.	The Federal Government also-indeed particularly- includes the other German State in its policy of detente. No nation has a greater interest in detente than the German nation, for the line dividing East and West runs right through our nation. We aim, in accordance with the Basic Treaty,  to develop co-operation with the German Democratic Republic and to widen the contractual framework of that co-operation. We do so also aware of our responsibility for peace and for people throughout Europe. We wish at the same time to make detente something tangible in the everyday life of the people and, above all, to increase the possibilities for Germans on both sides of the border to come together.
207.	On signing the Treaty of Moscow and the Basic Treaty, the Federal Government emphasized that it remained the aim of its policy to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation would recover its unity in free self-determination. Here, too, we are on the side of progress. No one can halt the course of history. It is moving in the direction of unity, not separation; in the direction of progress, not delimitation. Finally, detente must stand the test especially in the very city that lies at the heart of Europe and at the heart of Germany-Berlin'.
208.	The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin  has improved the situation of Berlin considerably. I shall not conceal that there are still difficulties, which both sides must help to remove once and for all-all sides must help to remove them. What matters to us is that West Berlin should be able to prosper and develop, and we shall do everything in our power to ensure that it can do so. We do not want to change the existing situation unilaterally. We are maintaining and developing the ties between Berlin and the Federal Republic of Germany within the framework prescribed by the Quadripartite Agreement and we shall take care that West Berlin is fully incorporated in international cooperation. The strict observance and full application of the Quadripartite Agreement is a major prerequisite for lasting detente in the centre of Europe. Berlin is a symbol and a touchstone of the readiness for detente and co-operation between East and West.
209.	In order to safeguard peace under the conditions of East-West relations there must be a balance of military power. To ensure and maintain that balance is the goal of the security policy which the Federal Republic of Germany pursues, together with its partners in the Alliance. It is our desire to secure that balance, not through an increased build-up of arms but through arms limitation and disarmament. What we want is a stable balance at a lower level,
210.	The Federal Government hopes for an early and successful conclusion of the second series of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. In a system of military balance between the alliances, the Soviet nuclear medium-range missiles should not be left out of consideration. Soviet superiority in this field is a source of concern to us. In the interests of true stability it is necessary that this existing imbalance should be reduced, including also the so-called grey area.
211.	The aim pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany, together with its allies, in the Vienna talks on mutual and balanced force reduction is to establish approximate parity in Central Europe, in the form of a common collective over-all ceiling for ground forces and a reduction of tank disparity. An important result of the visit to Bonn of the Soviet Head of State was that in the joint declaration issued with Chancellor Schmidt the principle of parity was expressly recognized for the first time in an East-West statement. The joint declaration says:
"Both sides deem it important that no one should seek military superiority. They proceed on the assumption that approximate equality and parity suffice to safeguard defence."
212.	This principle must now be translated into reality. In order to achieve, by means of reductions, true parity between East and West in the heart of Europe, the two sides must first agree on the data basis. The discussion on data is therefore now the main topic of the Vienna negotiations and will be continued.
213.	Disclosure of military budgets and confidence- building measures such as the exchange of observers during manoeuvres are therefore important preliminary steps towards verified arms limitation and disarmament.
214.	The Federal Republic of Germany therefore supports all measures calculated to make the balance of military power more transparent and in this way to build up more confidence. It has played a part in the preparatory work done by the Secretary-General to ensure disclosure and comparability of military budgets. The limitation and reduction of nuclear weapons and the non-proliferation of these weapons are of world-wide importance.
2)5. We appeal once again to all countries that have not yet done so to accede at long last to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
216.	Along with the efforts to promote nuclear arms limitation and non-proliferation, the efforts to limit and reduce conventional forces must also be stepped up. The tenth special session of the General Assembly, on disarmament, rightly emphasized this requirement.
217.	The greatly increased volume of weapons transferred has become a problem of the first order. This transfer must be restricted by supplying and recipient countries jointly. The Federal Republic of Germany does not supply any weapons to areas of tension. Moreover, only in exceptional cases does it allow arms to be supplied to countries outside the alliance. The proportion of our arms exports to the third world is 0.2 per cent of our over-all exports.
218.	We consider it intolerable that the world spends in the region of $400 billion every year for military purposes. This is a threat to peace; in a world in which there is much poverty and hunger, this is a challenge to reason and to our moral conscience. It is time that this money was released and earmarked for the economic and social development of all nations, thus also serving to increase the security of every nation.
219.	International terrorism has become an acute problem of increasingly threatening proportions. It can be stopped only if all countries co-operate in a spirit of solidarity.
220.	As long ago as the thirty-first regular session of the General Assembly the Federal Government proposed that an international convention be concluded on measures to prevent the taking of hostages.10 The Committee drafting such a convention has undoubtedly made progress, and I would ask the General Assembly to extend its mandate in accordance with its recommendation.
221.	The countries participating in the Bonn Economic Summit Conference declared their willingness to intensify their joint efforts in the fight against aircraft hijacking in particular,  In cases where a country refuses to extradite aircraft hijackers or to take court action against them, air traffic with that country is to be discontinued. This is an important step forward and other Governments are called upon to join us in this action.
222.	I spoke earlier about the task of jointly managing world economic interdependence. The Federal Republic of Germany is conscious of the responsibility that falls on it as the world's second largest trading country in carrying out this task,
223.	At the Bonn Economic Summit Conference in July we promised that, in order to strengthen our growth we would introduce additional measures to stimulate demand costing about 1 per cent of the gross national product. That promise has been kept.
224.	In the months, indeed years, previous to that we had, moreover, already helped considerably to promote economic activity and growth in the countries with which we trade. In the first half of 1978 our imports increased in real terms by 8 per cent. They increased much faster than our exports and were considerably higher than those of nearly all other major industrialized countries.
225.	With an inflation rate of 2.4 per cent in August 1978, the Federal Republic of Germany is close to price stability. It exports growth and stability, and 1 thank you, Mr. President, for yourself having explicitly expressed appreciation of this.
226.	My country is also making its full contribution in promoting the development of the third world.
227.	"We are firmly in favour of ensuring a steady increase in exports of manufactures from the third world. Indeed, we see in this increase and in the corresponding opening up of markets in the industrialized countries a central element of the evolution of a balanced world economic order. In 1977 our imports of manufactures from the non-oil- exporting, non-European developing countries were up by 10 per cent. That means that they have increased at four times the rate of our national product. This amazing rate of growth impressively demonstrates the openness of the German market. The non-European developing countries, excluding the oil-producing countries, ran up a trade- balance surplus in relation to the Federal Republic of Germany of 2.7 billion marks.
228.	The Federal Government has made a special effort this year and boosted its development assistance budget by more than 20 per cent. It also plans considerable increases for the years ahead, so that it will rise at a rate significantly higher than that of the over-all budget.
229.	In addition, we have further improved the conditions on which aid is given. As from 1978 we are giving aid to the least-developed countries entirely in the form of grants. The Federal Government will also convert into grants development assistance loans already afforded to that group of countries, which amounts to cancelling debts of $2 billion or more.
230.	The Federal Government expects the Committee of the Whole at last to deal with the substance of its work. This body is too important for the North-South dialogue to be allowed to continue any longer to deal with procedural questions. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will do all it can to ensure the success of the Committee's work.
231.	Of great importance for the future of international economic growth and development is the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. Here we must above all find a balanced solution as regards a regime for sea-bed mining. It must give all States and enterprises access to the resources of the deep sea and bring with it the political and economic security needed for the heavy long-term investment in sea-bed mining.
232.	The focal point of all efforts to lead the world, which is in a phase of transition, to an order of equality and partnership continues to be the United Nations. The Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its will to support and strengthen the United Nations.
233.	The United Nations is more than a forum for the formation of international public opinion. It is called upon to act. It must become more capable of action. This applies above all to the important task of safeguarding peace. The Federal Republic of Germany feels that all Members of the United Nations should become more acutely aware of their responsibility for peace-keeping measures. No one should remain aloof where this central function of the United Nations is concerned.
234.	Furthermore, it is necessary to improve the instruments available to the United Nations for preserving the peace; for example, by providing training facilities for personnel required for peace-keeping operations and keeping the Secretary-General regularly informed of available units or logistic capacities for peace-keeping operations.
235. In other areas, too, we must strengthen and develop the institutions of the United Nations. This applies also to the task of the United Nations in establishing an independent institution for the protection of human rights. The stronger the United Nations, the stronger each Member State will feel in exercising its right of self-determination and the stronger every individual will feel in exercising his human rights. The United Nations must be the citadel of equality of rights in the face of hegemony and power politics in any form; it must be the champion of the poor against the rich, the weak against the strong. The United Nations will attain this goal only if it keeps itself free from sweeping judgements, propaganda and agitation, if it is a forum in which reason and the desire for justice prevail. We want to help the United Nations achieve its great aims: to preserve peace, to promote economic and social progress and to protect the human rights of all individuals and the right of self-determination of all nations.
 

﻿
1.	Mr. President, it is a pleasure for me to greet you as the representative of a continent with which we find that we have, through its Latin roots, long-standing affinities that are still very much alive. I also want to pay a tribute to you as an historian, economist and statesman whose training and experience will surely be invaluable to the pursuit of our work. I wish you, as indeed I wish us all, complete success in it and I assure you that you can count on our total co-operation.
2.	By recalling the eminent qualities of our Secretary-General and paying a tribute to his tireless dedication, I am not simply conforming to some kind of ritual. It is only natural that the outstanding debt the international community owes him should be acknowledged publicly and that we should tell him once again how grateful we are to him for serving the goals of our Organization with such wisdom, enthusiasm, energy and competence.
3.	One year ago from this very rostrum1 I observed that the world situation was neither good nor reassuring. Alas, the events that have occurred in the past 12 months are scarcely reason to alter that view. The main points of tension persist; new ones have emerged; still others have reappeared. Economic imbalances and inequalities remain and at times have even widened. While the guiding principles of our Charter are not contested, one has to admit that their application is still inadequate. Finally, human rights are still subject to many violations.

4.	That observation may seem severe but it is not intended to be pessimistic. The United Nations today is represents ? e of almost the entire world community. It has been enlarged again by the admission of Solomon Islands, which we are pleased to welcome. Mindful of the countless ties it has long had with the Pacific region, France hopes to enjoy the best of relations with that new State.
5.	As our Organization draws still closer to being universal it is acquiring growing influence in world affairs. As a founding Member of the United Nations, and having fully integrated its goals and principles into our own political philosophy, France welcomes this course of events. As we have shown just this year, we are prepared to associate ourselves directly with the efforts of our Organization on behalf of peace. Indeed, now more than ever France is convinced of the value of collective action and the need for genuine international co-operation, without which our quest for peace and prosperity would be but an illusion.
6.	France pursues that policy first and foremost in its natural environment, Europe. With its eight partners, France is continuing the work begun more than 20 years ago to build a prosperous and peaceful community able to make its own contribution to international life. The current President of the European Community has described to the Assembly our views on the main questions it is to debate this session [see 8th meeting, paras. 135-200]. He expressed our shared determination to steer the development of our peoples on a course that is more rational and more generously open to the world. The many countries of every continent that are associated with the Community, as well as those nearby that are preparing to join, are aware of the determination behind this endeavour. They know the price and appreciate the difficulties in the present economic situation.
7.	Beyond the context of the nine countries members of the Community, France applies in Europe the principles of detente which it helped define and to which it remains deeply committed. Whatever the vicissitudes or stumbling-blocks, that policy is still the only reasonable one; therefore it must be pursued and developed to the full dimensions given to it by the Final Act of Helsinki.2 It must also be extended elsewhere in the world, for clearly areas outside Europe must not become the object or stakes of a confrontation between the major Powers, or the very process of detente will be imperilled.
8.	Long ago we established without reservation ties with European nations having social systems different from our own, and my country reaffirms its commitment to co-

operation with the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe. In the same way, it welcomes the development of its relations with the People's Republic of China. It intends to make those relations commensurate with the physical, human and political dimensions of that great country.
9.	"To maintain international peace and security": that is the principal goal the Charter assigns to our States. Now, even more than last year, persistent tensions or current conflicts are jeopardizing international peace. We are all aware of them. They are located primarily in the Middle East, in Africa and in the Indo-Chinese peninsula. The draft text on peace-keeping, which my colleague from the Federal Republic of Germany presented on behalf of the European Community [A/SPC/33/L.19J, deserves the full attention of the Assembly, because it invites us at a very opportune moment to lend the Organization our assistance in this essential matter of collective security. Occasions for doing so, I am sorry to say, are not lacking.
10.	In view of the crisis provoked by the Israeli intervention in southern Lebanon, my Government decided last March to participate in UNIFIL. Its decision to make a contingent available to the Organization was a concrete expression of its often stated commitment to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of that friendly country and of its support for President Sarkis's efforts to Strengthen the authority of the State and reconcile the communities within Lebanon. Who can fail to see that a free and united Lebanon is an indispensable element for the equilibrium of the entire region? But who can fail to see also that its tradition of freedom and openness exposes it more than any other State to the impact of the tensions and crises that surround and penetrate it?
11.	It was therefore justifiable for the international community to give the people of Lebanon, who had already been so severely tried, direct evidence of support following the occupation of southern Lebanon by Israeli armed forces. The operation undertaken by the United Nations has unfortunately not achieved all the objectives set for it. Although the withdrawal of Israeli troops was achieved, they are still overtly supporting rebellious elements along the border which refuse to submit to legitimate Lebanese authority and keep tension alive by dangerous acts of harassment. Security has not yet been restored to the entire area, mainly because it has been impossible for the units of UNIFIL to deploy along the border.
12.	With regard to restoring the authority of the Government of Beirut, the obstacles to this are not ones that UNIFIL has the mission or the means to overcome. The Force cannot take the place of the Government in the exercise of its sovereignty. While the Force—and we should pay tribute to it since the difficulties of the task are unprecedented for an operation conducted by our Organization—may draw on all the resources available to it in the framework of its mandate, it is not its job to maintain law or to impose a settlement the implementation of which would require also the co-operation of forces outside its sphere of action.
13.	UNIFIL would be diverted from its real goal if the protection it provides permitted the status quo to continue
and the parties to become immured in their intransigence, deaf to the suffering of the people and blind to the dangers of allowing the wound to fester. This was the meaning of the Security Council's resolution 434(1978) of 18 September to renew the mandate of the Force for four months. The stability of the region requires measures to be taken without delay to restore the authority and sovereignty of Lebanon, and everyone who understands this will find encouragement in this extension of the Force's mandate. But the time-limit imposed on the mandate should serve as a warning to those who entertain the illusion that the presence of the Force will from now on be a permanent factor in the situation.
14.	I do not want to leave the subject of Lebanon without stressing my Government's concern at the persistence of tensions in other parts of that country, particularly in Beirut. I should like to remind you once again of our constant position: that there can be no solution to the crisis in Lebanon unless it is founded on respect for the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of that country. Any undertaking that did not recognize this requirement would be doomed to failure and would risk destroying, along with itself, the very cause it claimed to serve.
15.	The situation in Lebanon cannot be dissociated from the Middle East situation, which has greater repercussions on that country than on any other in the region. After the historic initiative taken by the President of Egypt, Mr. El-Sadat in going to Jerusalem last fall, a new situation emerged Both those who approved and those who disapproved recognized it. Everyone realized that what was at stake was no longer Israel's existence but the terms of its coexistence with the Arab countries.
16.	This breach in the wall of distrust that had separated Israel and its neighbours for 30 years was not turned to as much advantage as had been hoped; the process begun last winter stalled too quickly. The President of the United States, Mr. Carter, tried to inject new life into it, and I want to pay a tribute to his courage and tenacity in his personal involvement in the Camp David undertaking. This meeting, unprecedented in style, has ushered in a new phase. Clearly, there is still great uncertainty in it. But we would like to hope that under the. shadow of ambiguities, precaution and silence, the complex texts adopted by two of the parties directly concerned can be used to further progress towards the necessary settlement.
17.	We believe that, for this phase to be decisive and to lead to peace, it must pave the way to an over-all settlement, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), with which all the interested parties would be associated, including the representatives of the Palestinian people. This settlement, may I repeat, must be based on withdrawal from the territories occupied in 1967, on recognition of the right of the Palestinians to a homeland, on consideration for the legitimate concern for security of all the States in the region, naturally including Israel, as well as on the mutual recognition of boundaries and on the gradual establishment of peaceful relations among the States concerned. Only respect for these principles can bring about the just and lasting peace to which all the peoples of the region aspire.
18.	We deplore the fact that in Cyprus the renewed efforts of our Secretary-General have had little success in breaking the stalemate. In order to strengthen the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and to restore trust between the communities, these communities must resume their talks and must be prepared to conduct them on a reasonable basis. The de facto state of affairs must not become law; pre-conditions cannot lead to negotiation. My country is too closely linked with that part of the Mediterranean not to know how deep and firmly rooted the concerns of each party are, but our own historical experience has shown us how much can be overcome by the determination of leaders and peoples. It is this impetus that we urge the parties to find, and we are
always ready to encourage them to do so. 
19.	Africa has suffered new ordeals this year, without a settlement being found for certain problems too long discussed by our Organization. That continent, one of the cradles of humanity, has begun a new chapter in its history. Many recently independent States, which have not yet firmly established internal equilibrium, today find themselves involved in rivalries which are not their own and which thus hurt their chances in the only struggle that is worth while, the struggle for development.
20.	In Rhodesia the recent turn of events has increased the dangers. The illegal regime in Salisbury continues to defy the international community. The agreement reached last March between Ian Smith and certain nationalist leaders with the aim of promoting a so-called "internal solution" only deepened divisions and heightened tensions. The application of the Anglo-American plan drawn up last year at this time would doubtless have paved the way for Zimbabwe's independence to be accepted, but we see today that violence is on the rise. Only direct negotiations among all the interested parties under the aegis of the administering Power could make it possible for Zimbabwe to accede peacefully to independence. But time is passing, intransigent positions are becoming more entrenched, and a storm is brewing. It is high time to listen to reason.
21.	In rejecting the implementation of the plan to settle the question of Namibia-a plan it had accepted four months previously—South Africa has created a crisis that could have grave consequences if the Government in Pretoria does not reconsider the position it has taken in defiance of international opinion.
22.	France again asserts that there is no essential difference between Mr. Waldheim's proposals and the settlement plan of the five Powers. In finding fault with some adjustments that alter neither the spirit nor the basic terms, the Republic of South Africa seems to be looking for pretexts to back out. In agreement with its Western partners, France has asked that the Security Council meet as soon as possible in order to adopt the Secretary-General's proposals.
23.	Confident as it is of the support of the African countries and, above, all of those the front-line countries,
and mindful as it is of the suffering of the Namibian people, who have waited too long for the right to self-determination to be accorded them, and assured as it is, along with its four partners, of the support of the international community, France again most solemnly calls upon South Africa to refrain from setting out on a dead-end road which can lead it only to suicidal isolation. Let me add that Namibia's independence will be effective only if prepared in co-operation with the international community.
24.	In the Horn of Africa, where violent clashes occurred last year, the situation is still disturbing. It is high time that the disputes that are setting Africans against each other were left to the Africans alone, so that they may seek the paths of a settlement through procedures of their own. Accordingly, it falls to the Organization of African Unity [OAU] to continue its efforts at rapprochement, without which tension and resentment will persist.
25.	Three other situations especially hold our attention: they involve Chad, Western Sahara and Zaire. I will discuss these at somewhat greater length because France's position has not always been understood, nor has there always been a desire to understand it. Because France has on three occasions been led to give direct assistance to the countries concerned, it has been claimed in some quarters that France sought to play some kind of role as "gendarme of Africa". I want once again to refute these accusations, which show little understanding of the reasons for our policy, which is based on two principles that I have already explained on several occasions but that I should like to reiterate.
26.	First, it is for African countries themselves to settle their disputes. This means that their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity must be free from all interference that would make Africa the arena for rivalries from outside the continent; it means that they must remain free to decide their political options for themselves.
27.	Secondly, it is with strict respect for the sovereignty of States that France shows its solidarity with Africa. "Africa for the Africans" does not mean rejecting this solidarity or erasing friendships.
28.	Though France did intervene on the African continent, it was always at the express request of the recognized Government of the country in question, and the extent and duration of French assistance were limited according to the necessities of the situation. In each case France was responding to an appeal from States which were victims of aggression originating from or supported from the outside; these States were trying to defend themselves within their borders and did not yet have the military means to ensure their own security.
29.	Accordingly, my country remains true to the policy of non-interference and of co-operation that it has always followed; no one can accuse France of straying from it and following supposed neo-colonialist or other designs.
30.	These supportive actions do not of course imply that we have taken any position on the substance of the issues or made any attempt to impose a solution. To our mind, the settlement of disputes is the exclusive domain of the parties concerned.
31.	In Chad, unmistakable aggression developed this past spring in violation of the Sebha and Benghazi cease-fire agreements; this aggression was clearly backed from the outside and led the Government of Chad to request our support. The sole objective of our action was to make it possible to restore the security necessary to the quest by the people of Chad—and by them alone-for national reconciliation. Today this endeavour is well under way, as everyone can see.
32.	In the different situation that prevails in the western reaches of the Sahara, France similarly answered an appeal from Mauritania, a country without substantial material resources or military forces which was the victim of aggression supported from the outside on uncontested national territory. In this matter France, which has longstanding ties with all the States involved in the conflict, has but one wish, and that is to see these States re-establish friendly and fruitful co-operation with each other. Accordingly, we note with interest the recent turn of events that is more favourable to restoring calm. We hope this trend grows. Since we had no part in the Madrid agreements, we would not be party to the dialogue that might begin. But we are prepared to encourage such a dialogue so that a peaceful solution might at last be found, with the help, if need be, of international organizations. As for us, it is in the forum of the United Nations that we have stated our commitment to the self-determination of peoples.
33.	For the second consecutive year, Zaire has had to endure bloody incursions in Shaba province by elements from the outside. To all indications, the toll of this attack in human lives, and material terms would have been even heavier without rapid international support. Since our soldiers have long since returned to their bases on our territory, who today can question the strictly humanitarian concerns that motivated us?
34.	France's action in Africa has never been aimed at jeopardizing the sovereignty or security of any country on that continent. Our sole ambition is to contribute, when the desire for this is expressed and when we are asked, to the development and well-being of the peoples of Africa, who have as much right as anyone else to stability and security.
35.	As for the Comoros, I emphasized last year that France had a feeling of solidarity with countries to which it was especially bound by history, and that we were ready to demonstrate this feeling toward the new State. I am therefore pleased that diplomatic relations have now been established between the Comoros and France and that the door is thus open for co-operation. Our co-operation can only facilitate better understanding between the Comorians and their neighbours in Mayotte, who have freely chosen a different path but who, I repeat, will have another opportunity to express their wishes regarding their future.
36.	Therefore, was it necessary to enter the question of Mayotte on our agenda again? Allow me to express some
doubt about the usefulness of such a debate if in fact the aim is, as everyone must hope and work for it to be, the restoration of an atmosphere of trust between the peoples in question.
37.	In South-East Asia, France can only deplore the fighting that has resumed on the Indo-Chinese peninsula, so long afflicted by war. This fighting is between two peoples with which we have historically had very close relations and for which we still feel deep friendship today. We hope that all the States of the region can devote themselves to the priority tasks of development and establish true cooperation between themselves, with respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of each of them, free of all undue interference from Powers outside the area.
38.	One of the most painful consequences of the situations of confrontation that we deplore is the exodus of part of the population. France, traditionally a land of asylum, could not remain unmoved, especially when this ordeal involves peoples that were once linked to it. This is why we took in 150,000 refugees, nearly one third of whom came from the Indo-Chinese peninsula; and we are keeping our doors open to other refugees, from this area to a limit of 1,OCO a month. Since this is an eminently humanitarian endeavour, we hope the burden can be shared to a large extent by the members of the international community.
39.	With the fate and protection of the human being at stake, how could we fail to mention the pledge made by our States when they adhered to the Charter, namely, to respect human rights?
40.	We mast be exacting in this, but also humble. Human rights are too sacred to be used for partisan ends; and they are precious enough for respect to be demanded for them everywhere.
41.	France has not forgotten that it was in Paris on 10 December 1948 that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted; we are celebrating its thirtieth anniversary this year. But who would venture to claim that this is also the anniversary of its application?
42.	In view of the continued violations of these rights, we are forced to admit that there is still a wide gap between the most solemn statements and actual behaviour.
43.	Political persecution, racial discrimination, torture and arbitrary sentences are still a painful reality today. The news offers too many examples of something that is all too common. There should be no hierarchy of arbitrary priorities in human rights, whether individual or collective. To tolerate selection would be to legalize all violations in advance.
44.	Unless there is respect for the supremacy of the individual, no progress can be made toward human equality and dignity; both would bet flouted, here in the name of economic imperatives, there in the name of security requirements. Neither the cause of peace nor the cause of development can justify the persecution of individuals or groups who ask only that international texts endorsing their basic rights be respected.
45.	In this connexion I should like to recall our staunch condemnation of the policy of apartheid. We denounce it not only as the manifestation of indescribable disdain for human beings but also as a potential detonator of dangerous conflicts. France has associated itself with the sanctions taken last November against a regime whose blindness makes a constant policy of such disdain. We therefore strictly apply the embargo on arms sales to Pretoria.
46.	Granting individuals and peoples every civil and political freedom and the means to enjoy it in peace was already the goal of our States a few decades ago. Today we all agree that it is important for them to have the economic means to exercise those freedoms. Furthermore, development, which should remedy the most blatant economic inequalities, is itself a factor for peace. Has it not been said at this very rostrum that development is the new name for peace?
47.	Nevertheless, when we speak of development, let us beware of taxing the peoples' patience. We are nearing the end of the Second United Nations Development Decade. What contribution has it made to the most impoverished among us? What has been its real impact on world hunger? Have we at least established the conditions that could, on the basis of national economic take-off, generate a process of self-development? Alas, that hardly seems to be the case.
48.	If public opinion in the developed countries and in countries benefiting from co-operation for development is not to become discouraged, the third development decade will have to respond in a more concrete manner to the needs of peoples and will have to be expressed more consistently in practical ambitions that mobilize support. It is important that the next decade attest to the commitment of the international community to deal realistically—that is, in the concrete terms in which they are presented—with the acute problems that confront a number of Governments daily and affect the lives of hundreds of millions of individuals. Therefore this decade must usher in, if not another type of development, at least a more pragmatic and diversified approach, and it must reject fruitless discussions on the nature of basic needs.
49.	In this regard we welcome the agreement reached recently at the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries in Buenos Aires; it opens up new prospects for international technical co-operation to further development.
50.	New elements may also be expected from the fifth session of UNCTAD, which is to be held in Manila next year, from the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development and the Third General Conference of UNIDO. Those elements should be integrated into a comprehensive whole and should be guided by master plans that serve to enlighten the mind and mobilize the spirit of determination.
51.	Instead of waiting passively for guidelines from the 1980 special session of the General Assembly, it is our duty to start thinking now, individually and collectively, about an outline for the third decade. While the objectives of the present Decade, which were defined globally [resolution
2626 (XXV)], will undoubtedly establish the general frame of action for the 1980s, changes in the world economic situation and the lessons learned from experience should none the less make certain priorities clearer.
52.	By the same token, the fight against the most dire effects of poverty is certainly a task in keeping with the possibilities of our Organization, and one that would enable it to respond to the hopes people place in it.
53.	The basis for such a project exists. It is the programme of action, adopted unanimously in 1976 by the tripartite world employment conference.7 But the programme should be expressed in terms of strategy by an effort of planning and by wide-ranging consultation, in particular with a view to eliminating any misunderstanding. The way was opened, inter alia, by the Conference of non-aligned countries which met last July in Belgrade. That Conference pointed out [see AI33/206] that the policy defined in Geneva - and I agree with this view—is based on the need to promote a new international economic order; it noted that such a policy did not dispense with the need for a global strategy designed to accelerate the economic growth of the developing countries; and, lastly, it stressed that those countries themselves were responsible in the first place for their own development and particularly for satisfying the basic needs of their peoples.
54.	I might add that that policy, rightly attentive to rural development and to the problems of unorganised urban concentrations, must not be used as an excuse for neglecting the indispensable geographical redistribution of industry.
55.	I have mentioned the necessary industrialization of the developing countries. I hope they will know how to control it and will avoid the mistakes we made in our own industrialization.
56.	Moreover, we, like the developing countries, are opposed to any international division of labour, old or new, that would imprison certain peoples in certain tasks. Faced with competition in some sectors from young industries in the third world, we decided, at the price of imposing real sacrifices on our companies and workers, to reject the facile solution of protectionist measures. We have allowed adaptations and reconversions to take place in the context of free trade and realistic pricing. We believe that by so doing -we have served honestly the interests of all.
57.	The third development decade, as 1 have said, needs some master plans. It also needs a sense of method and instruments for its implementation. With respect to this, the current restructuring of our Organization's machinery
in the economic and social domains, which has included the creation of a high office in the Secretariat, entrusted to Mr. Kenneth Dadzie, increases our confidence in the capacities of the system. The implementation of the General Assembly resolution [resolution 32/197] should be continued, especially with regard to strengthening the role and increasing the effectiveness of the Economic and Social Council.
58.	I should, however, like to point out one serious and paradoxical short-coming in our complex system, and that is the lack of any framework for genuine discussion on the fundamental issue of energy. By that I mean not the "energy crisis" that made headlines in the press but the crisis facing us, the one that must compel us all to adopt an active policy to conserve energy, which my country has embarked on with determination and success; the crisis that forces us to make a difficult, yes, but inevitable choice between various sources of energy with due regard for the balanced development of the entire planet, for the protection of our natural and man-made environment and for nuclear energy by guaranteeing that it will be used for peaceful purposes. To this end, while France has banned the export of sensitive equipment that could facilitate access to nuclear weapons, it is also anxious not to deprive any country of the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy or the advantages of the most promising technologies. For this reason we have agreed, pending the results of consultations under way in the framework of the international nuclear fuel-cycle evaluation programme, to provide our eventual partners with every service in the fuel cycle.
59.	The problem of energy, therefore, needs to be approached globally, without any spirit of confrontation, in order to take into consideration the interests of the international community as a whole. I thus welcome as a positive element resolution 1978/61 passed by the Economic and Social Council which retains the principle of an international conference on new and renewable sources of energy. The French Government will take an active part in preparing that conference.
60.	With regard to the 1980 special session of the General Assembly, we regret that the work of the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, known as the Committee of the Whole, is to be suspended, this being an irreplaceable forum for pursuing the North-South dialogue to which France is committed. Certainly starting such a dialogue on economic and development problems at the world level is an ambitious and arduous undertaking whose difficulties I underestimate less than anyone. Some divergences have become apparent on the interpretation of certain aspects of the mandate of the Committee. Nevertheless, the formula that found acceptance at the start of the month with a large majority of delegations is still entirely valid, in our view, and should enable the Committee, with the active collaboration of one and all, to tackle the main problems at last.
61.	Without the security to which our nations are rightfully entitled, no development is in effect possible. Yet security should not command an excessive share of our resources. In other words, the disarmament undertaking is an obvious necessity and one that should concern us all.
62.	The tenth special session of the General Assembly, by malting it quite clear that disarmament should be the affair of the entire international community and not of just a few State, has at last placed the debate in its real perspective.
This is not the only thing to its credit; it also provided us with the means to pursue the undertaking.
63.	In this matter, no one should entertain doubts about France's determination. The participation of the President of the Republic in person in the work of the special session attests to this. The presence of France in the place reserved for it in the new Committee on Disarmament, a presence that I now officially announce from this rostrum, confirms that this momentum will be maintained.
64.	The recognition of the central role that should fall to the United Nations and the concomitant reform of the machinery for negotiation and deliberation, with greater participation, better regional equilibrium and more democratic functioning through the dismantling of the co-presidency in Geneva, guarantee, in our view, that a new phase can now be entered. It has, therefore, become possible for France to join the Committee. It has become necessary for us to assume the role dictated by the importance of the stakes, for all our States.
65.	I should like to pay a special tribute at this point to the President of the special session, who was also the President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly, Mr. Lazar Mojsov, whose political understanding, dedication and great competence were invaluable to him in successfully carrying out the mission entrusted to him by the Assembly.
66.	With the help of revised machinery, the work envisaged last June could now begin. A set of principles and a time-table have already provided useful reference points, although we believe that in certain areas, notably in the nuclear domain, a different wording would have been better suited to the realities of the situation. This document, which is an attempt to cover a set of particularly complex and sensitive problems, nevertheless bears witness to a remarkable consensus within the community of nations on several key points.
67.	Let me mention: the right of all States to security; the special responsibility that must be shouldered by the great Powers in the area of disarmament, since they themselves recognize that they have arsenals far in excess of the requirements of strategic balance; the importance not only of nuclear but also of conventional disarmament, in view of the fact that the build-up of conventional weapons, particularly in Europe, constitutes an increasingly serious threat to peace; the need for effective monitoring of disarmament measures; and, finally, the allocation of funds thus freed for economic and social development.
68.	France has, moreover, presented concrete suggestions on some of these points which should be studied right here or in specialized bodies. I am referring to proposals for a satellite monitoring agency and a disarmament fund for development, as well as the establishment of an institute for disarmament studies, all initiatives whose usefulness has been widely recognized.

69.	The realistic approach to disarmament that should be encouraged leads us to recommend that measures of a regional nature be studied. It is within this framework that balanced solutions can be found which take into account the role deterrence plays in the security of part of the planet. We have therefore proposed to the countries interested in the security of the European continent that a conference on disarmament be convened.
70.	A regional consultation could also bolster efforts to limit the transfer of conventional arms. The geographical entity that a region constitutes is most often an arena for threats just as it is for co-operation. So it is at this level that the exigencies of each State's right to security and those of non-discrimination among partners must be assessed. Real progress cannot be made from the outside, by some cartel of producers or through unilateral actions. It can be based only on the common will of the interested States and their common understanding of the purpose and scope of a verifiable regional agreement. In this context the initiative recently taken by a group of Latin American countries sets an example and should be commended.
71.	I am addressing this Assembly as the representative of a country that is mindful of its independence and intent on preserving it. But mine is also a country convinced of the growing solidarity which links together all the countries of our planet. In the face of the crises, upheavals and threats of all kinds to which our peoples are exposed, none of us—whether a small, medium-sized or even very large Power-can expect to act alone and emerge unscathed. Co-operation is no longer a choice; it is a necessity that we must accept. Let us give it the means to grow stronger here.
72.	We must of course be realistic. Disunity too often pervades this privileged gathering place. Resistance to change is tenacious. And much imagination and political determination will be needed, it is true, to ensure that man, wherever he lives and whatever his race, religion or national origin, will enjoy personal dignity, a fair share of the world's resources and a part of the responsibility for decisions that concern him.
73.	"As the strange dawn of the third millennium draws closer", as the President of the Republic said in this very forum last May,12 the undertaking offers enormous scope for our intelligence and efforts. France for its part is determined to take part in it.
﻿107.	







108.	Mr. President, let me first extend to you my congratulations on your election. Your experience and skill will help to ensure a fruitful
Assembly session. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Mojsov of Yugoslavia, who ably led the Assembly through no less than four sessions during his year of office.
109.	When the United Nations was established at the end of the Second World War, the British Empire covered one eighth of the world's land surface and had a population of over 500 million. In the years since then, 35 independent States have emerged from among the people and territories that made up that Empire and have taken their place among the nations of the world. There can be no clearer testimony to the commitment of successive British Governments to the principle of self-determination.
110.	Today we are left with a handful of small dependent Territories which, because of their particular circumstances, have not become independent States.
111.	It has been the firm policy of the present British Government to give every encouragement and support to those Territories which seek independence. It was in fulfilment of that policy that Solomon Islands became an independent nation earlier this year and so the one hundred and fiftieth Member of the United Nations. In a few days' time, on 1 October, yet another country, Tuvalu, will celebrate its independence and will apply for membership in the specialized agencies. The Gilbert Islands have already reached the stage of full internal self-government, and we hope they will achieve independence in 1979. In the Anglo-French condominium of the New Hebrides, a programme has been agreed which will lead to independence by 1980. Among the West Indies Associated States, which are in voluntary association with Britain, Dominica will move to independence on 3 November this year. Discussions are continuing on the constitutional future of the other States.
112.	Our policy is to respect the wish of the peoples of our remaining dependent Territories to determine their own future in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter, to uphold that Charter in all its respects, and to put support for the United Nations at the centre of our foreign policy.
113.	People all over the world read in their newspapers day by day graphic accounts of systematic murders, cold-blooded tortures and the debilitating ravages of famine and disease. They watch pictures on television of grotesque sufferings caused by the dictatorial actions of Governments or by natural disasters. Most people hope that those countries and agencies which can do so well take practical steps to alleviate this misery; they do not want to find themselves in similar circumstances. Discussion and words of condemnation or sympathy are not enough. Ordinary people want to see real evidence that those who offend against the norms of civilized society are not accepted as members of it and that the effects of malnutrition and monsoon are mitigated for everyone. One of the United Kingdom's major aims is to encourage the strengthening of the United Nations capacity to protect human rights.
114.	In upholding our Charter commitments, we, the Member States, must pay more attention to the mechanics of how in our daily business we move from dialogue to negotiation, from general principles to specific detailed agreements, from rhetoric to action and from general support to binding commitments. No world organization can ever build up its strength, authority and effectiveness without developing and adopting a machinery which would enable its member States as a whole to make decisions sure in the knowledge that they will be carried out. It is, of course, not a new problem, but it is an urgent one. It is not enough to have a dialogue between rich and poor to redress inequalities. The millions outside looking in on our meetings, debates, special sessions and committees rightly expect progress. Most of them are realistic -- they recognize the limitations; but once year at least we should examine our record objectively and seek to learn from the past year to improve our performance for the coming year.
115.	It cannot yet be said our people have fully appreciated the immense importance of the relationship between the developed and the developing countries. The North- South dialogue in which we are engaged is not an elaborate stalking operation, where bureaucrats spend days and weeks locked in discussions which produce little agreement. It is potentially a deeply divisive issue and a central factor in world economic management. It can mean literally life or death for millions. There is a challenge here for the Governments of all countries. For the more developed countries the challenge is to be prepared for adaptation and change in the creation and distribution of new wealth in the world, and to generate the fullest public support for tackling the great disparity between the standards of life in fortunate countries, such as mine, and those which obtain over vast areas of the globe. For the less developed countries the challenge is to maintain the necessary disciplines both to enable them to achieve a rapid but stable expansion, with an equitable sharing of the benefits, and to continue to take part constructively in the search for an agreed approach to the problems and a shared responsibility for finding solutions.
116.	It would be a failure of statesmanship on both sides if the North-South dialogue, as in the early 1970s, became again an exchange of sterile slogans between spokesmen for the developing countries on the one hand and spokesmen for the developed countries on the other. Conducted in these terms the dialogue becomes a forum for rhetoric and confrontation instead of a co-operative enterprise from which all our countries and all our peoples will gain. We have risen above this, but we have not yet focused our attention collectively, and with understanding, on the specific problems: for example the optimal management .of the world's limited resources of raw materials, energy, finance, the transfer of resources from the rich to the poorer countries, and the problem of coping imaginatively with problems of adjustment so that the output of the newly industrialized countries can find its place in the world's markets. We will need more understanding, greater political resolve and imagination in the months ahead as we approach the fifth session of UNCTAD in May of next year and the special session in 1980. The United Kingdom recently decided that, as part of our aid policy, we would take immediate steps to relieve the debt burden of the poorest countries. The total amount of principal and interest involved in some £900 million, or $1.8 billion. This was a decision to give practical expression to the agreement negotiated within UNCTAD. It reflects our willingness to take action to show low genuine compromises can be achieved within the North-South dialogue. So far seven countries have taken a similar decision. For us it was a tough, political decision, which will undeniably cost jobs at home and be a charge on our balance of payments. There is no comfortable solution. Politicians will have to fight for these measures in the world; and then defend them at home.	
117.	Understanding and imagination will need to be shown by those relatively rich countries which at present stand aside from the common efforts of the rest of the world to help the developing countries. I believe that the Soviet Union and its partners are beginning to realize that there is a growing recognition among developing countries of the irrelevance of the time-worn excuse that the so-called "colonial legacy" of former imperial Powers means that the Communist countries can absolve themselves of any responsibility for helping the developing countries. I hope they also realize that the increasingly close economic interrelationships between countries of different systems and at different levels of development give all countries a- shared interest in helping the less fortunate to make progress.
118.	The divide between rich and poor is everyone's problem and everyone's responsibility. The economics of all countries are now so closely interlinked that none of us can find solutions by battening down the hatches and hoping to find some isolated-or protected-salvation. On the contrary, continued economic growth in the developing countries has an important part to play in supporting the health of the world economy. But the scope for sustained growth in the developing countries will of course be limited until the economies of the industrialized countries move out of recession- Recession in the West-or North—means receding hopes for the economies of the South. This is the reality and this is one of the reasons why my Government has spared no effort this year to bring about concerted action to restore confidence and growth round the world. The results of the July Bonn Economic Summit Conference show that there is a collective understanding at the highest level in the Western world of the need to stimulate growth, to make the most of our scarce energy resources, to avoid taking precipitate protectionist action and to get increased resources flowing 'to those countries where they are most needed.
119.	A major and acknowledged obstacle to these endeavours is the vast accumulation of military power which drains away scarce resources urgently needed for economic and social development. Four months ago here in this Assembly Heads of Government and Foreign Ministers attended the tenth special session on disarmament. We hoped to see moves to check this process of gathering and spending of money on armaments and take some practical action towards arms control and disarmament.
120.	Where did we get? While all States in the United Nations agreed on a Final Document [resolution S-10/2] expressing for the first time the views of all Member States on disarmament, much of it was so watered down that one gets the impression that everyone is in favour of disarmament until the moment that any proposal could actually affect them. The session admittedly encouraged more
States to take an active interest in disarmament. Two nuclear-weapon States which previously had not been involved in multilateral discussion of disarmament following the reform of the negotiating committee in Geneva will, it is hoped, now participate, and this is a welcome step. The involvement of non-governmental organizations in the debate was helpful and the special session stimulated greater public interest. The United Kingdom and other nuclear-weapon States gave the non-nuclear-weapon States important assurances that they would not be the subject of nuclear attack.
121.	The need for action to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons—one of the most crucial issues facing mankind- was recognized. But the dilemma of how to make available to all who need them the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear, energy without the risk of weapons proliferation was not squarely faced. My country has for some years made a financial sacrifice in not exporting some civilian nuclear equipment, materials and technology because of a fear of adding to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The existence of adequate safeguards to ensure that there is no fear of adding to the proliferation of nuclear weapons is also an essential condition of nuclear exports from the United Kingdom. But sophisticated countries still compete ruthlessly in the nuclear market place, and nuclear installations have become symbols of national sovereignty, so that any unwillingness to supply is wrongly seen as a political act. The Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1980 must look deeply at these matters, for I believe that it is possible for the equipment and services which are essential to a successful civil nuclear industry to be made available while minimizing the proliferation risk. Of course, one way to reinforce the non-proliferation regime is through the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones.
122.	It was natural that many countries at the special session should place the emphasis on nuclear disarmament. That must be the major concern. But let us not forget that four fifths of the military expenditure in the world goes on conventional forces and weapons. The system of nuclear deterrence has helped to keep the peace in Europe for over 30 years. But what has happened elsewhere? According to one estimate, there have been over 120 wars in the world since 1945. Not one day has passed in which a war was not being fought somewhere in the world. War casualties since 1945 number tens of millions, all caused by conventional weapons.
123.	We should give more attention to conventional arms control. The Final Document of the special session makes a negligible contribution to balanced reductions in military budgets and a halt to the world-wide build-up of conventional weapons. The brief and rather qualified reference to consultations on limiting transfers of conventional weapons is inadequate. The passage on reduction of military budgets is general and, unlike the Western draft programme of action, does not call for the testing of a means of measuring budgets so that actual reductions can be planned, with all the social and economic benefits that could ensue. In short, do not let anyone delude himself: an historic opportunity has been missed and we must resolve to achieve more at the next special session on disarmament. Otherwise another expensive session and a stream of words
will produce cynicism rather than commitment. A major reform is needed in the way we negotiate the final document. The political leaders make the speeches, but the final document is negotiated by officials. One senses in reading the words no clash of political view, no give-and- take. We appear to talk at each other rather than to each other, and so the bureaucratisation of international politics relentlessly proceeds. Declarations, principles abound, but action is relegated to second place.
124.	At least in the bilateral negotiations being conducted between the United States and the Soviet Union to achieve a second strategic arms limitation agreement, one is aware of a political debate at the highest level between Presidents and Foreign Ministers. This is a vitally important negotiation and needs to be followed as soon as possible by further reductions in strategic offensive weapons as well as by controls on qualitative improvement.
125.	My country, the United States and the Soviet Union are involved in negotiations on a comprehensive test ban. This would be entirely non-discriminatory; it could, if properly designed, curb the development of nuclear weapons and hinder their spread to more countries. We should like to see the widest possible adherence to the treaty, but that will only come if the non-nuclear-weapon States see the nuclear States as making a step-like change downwards in their development programme. There are some who want to take no action and to continue testing without any impediment to their scientific and technical plans- oblivious of the wider implications that would have for those States that need to be persuaded not to engage in testing themselves.
126.	Another priority is to maintain and accelerate the momentum injected recently into the Vienna talks on mutual and balanced reduction of forces in Central Europe. The Eastern response to the latest Western proposals has been encouraging, although serious difficulties remain unresolved. The Western participants will be ready at the right moment to propose that the talks be raised to ministerial level. Without this kind of political input, caution will predominate, the years will go by, and we shall all complain about the gap or the imbalance in forces while it widens before our very eyes, as it has done in every year that the negotiations have continued. The prize for us all is an agreement providing a more stable relationship and a lower level of military confrontation in Europe. It could be a major achievement in arms control and detente, but it will not be achieved at the present tempo and style of the negotiations.
127.	In one key area-peace-keeping—the United Nations has responded extremely well throughout the year. My Government is totally committed to the concept of United
• Nations peace-keeping. With our fellow-members of the European Community we shall be appealing to all members of the United Nations to reaffirm their support for United Nations peace-keeping measures. We have backed this support of principle with men, facilities and money.
128.	We have recently reviewed our own national capacity to assist in the preparation and conduct of peace-keeping operations, and I am pleased to be able to make the following offer of support, which is in addition to our current contribution to United Nations forces in Cyprus
and Lebanon. If requested, and subject to national commitments and exigencies, the United Kingdom will make available an infantry battalion group or a Royal Marine commando group for up to six months. The force will be available at seven days' notice and we shall airlift the force and its equipment to the area of operation. We shall also be willing to provide a small number of military personnel for duty as observers, and we shall consider as sympathetically as possible requests for other types of forces or forms of military assistance. In view of the experience which the United Kingdom armed forces have acquired in peacekeeping, we stand ready to share our knowledge and experience with others.
129.	When I addressed this Assembly a year ago,  I singled out Lebanon as an example of a situation where the United Nations should be involved in trying to resolve a major crisis before it occurred. In retrospect, I think we would all wish it had been possible to take more preventive action in spite of the difficulties. It took the Israeli military involvement in south Lebanon last March to make the international community fully aware of the vital need for the United Nations to play a part in that troubled country. Thereafter, the Security Council acted with admirable speed in securing the creation of UNIFIL to bring about the withdrawal of Israeli forces and to help the Lebanese Government to reintroduce its authority in the south. UNIFIL has undertaken its task with remarkable tenacity. It has faced great obstacles, but has nevertheless progressively fulfilled its mandate by military courage and skilful diplomacy. Already it has carried out the first part of its mandate; the complete withdrawal of Israeli forces has been effected. The difficult task of restoring the authority of the central Government in the south still lies ahead.
130.	But this is not a problem they can solve in isolation. A solution to the problems in the south depends on a solution to the larger political crisis which still racks Lebanon. All Members of the United Nations committed to the restoration of the authority of the Lebanese Government throughout the country should make a determined effort to work urgently for a political solution to Lebanon's problems. Only a political solution can guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon and put an end to the internal fighting which threatens to destroy the country.
131.	Peace in Lebanon depends also upon a solution to the wider conflict between Israelis and Arabs. The Camp David meetings have given renewed hope that a just, durable and comprehensive settlement can be achieved. Many major questions remain to be resolved, and I do not underestimate the difficulties. Nevertheless, the gap between the two sides has narrowed significantly. 1 believe that the success of the Camp David framework agreement  was because it did get into detail, not just declare principles, and because it involved the two Presidents and the Prime Minister. The detailed provisions in the Sinai Accord for demilitarization, force reductions and United Nations involvement  are something which my Government has long advocated. The Camp David agreements provide, too, a reasonable basis on which realistic interim arrangements for the most difficult problem, the West Bank, can now, given the will, be negotiated in greater detail.
132.	Those who condemned the agreements so hastily should, look at them again more carefully. They are based upon the principles of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and upon the international consensus in its favour. A perfect settlement cannot be achieved by exchanging declarations of principle any more than by making speeches at one another. Politicians have to be prepared to get down to what I term the "nitty-gritty" detail and then explain and defend the position to their own people. For our part, we have set out on a number of occasions—in particular in the statement on the Middle East made by the European Council in London on 29 June 1977-our views on the principles which should govern a peace settlement. The Camp David agreements are a positive step in that direction and they have our full support.
133.	Another major initiative has been that undertaken with regard to Namibia. We will be debating this issue in the Security Council, and I will reserve my remarks until then. But the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations Transition Assistance Group, the political commitment and atmosphere of patient diplomacy that has characterized the whole process, is an example of how the United Nations can act. At all times these negotiations have involved political leaders, whether foreign ministers or nationalist leaders, and their officials and supporters. African nations and leaders, as well as those of us outside Africa, have worked for an African solution and an international solution. It would be a tragedy for southern Africa if, at this late stage, the opportunity for Namibia to become independent was rejected. The alternatives—another Transkei, continued fighting and an escalating confrontation between South Africa and the world-would represent a shameful retreat from the ideals to which all parties have, I believe, been committed. Yet success here could not fail to have an impact upon the fundamental issue of racialism which haunts southern Africa, besides giving hope for a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia.
134.	Racism is one of the greatest evils which we face in the world community today and, in this International Anti-Apartheid Year, it is imperative that we should make clear our absolute, united condemnation of apartheid.
135.	Sadly, we see no real sign of movement towards fundamental change in South Africa since the General Assembly last met, but the message must go out again. Change is inevitable, and time is not on our side if that change is to be peaceful.
136.	At the time we meet, a new State President and Prime Minister are about to be chosen in South Africa. I
hope that these new leaders will respond to what I believe to be the true aspirations of the South African people for change, and will show courage and resolution in bringing that country back to its place in our community of nations. I believe that a united South Africa, through the efforts of all its people, can meet this challenge in the knowledge that failure will have the gravest consequences not only for the people of South Africa but for the world as a whole.
137.	Africa, and all of us outside Africa, are pledged to bring about majority rule, a return to legality, and independence in Zimbabwe. We want to do so without further bloodshed and in a way acceptable to the people as a whole. The objective for us all is a non-racial society in an independent Zimbabwe.
138.	The gravity of the present situation cannot be exaggerated. Deaths in the war have been over 3,000 this year. Civilian casualties since 1972 include nearly 3,000 Africans and some 600 whites. Intimidation and fear grow daily; atrocities have been committed on all sides. There is a growing refugee problem both inside and outside the country. One thousand people per week flee to Botswana. Inside Rhodesia the rural population affected by the war is fleeing to the cities, homeless and jobless. If the war continues, and the farmers do not plant and sow for next year, there are growing prospects of widespread famine in a country once endowed with plenty.
139.	The effect on the economic stability of southern Africa is now marked. There is a danger of foreign intervention and of embroiling the whole of Africa in a conflict out of all proportion to its original dimensions. The threat to the security of neighbouring States—Zambia, Botswana, Mozambique-is already only too evident, and has been highlighted by the latest raids into Mozambique.
140.	The < United Kingdom has never administered Rhodesia. In 1965 following the unilateral declaration of independence we came to the United Nations because we decided then, and have not shifted from that view since, that the United Kingdom acting alone could not end the rebellion and bring about majority rule. We accept our responsibilities and have tried to live up to them.
141.	We have striven for a negotiated settlement on the basis of the principles endorsed by the United Nations and the principles approved by the British Parliament. One of these principles is that, before granting independence, it must be established that any settlement is acceptable to the people of the country as a whole.
142.	Progress has been slow, but, encouraged by the support of many African States and the international community, we are urgently making every effort, together with the Americans, to bring about a satisfactory solution. But no one, including Britain and the United States, has a magic formula for peace in Zimbabwe. Ultimately it is for the people to decide the basis of their independence. It is not for any of us to impose a particular constitution or a particular leader on Zimbabwe.
143.	It is frankly recognized in private but often ignored in public rhetoric that, in contrast to most other liberation struggles, the Zimbabwean nationalist movement is not united. Its divisions are long-standing and have constantly bedevilled negotiations. It has been a major tactic of the regime to exploit these differences. It has never been part of our philosophy to seek to split the liberation movement or to widen divisions between the nationalists. Greater unity within the nationalist movement would make a comprehensive settlement far easier and a cease-fire a reality. The OAU has wisely endorsed the right of all the leaders to participate in elections. There must be no exclusions; we want an inclusive settlement.
144.	We are committed to working by persuasion and negotiation: we cannot impose, and this is a restraint which is not always recognized.
145.	Most of us in the United Nations support the objectives of freedom and of independence of the various liberation movements in southern Africa. Some support the armed struggle. My Government does not supply arms. To do so would gravely inhibit our ability to work for a negotiated settlement between all the parties to the conflict. I regret, though acknowledge, that many people have felt driven to take part in the armed conflict. No one can deny that this struggle has had a considerable effect, in addition to sanctions and diplomatic pressures, in making the possibility of majority rule a real one. Yet if the armed struggle continues with no negotiations it will result in massive damage to Zimbabwe: not just to its economy but perhaps above all to the chances of its being a non-racial society.
146.	Armed intervention by the United Kingdom ".vas ruled out in 1965 and there is no question of Britain or any other Western Power sending troops now to impose a settlement. We have committed ourselves to seek a solution through the international community and in the context of the Anglo-American proposals published on 1 September last year  and debated in the Security Council. Within that framework, we will honour our obligations, play a major part in any settlement, and contribute fully in terms of money, manpower and expertise. But we are not about to assume a colonial role which we have never exercised, which was rejected in 1965, and which is even more inappropriate in 1978.
147.	My Government's objective is to do everything possible to bring about a peaceful settlement through negotiations providing for majority rule and independence on a basis acceptable to the people of Zimbabwe as a whole.
148.	We have listened carefully to the criticisms of the detailed proposals we put forward a year ago. We have been trying to find common ground and, in elaborating and refining our proposals, we have had to take account of the strong views of those of the parties who wish to reduce the powers of the proposed resident commissioner. After the Geneva Conference i7 we thought that the inability of the parties to agree on a form of power-sharing could be quickly circumvented only by giving powers to the resident commissioner. Events have shown that judgement to be wise. We never sought those powers for ourselves; they were 
onerous and difficult. We willingly proposed that they should be exercised in concert with the United Nations. We advocated a special representative of the Secretary-General, a United Nations peace-keeping force and a United Nations civilian police element to monitor the existing police force. We have wasted a year arguing about the powers of the resident commissioner. I hope now, that after our consultations with the parties, we have found a workable formula for an executive and legislative council with powers on law and order reserved to the resident commissioner.
149. We now must agree on: the balance of representation on the council and the decision-making procedure; the appointment of a resident commissioner and the length of time he should remain; the timing of elections and the timing of independence; the details of the proposals put forward by the resident commissioner designate for the Zimbabwe national army and already explained in the presence of General Prem Chand to all the parties; the establishment of a unified command of all armies; the time-table for a cease-fire; and the structure of the United Nations Zimbabwe force.
350. We have presented some of these proposals to the parties in the form of options. We have not issued ultimatums. The detail is negotiable, but, if the parties continue to argue over the structure of a settlement, then-let us" be clear-the war will continue, and the bloodshed will increase; and neither the United Kingdom nor the United States will be able to prevent a fight to the finish.
151. All these preparations have been done in the belief that it is necessary to prepare the ground for final negotiations. Nothing has been pre-empted. The parties must decide for themselves; yet no decisions can be made without compromise. If they agree, then the United Kingdom is poised to enact the necessary legislation immediately. I hope the Security Council would then pass the necessary resolution for the establishment of a United Nations Zimbabwe force as speedily as in the case of Lebanon. In playing a neutral role as peace-keeper, the United Nations has never been partisan. The United Nations will stand up for the rights of all the people of Zimbabwe, as it will for the people of Namibia.
152.	This is a critical moment: if we are to prevent the escalation which could take all parties over the brink, then the voice of the international community must make itself heard in support of a negotiated solution and of our proposals. More insistent still is the voice of the people of Zimbabwe themselves, weary of war and seeking a just peace. They want a settlement; they want an all-party conference; they want majority rule; and above all they want peace.
153.	That is our commitment. We are actively preparing the ground now for round-table talks. I hope we can in the near future issue invitations to all the parties to come to negotiate a final settlement for an independent Zimbabwe. I hope that all of us as Members of the United Nations will do everything in our power to make such a meeting a success. The next few months in southern Africa are critical for us all, and the United Nations has, in my view, a major role to play. 

  





﻿




1.	Mr. President, may I extend to you on behalf of my delegation and myself our warm felicitations on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. Your elevation to this high office is as much a tribute to your diplomatic skill and eminence as it is a recognition of the constructive role played by your country, Colombia, in world affairs.
2.	We are glad to welcome on this occasion the Solomon Islands as the one hundred and fiftieth and youngest Member of the United Nations. We have every hope that this newest partner of the family of nations will make a useful contribution to the work of this world body.
3.	Enduring peace, the maintenance of which is one of the principal purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, is the age-old aspiration of mail. It is one of the abiding yearnings of the common man in all parts of our planet. It is both an elemental urge, like freedom from starvation and want, and the ultimate objective of every society. It is the yardstick with which to measure the excellence of any social organization; a happy society is where peace reigns supreme. That is why the prayers of all, irrespective of religion and belief, end with an invocation to peace.
4.	And yet, in spite of centuries of care and nourishment bestowed upon it, world peace still remains a tender plant buffeted by occasional whiffs of cold war, threatened by injustice and inequity, and dwarfed by the indignities that are still heaped by man upon man.
5.	Even though the clouds gathering over the international horizon have lifted of late and the process of detente,
6.	One of the principal causes of the continuing threat to peace is that world politics, as well as the world economy, are dominated by the interests of a few countries. That is not a new phenomenon; it has its roots in history. The compulsion to gain strategic advantages and the propensity to exploit differences continue to characterize the international climate. Institutions of multilateral militarism are being maintained and the urge to deploy them for sectarian purposes is growing instead of diminishing. Some of those institutions are known to have lost their relevance or usefulness, yet the political courage to bury them is lacking.
7.	There is no doubt that the big Powers could do a great deal more to improve the international atmosphere by exemplary behaviour and by displaying greater understanding of each other's legitimate interests, but that understanding must be within the framework of an equitable international order in which smaller and medium-sized countries would enjoy assured peace, equality and justice. Without a genuine acceptance of the principle of peaceful coexistence, the desire to live and let live and the determination to convert cold-war confrontation into competitive co-operation, the process of detente will not show the desired results.
8.	Detente is only a first step in creating the climate for finding long-term solutions to problems with a view to achieving durable peace. We welcome The process of detente because of its multiplier effect, if it is pursued in the right spirit. We have therefore been urging its extension to all fields of activity and to all parts of the globe.
9.	Each member of this body is endowed with its own national genius and its distinctive national personality and ethos. Each follows its own socio-economic system and has its specific pattern and strategy of development. Any attempts to impose conformity based on ideological and other considerations and to reduce the rich diversity of nations 
 to a common denominator will not only divest this world of its infinite variety but also pose serious threats to peace.
10.	The Charter prohibits the use of force save in self-defence or in the common interest and requires the settlement of disputes by peaceful means, yet nations have resorted to force against each other, quite often aided and abetted from outside with the consequent dangers of exploitation and domination. We have seen that, while such conflicts may sometimes be brought to an end as a result of external intervention, the cessation of hostilities is seldom followed by genuine peace. The root-cause of the conflict often remains unresolved while the strategic interests of outside parties become deeply entrenched.
11.	In the long run, disputes and conflicts can be amicably settled only through mutual understanding and accommodation. By building solid foundations, of mutual cooperation, nations can develop a stake in peace, stability and good neighbourliness which will be impervious to the outbursts of momentary differences, which are bound to apse from time to time,
12.	As recommended in the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers, for Foreign Affairs, of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Belgrade in July 1978 [A/33/206, annex I], governments involved in disputes should themselves make every, effort to reach a peaceful settlement through bilateral negotiations. Some regional organizations, as well as the United Nations, itself; provide- mechanisms for conciliation, although their efficacy obviously den-ends on the spirit, goodwill and mutual accommodation that the parties themselves, can show,
13.	Peace continues to be endangered also because the resolution of major international disputes has been delayed or neglected for far too long. Differences among nations, as among, individuals, if not resolved expeditiously, tend to erode trust, which is the basic pre-condition for resolving them.
14. By far the most potent threat to world peace is the continuing arms race, particularly in nuclear armaments. It militates against the fundamental objective of the United Nations "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". The arms race undermines the sovereignty and stability of nations. It goes against such principles of the Charter as refraining from the threat or the use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It is contrary also to the objectives of the international community to establish a New International Economic Order. We must keep reminding ourselves of the relationship between disarmament -- which could save up to 400 billion annually of unproductive expenditure - and development, which is chronically hampered by the lack of funds.  The contrast is unavoidable and the irony is inescapable. There is no greater distortion of resource allocation at the global level than that of those devoted to the arms race. 

15. Decades of efforts have yielded only a few arms limitations measures, such as the prohibition of certain kinds of nuclear tests, the agreement on the limitation of strategic arms and the prohibition of bacteriological weapons. 

16.	In spite of three rounds of talks on the Indian Ocean between the United States and the Soviet Union, there is no perceptible movement towards the goal of implementing the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)]. What is ironic is that the littoral countries, which are affected most by the big-Power rivalry in the Ocean, are not directly involved in those talks. We have been told that the talks will be resumed shortly and we trust that this will lead to the speedy elimination of big-Power rivalry and military presence in the Indian Ocean, thereby facilitating the implementation of the General Assembly resolution declaring the Indian Ocean a zone of peace.
17.	In the field of nuclear disarmament there has been little real progress. That is indeed disturbing because of the threat that nuclear weapons pose to the very survival of mankind. The nature of the current negotiations and their direction are not such as to assure mankind that the probability of a nuclear war will be reduced, even if not removed. We, the non-nuclear-weapon States, are entitled to that assurance, for the right to survival is basic to all other rights. We cannot, therefore, be indifferent to the outcome of the current negotiations. On the contrary, we would expect them to take fully into account the aspirations of the overwhelming majority for peace and security in a world free of weapons of mass destruction.
18.	India believes that partial measures such as the creation of zones free of nuclear weapons comprising the nuclear "have-nots" are not likely to generate any genuine feeling of security unless there is, at the same time, significant progress towards nuclear disarmament. Surely, the more urgent task is to reach agreement on measures for the non-use and the phased reduction and elimination of nuclear weapons and on a moratorium on all nuclear tests pending the conclusion of a genuine and non-discriminatory comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. It was with this in view that at the tenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, India took the initiative of submitting two draft resolutions covering these two aspects of disarmament.3
19.	The final objective must of course be to bring about general and complete disarmament under effective international control,, to which we, all subscribed in the historic resolution adopted by the General Assembly in November 1959 [resolution 1378 (XIV)]. It was obvious, then as it is obvious now that, disarmament should, be general in the sense of its universal application and it should be complete in the sense of its covering all weapon systems.
20.;	We. continue to believe that all aspects of disarmament both nuclear and conventional, are important. Yet, it has been our consistent, policy that nuclear disarmament must be given the topmost priority. The foremost task facing, humanity is to dismantle and to destroy nuclear weapon. The . concept of a security system of which nuclear weapons, represent the most dangerous and totally unacceptable component must be abandoned.
21.	We. must recognize and accept the primary role of the United. Nations in this field, It is a matter of great
satisfaction to us that the special session succeeded in bringing disarmament deliberations and negotiations squarely within the United Nations.
22.	It is the considered view of the Government of India that if we are to make progress in moving towards our goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control, we should implement the following six measures: first, the cessation of the qualitative improvement and development of nuclear weapons, including, in particular, the early conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty, pending the achievement of which there should be a moratorium on the further testing of nuclear weapons; secondly, the cessation of the production of nuclear weapons and of fissionable material for nuclear purposes; thirdly, the reduction and eventual elimination of existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons within an agreed timeframe; fourthly, the conclusion of a convention oh the non«use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances; fifthly, the elimination of all other weapons of mass destruction; and sixthly, the limitation and gradual reduction of armed forces and conventional weapons within the framework of a comprehensive programme of disarmament.
23.	Apart from the disarmament problem, there are other major issues of global concern which, if not resolved expeditiously and in a just and fair manner, could tear asunder the fragile fabric of world peace.
24.	In the Middle East there are at present some new moves and counter-moves and in the current fluid situation, when the parties themselves are engaged in reassessing developments, it would be premature for us to pronounce any judgement. Suffice it to say that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) and the relevant General Assembly resolutions on the Palestine question constitute a principled basis for a comprehensive and lasting peace settlement. We should like to reaffirm in this connexion certain principles that are fundamental for the establishment of enduring peace. These are  the non-acquisition of territory by force and the vacation of Arab and Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967; the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and to a nation-State of their own; and the right of all States in the Middle East to exist in security and peace within internationally recognized boundaries.
25.	The situation in Lebanon is a source of continuing concern for all of us. Here is an unfortunate country which has fallen prey to the power politics of the Middle East and where at the moment, by a strange twist of fate, Arabs are killing other Arabs, encouraged and assisted by outside forces. There is no doubt in our mind that, first and foremost, national reconciliation in Lebanon must be achieved in order to immunize the country from external pressures. I am glad that the parties concerned have responded positively to the Security Council's call for an immediate cease-fire. It is important that the cease-fire should be scrupulously maintained. I hope that initiatives for a just and honourable reconciliation will be supported by all peace-loving peoples.
26.	Although the situation in divided Cyprus has remained peaceful during the past year, chiefly due to the presence of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, there
has been no progress either in regard to the withdrawal of foreign forces or in the search for an agreed basis for the resumption of the intercommunal negotiations. The dimensions of the Cyprus problem, both the external and internal aspects, are such that the problem can be solved by peaceful means provided that the parties concerned recognize the legitimate rights and interests of each other and are willing to display a spirit of mutual accommodation. However, no solution will last unless it respects the unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and non-alignment of Cyprus.
27.	The Preamble of the Charter reaffirms "faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations, large and small". This objective is directly related to the purpose of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. For peace does not He in a mere cessation of hostilities or a containment of conflicts, or even in disarmament measures concluded in a general environment of violence, coercion and subjugation. As Gandhi said: "The way to peace is the way to truth." Truth lies in equality and justice. An individual cannot pursue truth, the highest urge of his soul, unless he is able to exercise his fundamental freedoms and human rights.
28.	Nothing is more degrading to human dignity than the practice of discrimination on the ground of race. Similarly, a first step towards ensuring equality among nations is to take the process of decolonization to its logical conclusion.
29.	In southern Africa we continue to witness the most pernicious combination of colonial domination and racial discrimination. The minority white regime of South Africa, in a bid to preserve its privileges, has been subjecting the majority population to the worst forms of human degradation, including torture, brutal repression, slavery and the denial of all fundamental freedoms.
30.	The United Nations has been seized of this matter since India raised it for the first time in the first session of the General Assembly in 1946.4 Since then, the South African Government has openly and flagrantly flouted all United Nations resolutions, decisions and sanctions. It has done so partly e cause of the supporting defiance of United Nations resolutions by other countries. We must not let our reiteration of opposition to this racist policy become a mere ritual at annual sessions of the General Assembly. The international community cannot evade its responsibility for taking effective measures to liquidate the dehumanizing practice of apartheid.
31.	With the adoption of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) on 29 September there is some hope that the illegal occupation of Namibia by the South African Government can be ended peacefully. Namibia can emerge as an independent country with majority rule, not through the sham internal settlement whose promotion is sought by the South African regime, but only through full implementation of the Security Council resolution. If the South African Government rejects the plan approved by the
Security Council5 and reverts to its familiar path of intransigence and defiance of world public opinion, the armed liberation struggle is bound to be intensified. The Security Council would then be fully justified in invoking the application of measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.
32.	We believe that the present stalemate in Zimbabwe is largely due to the ambivalence of some Powers on the question of the internal settlement.6 The only effective way to end the stalemate and perpetuation of the illegal regime of Ian Smith is to transfer power to the elected majority on the basis of "one man, one vote", and an agreed plan for the transition to a genuine independence. Meanwhile we should continue the sanctions against the racist regime, widen their scope and apply them more rigorously.
33.	Decolonization, the elimination of racism and racial discrimination, and the economic liberation of peoples are essential pre-conditions for securing the fundamental rights of peoples and for the promotion of human dignity and the free exercise of human rights. Equally important is the need for national Governments to assume primary responsibility for safeguarding and promoting the fundamental freedoms of the individual.
34.	The historic mandate of the Indian people in favour of fundamental freedoms left no doubt regarding the deep-seated and basic commitment of our people to human values and human rights. We therefore attach great importance to the activities of the United Nations devoted to this important issue of our times.
35.	We cannot achieve a durable and just peace until there is a transformation of the very quality and structure of the present world order. Characterized by glaring inequalities and imbalances among nations and the widening chasm between the rich and the poor countries, the existing order works inexorably against the interests of the poorer countries.
36.	The prevalence of mass poverty among a sizeable portion of the world's population living in developing countries-as many as 800 million persons—is in large part attributable to the inequities of the present international economic system. Poverty breeds tension, debases human personality and makes a mockery of the achievements of science and technology.
37.	Recent developments have shown that basically there is an unwillingness on the part of the major developed countries to begin serious negotiations to restructure the world economic order. The Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, also known as the Committee of the Whole, was expected to be the supreme United Nations body to monitor, supervise and impart momentum to negotiations on major development issues in all United Nations forums. But, almost a year after its creation, it has not even got off the ground. We hope that
following a discussion of this subject in the plenary meetings an agreement will soon be reached enabling the Committee to resume its work on the basis of its original mandate.
38.	The developed countries have till now not agreed even to discuss at the international level the question of bringing about structural changes in their economies to achieve optimal utilization of world resources and specifically to facilitate increased imports from developing countries.
39.	Some of the developed countries have recently refused even to reiterate their commitment to attaining the target of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade (resolution 2626 (XXV)] of providing 0.7 per cent of their gross national product as official development assistance to developing countries.
40.	There is, on the other hand, a resurgence of protectionism in the developed market-economy countries in the form of an increase in the incidence and scope of selective non-tariff barriers as well as of anti-dumping duties.
41.	The measures that the developed countries are prepared to adopt are still in the nature of tinkering with the present world economic order and hesitant ad hoc concessions.
42.	The developed countries have sought to justify these retrogressive actions as a means of dealing with their admittedly real problems of unemployment and "stagnation". It should, however, be obvious that these short-term and short-sighted measures, apart from having disastrous consequences for the development prospects of the developing countries, are neither conducive to healthy growth of the world economy nor in their own long-term interests. No lasting solution to the malaise afflicting the world economy can be found until a concerted effort is made to provide adequate purchasing power to two-thirds of the world population. It is therefore incumbent upon the developed countries to adopt a global, comprehensive and long-term approach to deal with their present economic problems.
43.	This Assembly's call for the ushering in of a new era of international economic relations has given rise to worldwide expectations. We therefore cannot afford the present stalemate in the negotiations between the developed and the developing countries. We must exercise our collective will to continue the onward march towards our common goal. It is necessary: first, to conclude, well before the fifth session of UNCTAD, the ongoing negotiations to establish the common fund, adopting a code of conduct for the transfer of technology to developing countries for the extending of special preferential trade concessions to developing countries within the framework of the multilateral trade negotiations; secondly, to arrest the present protectionist trend by strictly adhering to the commitment not to raise fresh barriers, to dismantle existing protectionist barriers and to take positive steps to improve the access of the exports of developing countries to the markets of the developed countries; thirdly, to commence negotiations within a time-bound framework on other key issues having a vital bearing on the restructuring of the international economic system, such as concluding a comprehensive series of commodity agreements, ensuring an adequate flow of financial resources on a dependable basis and on the softest of terms and conditions, evolving a multilateral framework for debt renegotiation, reforming the international monetary system, formulating a code of conduct for transnational corporations, and so on; fourthly, to initiate negotiations with a view to adopting an international programme to set in motion an adjustment process in the world economy and to bring about structural changes in the economies of the developed countries geared to utilizing fully the development potentialities of the developing countries; fifthly, to formulate a new international development strategy conceived within the framework of the New International Economic Order embodying a set of consistent and interrelated goals and objectives and commitments to adopt time-bound means of attaining these objectives; and, sixthly, and finally, for the developing countries to go ail out to utilize the vast potentialities of mutual co-operation by strengthening existing links and forging new links of economic, commercial and technical collaboration.
44.	The negotiations which have been going on for about five years at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea have far-reaching implications for the efforts of the international community to evolve a new world order. While it has been possible to make headway on certain important issues, the main problem, that of establishing a regime for the exploitation of the resources of the sea-bed area lying outside the limits of national jurisdiction, remains unsettled. This is mainly due to the persistent hesitation of the major developed countries to recognize fully the legitimate interests of the developing countries in this common heritage of mankind. It is incumbent on all of us to ensure that the work of the Conference comes to a successful conclusion as expeditiously as possible. If, at this critical stage of the work of the Conference, any State adopts unilateral mining legislation, it will seriously affect the future negotiations to the detriment of the interests of the world community as a whole.
45.	On all these important issues, the non-aligned nations have always adopted a consistent and principled approach. From a small beginning in 1961, this movement has grown, within the span of two decades, into a mighty force, encompassing almost two-thirds of the countries of the world. The non-aligned movement not only has enabled the newly-independent nation's to consolidate their political freedom but has also given them the strength to resist all forms of foreign domination, overt and covert, obvious or subtle. It has thrown its weight in favour of international peace and justice.
46.	It is indeed heartening to note that some of the big countries that earlier used to frown upon the movement now recognize its role and its validity. The movement has been able to preserve its unity—despite multitudinous diversities of geography, race, language and religion, differing social and political systems and varying stages of economic development-because of its strict adherence to the principles of the equality of nations, large and small, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of others, and non-interference in the internal affairs of others.
47.	As a signatory of the United Nations Charter and as a founder member of the group of non-aligned nations, India has assiduously tried to conduct its international relations in a manner Intended to promote peace, understanding and co-operation throughout the world. India has taken a number of significant initiatives towards stability and peace in the South Asian region. In this we have accorded the highest priority to improving the climate of co-operation with our neighbours. We sincerely hope that our endeavours will ultimately overcome the old suspicions and irritations, thus paving the way to undertaking new ventures of mutual co-operation. With the vast majority of the developing countries we have joined hands in trying to shape a world free of want and injustice.
48.	Our policy is to develop bilateral relations with a11 nations on the basis of the imperative of close economic co-operation and shared ideals. It is our firm belief that the tapestry of world peace can be woven only with the strands of such bilateral relations.
49.	We are in favour of an ever-expanding role for the United Nations and of bringing within its purview all issues of universal concern so that it may be instrumental in the promotion of international peace, justice and co-operation. We reaffirm our commitment to making this body a more effective instrument for bringing about a qualitative change in the world situation. We attach great importance to the role of the United Nations as a forum for formulating, negotiating and supervising the implementation of global development strategies. We may not, in the foreseeable future, be able to establish a world government; but we can at least move towards the realization of the goal of one world by devising and implementing, under the aegis of the United Nations, international development plans and programmes - both overall and for as many sectors of human activity as possible.
50.	We must build, on the foundations of the United Nations, a better world for all of us. Modern science and technology have opened up immense opportunities which can either be used for jeopardizing the very future of our planet or be harnessed to bring about progress and prosperity. Instead of wasting our energy on petty squabbles and frittering away our resources on the piling up of arms, we must employ them for wiping every tear from every eye and eliminating every ache from every heart. I trust that in the critical years ahead of us we shall demonstrate our determination, realism and sagacity to realize the dreams of our saints and savants for universal peace based on freedom and justice. I should like to conclude by reciting a quotation from Thiruvalluvar, one of the most famous ancient poet-saints of South India:
 "Where there is no terrible famine, no cruel pestilence, no foreign enemy to invade and ravage, where peace always reigns, that is the ideal land."
Hail one world!















﻿70.	Mr. President, permit me to join the representatives who have spoken before me in this general debate by offering you the congratulations of the delegation of Israel on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. My delegation is confident that you will guide this session with fairness and wisdom.
71,	It is my pleasure also to congratulate Solomon Islands on its independence and admission to the United Nations.
72	As we reflect upon the work of the United Nations over the past year one undertaking stands out above all others: it is the noble attempt to reach an agreement on disarmament, to divert precious resources to improving the lot of the common man
73	In the Middle East we recently witnessed an unprecedented escalation in the quantity of weapons purchased by the Arab States, amounting to $11 billion in orders since the beginning of 1977. Indeed, over the past five years the arms agreements signed by those States mean that they have outstripped both the countries members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the countries members of the Warsaw Pact Organization in the ratio of their arms build-up.
74.	Israel is prepared to play its part in the reduction of the arms race and it remains ready to enter into agreements on arms limitation with all States in the Middle East. There is no doubt, however, that the appropriate way to bring about an arms reduction in the Middle East is through peace treaties which would include limitations on armaments within their framework Indeed, the mere transformation from a state of war to one of peace will move the States involved to dedicate their resources to economic development rather than military aims.
75.	Terrorist groups continue to threaten the lives of innocent men, women and children in different parts of the world. Once again it must be emphasized that terrorism could be virtually eliminated if certain countries did not continue to provide arms, training and refuge to its practitioners. Yet we are gratified that States which once stood helplessly by have begun to assert themselves.
Mention should be made, for example, of the Federal Republic of Germany's rescue operation in Mogadishu and of the joint statement on international terrorism of the Heads of State 'or Government at the recent Bonn Economic Summit Conference,6 wherein they recognized the need for immediate action to cease all flights to and from a country which refuses to extradite or prosecute hijackers of aircraft. It is only through such concerted and effective action that the world can be freed from organized terrorism.

76.	In the field of human rights no State should ignore a violation of human rights wherever it may occur in the world.
77.	Israel continues to follow closely the situation of Jews in the Soviet Union. We welcome the recent increase in the number of exit visas issued, although a large number of Jews are still denied the elementary human rights to emigrate. In addition, administrative obstacles and arbitrary restrictions still threaten the social and economic livelihood and personal freedom of Jews seeking to emigrate.
78.	We have been particularly concerned by the harsh prison sentences passed this year on Jews whose only crime is their desire to rejoin their families in Israel-Grigorij Goldstein, Iosif Begun, Ida Nudel, Vladimir Slepak, Simon Shnirman and Anatoly Scharansky. Those sentences caused bitter protest and indignation throughout the world. The Soviet Union should release these and other prisoners of conscience and allow those who want to emigrate to Israel and rejoin their families to do so.
79.	We cannot be silent in the face of the increasing incitement of feeling against and defamation of the State of Israel and the Jewish people, their religion, culture and national movement, manifested day after day in the official Soviet media. Those anti-Semitic attacks, unprecedented in their intensity, may have most dangerous consequences. In this regard it must be noted that the Soviet authorities still do not permit Jews to practise their ancient traditions and culture, and in fact take severe measures against Jews who wish to do so. We appeal Jo the Soviet Union to allow Jewish culture to be expressed freely.
80.	We also deeply regret that the Syrian Government continues to violate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other relevant international conventions by refusing to permit its Jewish citizens to leave and be reunited with their relatives residing in other lands.
81.	One of the most important trends in world , politics today remains the determined aspiration of the new and under-developed nations to take their place in the international political and economic arena. Being a developing nation itself, Israel strongly identifies with the aspirations of nations in Africa, Asia and Latin America to transform their political independence into a full and equal economic partnership with the older-established nations of the world.
82 To that end the North-South dialogue, with its guidelines on the transfer of resources, marks an important
beginning, and the Government of Israel appreciates the efforts of the United Nations and its agencies in encouraging this process. My Government particularly welcomes the results of the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries in Buenos Aires, where Israel proposed a voluntary agreement for the exchange of technical assistance among developing countries. Israel has been co-operating for more than 30 years with other developing nations in fields such as irrigation techniques, seed production, desalination, solar energy and the agricultural development of arid and semi-arid zones. We view the expansion of such co-operative efforts as vital if the serious food shortages that still exist in so much of the world are to be overcome .
83.	A year ago I addressed this Assembly on the prospects of launching a peace process in the Middle East. Today I have the satisfaction of being able to address the General Assembly on the new and positive developments that have taken place recently.
84.	As all members of the Assembly know, a few weeks ago at Camp David two framework agreements8 were signed by President Anwar El-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel and witnessed by President Jimmy Carter of the United States of America. Within a very few days from now negotiations will start between Israel and Egypt for the conclusion of a peace treaty between them.
85.	It is my hope that these negotiations will be successful and that before the year is out we shall witness the beginning of a new era in the Middle East. It is our desire that the peace process should eventually embrace the other States that are our neighbours—Jordan, Lebanon and Syria-so that we may achieve a comprehensive settlement in the area.
86.	The gratitude of my country goes out to President Jimmy Carter, whose devoted efforts have made the Camp David developments possible When this achievement ends with an Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty, President Carter's name will be recorded in history as that of a great peacemaker.
87.	I also wish to express my country's deep appreciation to President Anwar El-Sadat of the Arab Republic of Egypt for his wisdom and faith. His visit to Jerusalem in November 1977 turned a new page. He decided to enter into negotiations with Israel, to recognize Israel and to make peace with Israel. This change in policy ushered in a historic change in the relations between Egypt and Israel. The previous policy based on the "three Nos" of Khartoum 19679—no negotiations, no recognition and no peace with Israel—prevented any progress towards a peace settlement.
88.	Now the road to peace lies open. The warm reception accorded to President El-Sadat by the people and Government of Israel constituted an acknowledgement of this change in the Egyptian policy. A new era of peace, for which Israel has been longing since its establishment, has started. Prime Minister Begin's courage and leadership were a decisive factor. Without his readiness and ability to assume responsibility for very painful decisions, the achievements reached at Camp David would not have been conceivable.
89.	Not only since the founding of the State of Israel but since the very beginning of the Zionist movement our dream has always been of a Middle East in which Jew and Arab would live in harmony and co-operation for the mutual advantage of both peoples.
90.	The Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel is a step in this direction. It provides for a withdrawal of Israeli armed forces and civilian population from Sinai; for the establishment of normal relations between the two countries, including diplomatic, economic and cultural relations, and full recognition; the termination of economic boycotts and of barriers to the free movement of goods and people, and mutual protection of citizens by due process of law. It also stipulates that there shall be free passage of Israeli ships through the Gulf of Suez and the Suez Canal, and that the Straits of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba are international waterways to be open to all nations for navigation and over flight.
91.	In view of the several wars launched by our neighbours, we are conscious of our security needs. Therefore, in addition to the establishment of normal relations between the two States, there will be security arrangements concerning the limitation of armaments and forces in the different areas on the basis of reciprocity.
92.	Moreover, the framework for the conclusion of a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel also provides for the stationing of United Nations forces at Sham el Sheikh to ensure freedom of passage through the Straits of Tiran. Similarly, there is a provision for their being stationed in northern Sinai, thus creating a "buffer zone" between the forces stationed in El-Arish and those in Gaza. These forces will not be removed unless such removal is approved by the Security Council of the United Nations. It should be noted here that in recent years the United Nations forces in the Middle East have played a constructive role with the framework of the various agreed arrangements in the. region.
93.	It has never been the wish of Israel to exercise control over the lives and activities of the Arab inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza.
94.	We want to live as equals with the Arab inhabitants of those areas. We want to live with them, not to replace them; but at the same time we do not regard ourselves as foreigners in those areas. The Israeli settlements in Judaea and Samaria and in the Gaza district are there as of right. It is inconceivable to us that Jews should be prohibited from settling and living in Judaea and Samaria, which are the heart of our homeland.
95.	We maintain our army positions in those areas in order to ensure the security of the population of Israel, the majority of whom live in the Mediterranean coastal area. The Israeli forces are there in order to protect Israel and not in order to interfere in the lives of the Arab inhabitants. Under the agreement for the Framework for Peace in the Middle East, the Israeli military government and its civilian administration will be withdrawn from those areas once a self-governing authority is freely elected by their inhabitants. The Israeli defence forces will be redeployed in those areas and maintained for security purposes. The final status of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza and their relationship with their neighbours will be negotiated during a period of five years following the establishment of the self-governing authority.
96.	One of the subjects that will be discussed between the parties will undoubtedly be the question concerning Jerusalem. For us, the city of Jerusalem is the one and only eternal capital of Israel. We have not, and we shall never have, any other capital city, whether or not others recognize it as such. This eternal city is holy to three religions—Judaism, Christianity and Islam. However, our connexion with it is not just religious, but derives from the totality of Jewish national history. Jerusalem is the heart and soul of the Jewish people. It is now united once again, as it should be, free and open for all to come and go. All religious communities should be in complete control of their own holy places and of their own religious life, and all should enjoy the rights of free worship. The inhabitants of the city should live together in harmony with a representative municipal council supervising all essential functions. We have resolved never again to compromise the unity of Jerusalem, and it is our hope that other peoples will share our position.
97.	It was agreed at Camp David that a peace settlement in the Middle East should be based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) of the United Nations Security Council. Resolution 242(1967) is a carefully worked out set of principles establishing a framework of peace to be negotiated among the contending States. It makes clear mat the final borders must be negotiated bilaterally among the States concerned.
98 Let us hope that all those whose co-operation is essential in obtaining peace in the Middle East will not short-sightedly remain outside the peace process. We have to find agreed and appropriate ways for Jews and Arabs to live together in equality, trust and mutual respect.
















﻿
















25.	
26.	It is my great pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly and to wish you well in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities.
27.	I also extend a special welcome to the newest Member of this Assembly, Solomon Islands, whose application for membership New Zealand was privileged to sponsor. We are neighbours in the South Pacific, members together of the South Pacific Forum and the Commonwealth. In those settings, and now in this one, New Zealand looks forward to a close, warm and co-operative relationship with Solomon Islands.
28.	New States enter upon their nationhood today at a difficult time. As an international community we face enormous political and economic problems. If the measure of a healthy civilization is its ability to govern itself, to match its demands to its resources, to manage its technology and its institutions in a sane and rational way, then we are heading for trouble. The problems we face as a global community, as a group of "united nations", are both menacing and daunting: issues of peace or war in many parts of the world, the crippling and dangerous arms race, the risk of nuclear catastrophe by deliberate decision or mischance, the widespread denial of human rights, food shortages, energy problems, population pressures, dwindling non-renewable resources and a whole range of economic ills, including high rates of inflation, unemployment and protectionism, low levels of investment and unstable commodity markets.
29.	It is not altogether surprising that, confronted with these awesome and intractable problems, some countries, in effect, opt out. Consciously or not, they decide to hold on to what they have, to settle for the protection and enjoyment of whatever resources they possess without too much regard for the effects of that policy on others. If, by way of regional or other association, this self-interest can be reinforced, then the wider grouping is pursued, with great emphasis on the value of regional co-operation. The motive in fact is national self-interest, and the manifestations of such groupings are high walls and barriers of one kind or another to keep the world at bay.
30.	This is not, in New Zealand's view, the way to deal with the great issues of the day. Self-indulgence and self-interest proved fatal to earlier civilizations; they may well, unchecked, be fatal to ours. The international community, of which the United Nations is the symbol, cannot survive let alone prosper if we, the members of it, withdraw into our shells. The agenda of international problems, however frightening, needs to be addressed by all of us squarely and determine and, mindful of course of our responsibility for the security and welfare of our own people but mindful also of the needs of the global community. We need, in short, fewer barriers between us, better machinery for consultation in the economic, social and political spheres, and above all the political will to engage in the sort of co-operation which allows us at least to make a start towards correcting the gross social and economic injustices that now prevail.
31.	This is not simply an economic issue. If we are to move in a discernible way to cure current ills the issues of national security, of international law, of intergovernmental organization—all the major political issues of the day—are of paramount importance. Solutions to those problems will determine the freedom of States to make the appropriate responses in the economic sphere. Nor is it, as I have pointed out, the concern of just a few States; the problem is an immediate one for all pf us.
32.	The great Powers, however, have a primary role. Their attitudes to each other condition the environment in which we all live and operate. What the great Powers do, and what they do not do, carry consequences for all of us. We welcome therefore those co-operative arrangements that betoken an effort to contain crises, to co-operate in the avoidance of nuclear war, to reach agreement on arms- control measures, to extend relations over a broad range of social and cultural fronts and to reduce the harshness of the rhetoric between them.
33.	It is not, of course, only up to the great Powers. International relations are both intricate and complex and there are opportunities for constructive contributions from the small and middle-sized Powers as well as from the great.
34.	These opportunities would be immeasurably enhanced if the smaller States learned to work together. In New Zealand's part of the world, the south Pacific, we are making an effort to do so and we are attempting to build up a sense of partnership in the region. I have just come to
New York from a meeting earlier this month of the South Pacific Forum-a regular conference of the Heads of Government of all the independent and self-governing States of the south Pacific. Among the major topics discussed at the Forum was the enactment of legislation creating a 200-mile exclusive economic zone by the countries of the region. This offers to many of these smaller island States an opportunity, for the first time, to capitalize on what is in some cases their only substantial resource. These Pacific island States, together with New Zealand and Australia, have decided to move at once to set up a Forum fisheries agency to advise their Governments, many of whose scientific resources are slender, on the conservation, utilization and management of the living resources, including highly migratory species, of their 200-mile economic zones. At the same time, they are continuing to explore the question of what kind of long-term regional fisheries arrangements will serve the Pacific best.
35.	Another major topic discussed at the Forum was economic development and ways of minimizing the twin evils of protectionism and declining terms of trade. We suffer from these in New Zealand and we understand the difficulties facing developing countries and in particular our south Pacific neighbours, most of whom have an even narrower range of export products and less stable markets than we do. To tackle these problems we have together established an industrial development scheme to provide financial backing and incentives for companies to develop manufacturing industries in the islands. In addition, we are currently reviewing the numerous factors affecting entry of island exports to the New Zealand market. Our bilateral aid programme continues to have its primary focus in the south Pacific and this year 60 per cent of New Zealand's bilateral aid will be directed to the region. In the fields of shipping and civil aviation substantial progress has been made. A regional shipping line started operations in May and the number of direct air services between countries of the region is increasing.
36.	These are practical issues-a serious effort on the part of all the regional States to stimulate new thinking and to create greater opportunities for the development of trade and economic advancement in our part of the world. Their purpose, however, goes beyond mere economic considerations. Solutions are vital if democratic processes and political stability are not to be placed in jeopardy.
37.	In New Zealand's view, the same sort of co-operative effort—and for the same reasons—is needed in the global arena. As I see it, the world's economy today is distinguished by two rather paradoxical characteristics-its interdependence and its diversity. We have to grapple with both. Take interdependence. I do not question the argument for individual countries fostering a degree of economic self- sufficiency. There are certain skills and certain industries which every country needs to have even when the cost of establishing those skills is, by international standards, high. I believe, however, that most countries, including my own, have far snore to gain from participating in the international economy than from standing outside it. Decisions made in the world's major trading nations have a critical effect on the economic well-being and on the development patterns of the more peripheral economies. In the reverse aspect, recent years have shown that the world's major trading
countries also depend, to varying degrees, upon economic events in the less economically powerful countries. Raw material supply is an obvious area. Another is the importance of some developing countries as sources of demand and as areas of investment for the products and capital of the richer nations. There is evidence stretching back over a long period of the economic benefits for richer countries of increasing their imports, particularly of labour-intensive goods, from the newly industrializing countries. For these countries political stability is inseparable from economic stability.
38.	If countries are to produce and export those things which their human and material resources and their historic development priorities suggest as logical and economically efficient, they must do so within an international economic environment that allows scope for their diversity. That means an open international trading system. Protectionism must be resisted, especially in the area of agricultural commodity, trade, where there is a dangerous disposition among the richer developed countries to apply more restrictive policies than in the industrial commodity area. I recognize that the principles of an open multilateral trading system raise difficult domestic political problems, but economic development is about change and innovation and we need to look at today's problems with our eyes very firmly fixed on the longer term. These wider principles are very much at stake in the current series of the GATT negotiations. Only to the extent they are recognized, and acted upon, will the Tokyo round of negotiations be judged successful.
39.	The maintenance of an international trading system is not, by itself, enough. An international economy to which all countries and all people are contributing to the maximum extent possible needs to take account of the diversity of the international economy in another sense too. We need to recognize that there are very different kinds of economies. I do not mean that we should endeavour to come up with a new and sophisticated classification; rather that we should recognize, in the interests of the international economy, as well as in the interests of peace and justice, that some countries will need special assistance on a long-term basis, the world's poorest nations will need special aid and trade measures; so might the land-locked countries and the developing island countries. The aid and trade policies of some. countries, including my own, are already taking account of these special requirements, and the more advanced developing countries are following suit. Technical co-operation among developing countries, a concept which the United .Nations had done much to promote, has in this last month been the subject of a world conference in Buenos Aires.  It is a most welcome development and one which exemplifies the sort of practical co-operation I have been advocating.
40.	This sense of community, of co-operative partnership, of working together to discuss and solve problems, not only must underpin our aid and trade initiatives; it must be demonstrated also in our- treatment of political problems if our systems and institutions are not to become irrelevant.
There are few people in the world who do not wish for peace. There are even fewer who believe that peace can be secured other than through the co-operation and partnership l the people concerned themselves. Enforced solutions rarely endure. The only sure foundation for the peaceful settlement of disputes is the will of the parties involved to work for reconciliation and peaceful co-operation.
41.	This is surely the lesson of what is now happening in the Middle East New Zealand has no special knowledge of the Middle East question nor would we presume to offer an answer to the tangled web of issues at stake. But it does seem to us that certain fundamental principles need to be accepted if the will to reconcile and co-operate, which has been demonstrated in a dramatic way by the leaders of Egypt and Israel over the past year, is to be turned into a fair and lasting peace. Above all, we believe that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) contains the essential elements which should form the basis for a negotiated settlement. But just as our support for Israel's right to exist as a sovereign State within secure and recognized boundaries is fundamental to our approach to the dispute, so we are convinced that the rights of the Palestinians, including the right to self-determination and to establish an independent Palestinian State if they so desire, must be recognized. It is clear that a settlement which meets these -two criteria requires that Israel withdraw from areas occupied in 1967, so as to permit the Palestinians full freedom to exercise their right of self-determination. A Middle East settlement would not only confer inestimable benefits on Israel and its Arab neighbours, but would remove a potential and ever-real danger to world peace. We have therefore been tremendously encouraged by the will for peace and reconciliation displayed at the recent Camp David summit meetings. Early progress in pursuit of the agreements reached at Camp David by the leaders of Egypt and Israel, with the active partnership of the United States, must be our common hope in this Assembly.
42.	It is true also that these lessons of co-operation have still to be learned in southern Africa. The history of relationships between black and white in that continent, between those who exercise power and those who, though in an overwhelming majority, have had no say in their destiny, is one - of so many opportunities lost to work together in harmony and co operation. In Namibia recently, it is true, there has been encouraging progress towards independence as a result of the persistent efforts of the five Western members of the Security Council and the front-line African States. It would be tragic if progress were to be held up now by intransigence on the part of any of those involved. It is New Zealand's hope that free elections will be held at the earliest practicable date and that Namibia will soon be able to take its rightful place as a Member of this Organization. New Zealand is anxious to support this process in practical ways. Most recently my Government has contributed substantially to a Commonwealth fund for the education and training of Namibians who will soon be in a position of responsibility in their own country.
43.	In Rhodesia it is clear from the increasing scale of the armed conflict that the "internal settlement" introduced in March of this year  has failed to produce the cease-fire that
the Salisbury regime predicted. On the contrary, there has been an escalation of violence, with innocent people as the not infrequent victims. These senseless and tragic killings must be stopped. The only way is through the speedy conclusion of a negotiated settlement. The best hope is for all the elements in Rhodesia and the Patriotic Front to come together in an all party conference on the basis of the Anglo-American proposals.  This is a course which we urge as the first step towards a cease-fire, the holding of fair and fair elections, and ultimate independence for Zimbabwe and its people.
44.	Other States, and especially the neighbouring African States, can play a constructive part in creating the climate for a settlement through mediation and diplomatic support. Or they can meddle, as some States far from Africa have chosen to do in various parts of the continent, by encouraging divisions and even by direct intervention. That is a prescription for conflict, not for settlement. We trust that the pattern we have already seen in some African countries will not be repeated elsewhere.
45.	Even after peace is established in other parts of southern Africa, the most difficult problem of all will remain in South Africa itself. It is there that a co-operative effort, even a dialogue, is most desperately needed. The institutionalized racism which is apartheid offers no hope of a peaceful future for South Africa. It must be abandoned. Change must come. There is no other way. A policy of apartheid is not only wrong; it is suicidal. It seeks to impose what cannot be imposed, to deprive people of rights and freedoms that cannot be denied. The delusion of those in power in South Africa that they can succeed in their purpose if they are tough enough and determined enough is a delusion common to Governments which refuse to listen to the voices of those they oppress. Sooner or later those voices make themselves heard and the result is both predictable and destructive. There is still time to avoid that result in South Africa, but not much. New Zealand is and always will be utterly opposed to apartheid. We want to see justice and common sense prevail. This is the oily way to prevent conflict.
46.	Our concern for human rights in southern Africa must not blind us to deprivations that occur elsewhere. New Zealand upholds the principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, proclaimed 30 years ago by this Genera] Assembly—among those rights: freedom of movement, the right to leave one's country and to return, the right to a nationality, the right of freedom of opinion and expression. We are concerned when these rights are denied, wherever that denial takes place, and it is shameful that, 30 years on, there are countries, including some who were founder nations of this Organization, who still deny their millions of citizens these basic human rights. How can the international community ignore that?
47.	In New Zealand this year the Human Rights Commission Act came into force, establishing a national Commission on Human Rights to deal with complaints of racial, religious or sexual discrimination, in conjunction with the
Race Relations Act of 1971. This new legislation codifies that respect for human rights which has had a central place in our traditions. We have regarded the two International Covenants on Human Rights as legal documents of substantial value and importance, and have not wished to ratify them merely on the basis of our general attachment to the principles they enunciate. We have now completed a comprehensive review of our legislation and are satisfied that our laws are in compliance with the requirements of the two International Covenants. I am pleased to announce therefore that New Zealand will ratify the International . Covenant on Political and Civil Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide during this session of the General Assembly.
48.	I want before I close to turn very briefly to two major issues that have preoccupied the international community, and this Assembly in particular, over the past year—the law of the sea and disarmament.
49.	On 1 April of this year New Zealand brought into force its jurisdiction over a 200-mile exclusive economic zone. Some 330 foreign fishing vessels from three countries are now licensed, pursuant to agreements with New Zealand, to catch fish which is surplus to the capacity of the New Zealand fishing industry. The expansion of the New Zealand industry, upon its own initiative and through joint ventures, represents a significant economic opportunity for us.
50.	I want to emphasize therefore the importance for New Zealand, and for very many of the small and middle sized countries in the Pacific and elsewhere, of a speedy and successful conclusion to th3 Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The adoption of a widely acceptable international convention will give us and many other countries a secure and stable basis upon which to plan and develop the utilization of the resources within the 200-mile zone. It is in no one's interests that the oceans should become a battleground for competing claims and the focus of conflicts over the extraction of resources. Both our national interest and a wider interest in the rule of law and a stable regime for the oceans lead my Government to attach great value to the achievement of a wide-ranging treaty along the lines on which the Conference is now working.
51.	In last May and June this Assembly met in its tenth special session in an attempt to stem the arms race and to begin, in a real sense, the process of disarmament. There will be differing views on the success of that session. New Zealand's view is that we have made a small beginning, that the special session has given a modest impetus to the disarmament cause and that the establishment of machinery for discussion and negotiation marks a step forward. We hope that other steps will soon follow, among them the early conclusion of a treaty putting an end to nuclear- weapon testing in all environments. Time is short, but it should still be possible, in New Zealand's view, to present this treaty to this thirty-third regular session of the General Assembly.
52.	My Government sees disarmament as among the most urgent requirements of our time. Progress has been slow.
We must do better, not by calling for far-reaching measures that have no hope of acceptance, but by working for and participating in a realistic short-term programme of action which will result in agreements that are balanced, practicable and verifiable. Between now and the next special session, New Zealand will support each and every measure of disarmament that meets these criteria.
53.	The world is an increasingly complex place. Within our own societies, and in our international life, there are forces at work that are changing our perceptions, altering our values and demolishing our traditions at a bewildering pace. There are many competing interests to be accommodated, conflicting philosophies and approaches to be reconciled. We can accommodate and reconcile them only by being honest, understanding, straightforward and fair with each other-not only with our friends, for that is relatively easy, but more importantly with those with whom we may disagree. If we can work towards this sense of co-operation and partnership as a world community we can, I believe, if not solve all our problems at least reduce them to a manageable dimension. For its part my Government pledges itself to work with others in this spirit and to this end.
﻿35.	Mr. President, the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics wishes to congratulate you on your election to the post of President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and to wish you full success in that high office.
36.	It has become customary for representatives of practically all States to expound the views of their Governments concerning the crucial issues of war and peace at regular sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. Indeed, the United Nations, the most representative international forum, is the right place to raise in their full dimensions issues on whose solution largely depends the future of mankind.
37.	The United Nations was established specifically for that purpose. It emerged immediately after the fiery steamroller of the Second World War had driven over Europe and a considerable part of the rest of the world. Today, memories of those days are still fresh in our minds. Words fail to describe fully what that war visited upon mankind.
38.	Both the generation that had to live through the war and the present generation realize that the victory won over the forces of fascism and aggression is of historic world significance. It changed the political image of the planet and brought to an unprecedented pitch the activities of forces working for peace, national liberation and social progress. The sword of justice smote those who had instigated the aggression. Such are the lessons taught by history itself-history, the most authoritative teacher.
39.	Looking back over the path traversed in international affairs over the post-war decades, including the troubled years of the "cold war", peoples, Governments and political figures—unless of course they are laymen in politics—cannot afford to ignore the major imperative of bending every effort to prevent another military catastrophe which would be even more disastrous for mankind than the two world wars taken together.
40.	The fact that it has proved possible to avoid a major war for almost a third of a century is undoubtedly a great achievement of the peoples. They are increasingly showing that they hate war, reject and curse it as a means of resolving international disputes and controversies.
41.	Representatives of the Soviet Union, speaking in various international forums on behalf of our people and of the Communist Party, which is the nucleus of the political system of Soviet society, have always emphasized the theme of peace, and will continue to do so. The fundamental law of the Soviet State, its new Constitution, declares: "The USSR steadfastly pursues the Leninist policy of peace and stands for strengthening the security of nations and broad international co-operation."
42.	We are implementing that policy, hand in hand with our friends and allies. The recent meeting in the Crimea of Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev with the leaders of fraternal parties and States has shown with new strength that the socialist community firmly follows the course of peace, detente and international co-operation.
43.	The fraternal socialist States are justly proud of the fact that through their consistent activities year after year, month after month, almost day after day, they are making no small contribution to preserving peaceful conditions for the life and creative work of peoples on earth.
44.	Yet it would be naive to deny another thing: peace will not become more durable, detente more reliable, unless the efforts of socialist States are reciprocated by other countries. That in turn calls for a willingness, despite differences in social systems, to resolve controversial issues at the negotiating table, without seeking unilateral advantages.
45.	The participants in this General Assembly session will probably agree that we have not gathered here merely to express our satisfaction at the fact that, so far, peace has been preserved. What is much more important is to mobilize additional efforts and find new possibilities of shielding the peoples from aggression and from a world conflict in the future as well.
46.	The will of the Soviet people and the policy of our State was expressed in a penetrating and meaningful manner by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev in these words:
"The major thrust of our struggle for peace in the present conditions is to lessen the risk of another world war, of the mass annihilation of people through the use of nuclear weapons."
47.	It is indeed true that all peoples are inspired by one idea, one aspiration: peace. Yet the situation in different parts of the world is taking shape differently, for the world is full of contradictions and the influence exercised by those forces which are working for stronger international security and the freedom of peoples and that exercised by those who on the contrary are attempting to encroach on them is felt differently in various parts of the world.
48.	The continent of Europe has made the greatest headway towards establishing durable peace. It is in Europe that major moves towards peace on a collective and bilateral basis have been accomplished in recent years. Several hurdles have been surmounted, one after another, in improving relations between countries with opposing social systems. The political climate in Europe today is clearly healthier than before.
49.	The results of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe have been a fresh and considerable impetus. It is no secret that from time to time attempts are made to put the durability of those results to a test. However, detente has been and continues to be the dominant trend in European international life. And surely this is demonstrated by the development of relations between the Soviet Union and other socialist countries on the one hand and France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Finland and the Scandinavian and many other States on the other.
50.	Europe now appears to have reached a stage where the opponents of detente are hard put to it to reverse the course of events. However, this does not mean that (he fruits of improved relations between States will fall by themselves into the hands of the peoples. On the contrary, sustained efforts are required, and. provided States are on the side of detente, they have great opportunities for mutually beneficial co-operation in the most diverse fields. For its part the Soviet Union will spare mi effort to this end.
51.	Close attention is riveted today on the continent of Africa. Africa, with its 400-million population, is seething, Newly-liberated States are in the process of self-assertion, shedding the last shackles of colonialism. Following the adoption by the United Nations in I960 of the historic Declaration oil the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples almost all of them hare gained their national freedom almost all, but not all. The colonial order still persists in Rhodesia, Namibia and the Republic of South Africa, with its barbaric forms of racial discrimination.
52.	How many words and how much paper are wasted in casting aspersions on the policy or the Soviet Union and other socialist countries in connexion with the situation in some parts of Africa. And who is doing all this'? Those who are clinging to the remnants of colonialism and racism. Aware that what they are doing is hardly popular, to say the least, they are attempting to cover up their neo-colonialist moves and to deceive the peoples. Apparently such devices will be resorted to m the future as well. Yet, deceit will get no one very far; the peoples will know how to tell the truth from a lie.
53.	Colonialism and racism must be fully and irrevocably eliminated from the African continent too. Those who want to preserve the racist regimes, which are so odious to the peoples of Africa, must realize that their cause has been lost, and lost irretrievably.
54.	As in the past, we make no secret of the fact that our sympathies are tin the side of the peoples fighting for their national independence and social progress. But we are not seeking any advantages fur ourselves either in Africa or in the developing countries in other continents. The Soviet Union does not covet political domination, concessions or military bases.
55.	When the States of Africa or other parts of the world request aid to repel aggression we repeat, aggression or an armed attack, they have every right to expect support from their friends. Or perhaps the provision of the United
Nations Charter on the "inherent right of individual or collective self-defence" is no longer valid?
56.	The objective, inexorable laws of historical development will prevail. The day is not far off when the hour of independence will strike for the peoples of southern Africa, too. and when the entire African continent to the last inch will become free.
57.	There is an area at the crossroads of three continents which could be described as a "powder keg", as the Balkans once used to be called. That area is the Middle Hast. Hardly anyone would dare to say that the situation in the Middle East is not fraught with the danger of another explosion.
58.	What is the root-cause of such a situation? It lies in the fact that 10 years after the aggression its consequences have still not been eliminated, while the aggression itself goes unpunished. Israel continues to hold sway over territories it has seized. Unfortunately, even in the Arab world there are some politicians who display no concern about Arab lands and who are inclined to neglect the legitimate rights of the Arabs, especially the Palestinian Arabs, and to cringe and surrender to the demands of the aggressor and those who protect him.
5V. The Soviet Union has repeatedly stated its willingness to play a part in ensuring peace in the Middle East and to participate in the most stringent international security guarantees for alt States of that area. Israeli spokesmen contend that they have no use for international guarantees. This is no more than empty polemical bravado. If Israel genuinely cared for its security - real, not illusory, security it would seek a political solution. For the fact is that with existing means of warfare the distance from the borders to which a neighbouring State has withdrawn its guns is of little consequence. What is required here is a radical breakthrough towards a situation in which the guns would be altogether silent.
60.	Only a solution that would guarantee the right to independence and security of all States and peoples in the Middle East, including the Arab people of Palestine, who are fully entitled to a national home, a State of their own, can lay the foundations for a lasting peace in that part of the world.
61.	All the accumulated experience, particularly recent experience, indicates that a radical and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East can be achieved only oil the basis of joint efforts by all the parties directly concerned. Separate deals at the expense of the Arabs have only side-tracked the solution of the problem.
62.	And such, precisely, is the nature of the understandings reached at the recent three-sided meeting at Camp David. If one looks at things realistically, there are no grounds for believing that they, as claimed, bring a Middle East settlement closer. On the contrary, what this is all about is a new anti-Arab step making it more difficult to achieve a just solution of this pressing problem. That is why a campaign of artificial and affected optimism can mislead no one.
63.	There is machinery specifically established to achieve peace in the Middle East, and that is the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. The sooner an end is put to attempts to keep it in a state of paralysis, the nearer will be the moment when the solution of the Middle East problem can be tackled with a chance of success.
64.	For many years, many decades, the peoples of Asia, the most heavily populated continent in the world, have been concerned about how to ensure peace, security and possibilities for development and progress in that area. The key to this, in our view, lies in joint action by all Asian States without exception. This is particularly urgent in the present conditions when developments in Asia are revealing certain disquieting traits. It is not fortuitous that among Asian countries there is a growing realization of the fact that conflicts, crude pressure and interference in internal affairs, which not so long ago went so far as to assume the dimensions of military intervention, and attempts to pit Asian States one against the other should give way to a stable peace.
65.	It is in this perspective that the creation of a unified Viet Nam, which had expelled the aggressors from its territory and is today pursuing a peace-loving policy, is of tremendous importance. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has heroically lived through all the hardships of a long and bitter war, is now courageously defending its sovereignty. From the United Nations rostrum the Soviet Union once again declares its solidarity with Viet Nam and states that the hegemonistic claims with which it is being confronted are totally inadmissible.
66.	The Soviet Union favours good relations with those Asian States which in turn seek mutual understanding and good-neighbourly relations with us. Such are our relationships with most Asian States, and in several cases they go back a good many years. Along with equal and mutually advantageous co-operation based on the principles of mutual respect, strict observance of sovereignty and the principle of non-interference in each other's internal affairs, we are united with those countries by our common concern for strengthening peace and security in Asia, our joint struggle against the designs of the forces of imperialism, colonialism and racism.
67.	One striking example of multifaceted friendly cooperation, of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems, is the relationship between the Soviet Union and India. This relationship, with long-standing traditions of good-neighbourliness, is steadily on the rise, in its development on the firm basis of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Co-operation.  It is consonant with the vital interests of the peoples of the two countries and constitutes an important and effective factor for peace on the Asian continent and throughout the world.
68.	If we do not have such relationships with all Asian States, the responsibility for that is not ours. It rests squarely on those who persist in following a hostile line with regard to our country, a line which is hostile to the cause of peace in general. Those who, while themselves pursuing hegemonistic aims, try to peg the label of hegemonism on others are making a travesty of the facts.
69.	Of course, it is not immaterial to the interests of peace in the Far East and the Pacific to note what policy is followed by Japan. Unfortunately, its policy has been showing some disquieting trends. One may well wonder whether that country might not eventually step on to the path that has led in the past to enormous sufferings for other peoples and plunged Japan into catastrophe. I should not like to draw any final conclusions; yet serious attention should be paid to all this. We believe that our concern is shared by many.
70.	Our policy with regard to Japan has been and will remain a policy of principle. We stand for good relations with that country, for genuinely good-neighbourly relations. However, appropriate moves by Japan are also required.
71.	Let us now turn to another continent, Latin America. Its role in world affairs is on the rise, and what is particularly noteworthy is that Latin American countries increasingly seek to have an independent voice. Accordingly there are growing opportunities for co-operation between those countries and States in other parts of the world. This is a positive and important factor of international life. The Soviet Union wishes the countries and peoples of Latin America nothing but good.
72.	During the current session of the General Assembly another independent State, Solomon Islands, has become a Member, the one hundred and fiftieth Member, of the United Nations. Oceania is very far from us, but we wish to maintain normal and, where possible, friendly relations with the countries of that area as well. Here, too, we regard with sympathy the aspirations of the peoples to gain independence and to free themselves from foreign tutelage, in both the literal and the figurative meaning of the word.
73.	In this connexion, one cannot ignore the actions of the United States in respect of Micronesia in a bid to lay its hands on a Territory which is temporarily under its trusteeship and to make those islands serve its own military and strategic plans in violation of the United Nations decisions and in circumvention of the Security Council.
74.	What follows from this review of the state of affairs in the world, brief as it is? First of all, despite the contradictory nature of the current world developments, the international situation on the whole is better than, say, 10 or 15 years ago.
75.	At the same time, it is clear that the international situation does not depend solely on the state of affairs in this or that area of the world. There are international problems which it is difficult or even impossible to fit into a geographical framework. The most crucial, most burning and most truly global problem affecting all countries and peoples is the ending of the arms race and disarmament.
76.	The truth which is recognized today by all is that enormous resources are being spent to manufacture engines of destruction. It is indeed a fact that in this time of peace more than 25 million men are in military uniform; and there are many more people who are directly or indirectly engaged in military production. All this represents a colossal drain on the material and intellectual resources of mankind.
77 There are those who may say that something is nevertheless being done to contain the arms race. Recently, for example, a special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament was convened. It reflected the determination of peoples to do away with the arms race and to direct the course of events towards disarmament and eventually general and complete disarmament. The session did adopt a comprehensive Final Document [resolution S-10/2/ which on the whole is a good one.
78.	The Soviet Union can note with satisfaction that many ideas that it proposed became an organic part of the Final Document. Like all those who are not merely paying lip- service to disarmament but are actually seeking disarmament, we believe that the decisions taken at the special session must be translated into the language of practical deeds by States, failing which they will remain empty phrases.
79.	If one is to take a sober view of things, one must recognize, however, that the arms race has not diminished one whit. A group of States and everyone knows which- has decided to earmark huge additional appropriations for an arms build-up over many years to come. The decision taken by the North Atlantic Council session of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Washington and the subsequent steps to intensify military preparations in a number of countries can only be interpreted as a challenge to those who are working for disarmament.
80.	Regardless of all the attempts of the instigators of the arms race to make things look as if the security of States will be all the more reliable the bigger their military arsenals are, the facts are quite different. As the number of weapons grows, as new and ever more destructive types of weapons emerge, the risk of war also increases. People will not accept any excuses such as references to a "threat from the USSR". Such references are completely spurious.
81.	Who but the Soviet Union is making one proposal after another designed to halt the arms race, to check it from this or that angle, and to prevent the development of new means of warfare? And who is rejecting these proposals out of hand0 The opponents of disarmament are doing this.
82.	By now and Western statesmen recognize this-there exists an approximate equality or parity in weapons. The Soviet Union-and we reaffirm this does not intend to change this correlation in its favour. What is more, we have been and are proposing now that the levels of military confrontation be reduced that is, that the security of each and every one be ensured with lesser quantitative and qualitative parameters of armaments and armed forces.
83.	As was clearly emphasized by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, ". .. there is no type of armaments, and above all weapons of mass destruction, that the Soviet Union would not be prepared to see limited and banned reciprocally, in agreement with other States, and then eliminated from the arsenals".
84.	Our country has a comprehensive programme for curtailing the arms race. Our proposals were put forward here in the United Nations only a few months ago. It will be recalled that they will remain the subject of further discussion in various bodies dealing with disarmament. We shall never tire of taking such initiatives, and they will not become tarnished because of this, since the need for specific action in all the sectors of the struggle for disarmament, for the prevention of another war, is increasing rather than diminishing.
85.	In circumstances where the arms race is being stepped up and the world is sliding downhill in this respect, the first thing to do is to stop completely and further quantitative and qualitative build-up of arms. Clearly, this applies above all to States with large military potentials.
86.	It will be recalled that on a practical plane the Soviet Union has urged the discussion of a set of sweeping measures which could be carried out within a. specified limited period; cessation of the production of all types of nuclear weapons; cessation of the production, and prohibition of, all other types of weapons of mass destruction; cessation of the development of new types of conventional armaments of great destructive capability; renunciation by the permanent members of the Security Council, and by countries which have military agreements with them, of the expansion of their armies and the build-up of their conventional armaments. We expect those proposals to be treated seriously and to be examined in practical terms.
87.	The greatest threat to peace-and this is something that is now recognized everywhere-stems from the nuclear- arms race. Consequently, priority should be given to nuclear disarmament. On this matter we see eye to eye with most States of the world, including the developing countries.
88.	Why is it not possible to couch in treaty language an obligation by States to discontinue the production of all types of nuclear weapons so as to move then to a gradual reduction of their stockpiles, and all the way to their complete destruction? But such obligations cannot materialize out of thin air; they are produced in the course of negotiations-and we have been insisting on the necessity for such negotiations.
89.	In the opinion of the Soviet Union, what is required is that all the nuclear Powers as well as a certain number of non-nuclear States get together at a conference table and that an exact date for the beginning of the negotiations be set And this session of the General Assembly should have its say in this regard and make an appropriate appeal to all the nuclear Powers in the first place.
90 Any major task, and particularly that of nuclear disarmament, calls for maximum realism once you have begun to tackle it. In the world of today it is inconceivable that such a task can make any headway unless action is taken at the same time to strengthen political and international legal guarantees for the security of States. In this connexion, the proposal to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations is becoming ever
more urgent.
91.	While emphasizing as a great achievement of the peoples the fact that peace has been preserved for more than a third of a century now, we should not forget even for an instant how great are the dangers that lie in wait for mankind. Fully to deliver the peoples from the threat of nuclear war: this is what underlies our proposal.
92.	The same purpose is served by concrete initiatives of the Soviet Union, and today we are stressing them again, expecting that they will elicit the understanding and support of the General Assembly.
93.	What is involved here in the first place is the strengthening of security guarantees for non-nuclear States; and secondly, the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territory of States where there are no such weapons at present.
94.	It will be recalled that recently our country has taken a step conducive to instilling among non-nuclear States greater confidence in their security. The Soviet Union has declared that it will never use nuclear weapons against countries which renounce the production and acquisition of nuclear weapons and which do not have them on their territory.
95.	Following our lead, the United States and the United Kingdom, for their part, have made declarations to the effect that they would not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States. On the whole, this could be regarded as a positive fact, were not such declarations replete with all kinds of reservations rendering them valueless.
96.	The Soviet Union has not confined itself to a solemn declaration regarding the non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States which renounce the production and acquisition of nuclear weapons and do not have them on their territory. We have expressed our readiness-and this still stands—to enter into special agreements to that effect with any of those countries. The USSR calls upon all the other nuclear Powers to act in a similar manner and to assume corresponding obligations.
97.	At the same time, it is clear that, if the problem of safeguarding non-nuclear States from the use of nuclear weapons against them is to be tackled in the most effective manner, agreed guarantees on the part of the nuclear Powers and a multilateral arrangement are required. In other words, it is necessary that we have an international agreement based on a pledge by those Powers not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States parties to such an agreement provided the latter do not produce, acquire or have such weapons on their territory. A similar obligation could be extended to armed forces and installations under the jurisdiction and control of non- nuclear States—that is, to make it even more sweeping in scope.
98.	Do non-nuclear States stand to benefit from their participation in an international agreement of this kind? Of course they do. They would be provided with security guarantees universally formalized in international law, whereas they themselves would not be required to do anything but strictly to observe their non-nuclear status. At the same time, this would be to everyone's advantage, for the threat of a nuclear conflict would diminish, and the climate throughout the world would improve.
99.	Taking all this into consideration and in response to a relevant appeal of the United Nations General Assembly at its tenth special session, on disarmament, the Soviet Union has proposed the inclusion in the agenda for this session, as an important and urgent matter, of an item entitled "Conclusion of an international convention on the strengthening of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States" [A/33I241 J. Seeking to put things on a practical footing from the outset, we have also submitted the draft text of such a convention [ibid.].
100.	We feel that one of the merits of our initiative is that, given the goodwill of States, and of course of the nuclear States above all, it may yield practical results fairly soon. Following discussion on this question at the current session of the General Assembly, the Committee on Disarmament could immediately proceed to negotiate the text of the convention so that it would as soon as possible be open to signature by all States of the world.
101.	I should like to turn now to our second proposal, concerning the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there are no such weapons at present. It can hardly be disputed that this is a reliable way to prevent nuclear weapons from spreading all over the globe.
102.	Here, too, we take into account the point of view expressed by a large group of States. Many countries are becoming increasingly aware of the risks stemming from nuclear weapons and they are not at all eager to have them on their territories.
103.	In our view, this could be achieved through an international agreement to be based on a clear and simple pledge by the nuclear Powers not to station nuclear weapons on territories where there are no such weapons at present. Such an obligation would cover all types of nuclear weapons—warheads, bombs, shells, mines and so on— whether deployed as combat systems or kept in depots and storage facilities. At the same time, non-nuclear countries would formalize their intention to refrain from any steps which directly or indirectly could lead to the presence of nuclear weapons on their territories.
104.	If all the nuclear Powers were to agree not to station nuclear weapons where there are no such weapons at present—and our country has already declared its willingness to do so—it would not be too difficult to reach international agreement. The Soviet Union would like to hope that the United Nations General Assembly will respond favourably to its proposal.
105.	The implementation of the initiatives which we are putting forth at this session would also result in a much stronger regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons without affecting in any way the possibilities of using nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. By the same token, our proposals, which are consonant with the idea of creating nuclear-free zones, provide even greater leeway for putting these ideas into practice through the collective or individual efforts of States.
106.	The need to prevent the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction is being increasingly felt. Upon our initiative, the Committee on Disarmament has started negotiations to that effect; but these negotiations are proceeding very slowly. The Soviet Union is in favour of the reaching of agreement on this extremely important matter and of the stepping up of the preparation of special agreements on individual types of weapons wherever necessary.
107.	This applies first and foremost to such inhuman weapons as the neutron weapon. The situation would become much more dangerous if the plans for its production, stockpiling and deployment materialized. It is in the interests of peace that those plans be irrevocably abandoned.
108.	Rapid progress in military science and technology- this frenzy of armament, so to say is increasing the risk that a point could be reached beyond which it would become absolutely impossible to verify compliance with the existing arms limitation agreements or those in the process of preparation.
109.	Wherever disarmament negotiations are taking place and whoever the participants arc, our line is directed towards achieving concrete results. An early conclusion of the Soviet-American talks on limiting strategic offensive arms is of particular importance. The essence of the problem lies in setting limits for the deployment of the most dangerous and destructive types of armaments, to be followed by negotiations with a view to a substantial decrease in their levels.
110.	It is to be hoped that a sober-minded and well- considered line in United States policy with regard to this extremely important matter will prevail, because a new agreement is needed equally by the Soviet Union, the United States and the world at large.
111.	Many countries on various continents welcomed the beginning of negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States on certain questions related to the problem of disarmament and the cessation of the arms race, including the talks on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in the Indian Ocean and on the limitation of the sales of conventional weapons.
112.	Positive results could have been achieved long ago at the talks concerning the Indian Ocean. However, ever since last February they have been "frozen" -through no fault of ours. This is giving concern to many States which cherished hopes that the talks would help turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace.
113.	What is required, in the first place, to limit the sales of conventional armaments and their transfer to other countries'' The political basis for solving this question is to be found in criteria of international law which would take care both of the task of limiting arms sales and of the legitimate interests of peoples fighting against aggression, for their freedom and independence.
114.	Of late, some progress has been achieved at the negotiations between the USSR, the United States of
America and the United Kingdom on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. It has been agreed that the treaty under preparation must impose a ban on any test explosions of nuclear weapons in any environment. It is all the more important to bring these negotiations to a successful conclusion. But for some reason or other our negotiating partners are stalling,
115.	It is in all earnestness that the Soviet Union has been raising the question of limiting conventional armaments and armed forces. Even today the role of conventional armaments is quite important, while the efforts by States to limit them are insufficient.
116.	No real headway has yet been made at the Vienna talks on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. Throughout the talks we have witnessed one and the same line pursued by our Western partners: "You socialist countries", they say, "should reduce more and we less". Of course there is no proof—there could not possibly be any proof-that such a unilateral approach is justified. This is nothing but an artificial piling up of obstacles.
117.	Our position is simple: without effecting any changes in the correlation of armaments and armed forces, their level should none the less be reduced by both sides. Some people who want to inflict damage on the socialist countries by changing the ratio of forces in favour of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ought to curb their appetites.
118.	The socialist countries have recently put forward in Vienna new proposals whose constructive nature is recognized even in the West. We are expecting a practical and positive response to them.
119.	In connexion with the problem of disarmament, it is appropriate to stress how acute are the problems of economic development of many countries which are asking for assistance. They are compelled to overcome great difficulties. Suffice it to say that according to United Nations data 1.5 billion people, that is to say over one third of mankind, are deprived of elementary medical attention, while some 700 million people suffer from systematic malnutrition. At the same time, enormous amounts of money, unprecedented in history, are being wasted on war preparations. And, what is more, military appropriations continue to swell.
120.	The Soviet Union has for a long time been proposing that military budgets, primarily those of the States which are permanent members of the Security Council, be reduced by a certain percentage, and that part of the funds thus saved be used to provide assistance to developing countries. This would be a major step of tremendous importance. Yet, what are we told in reply is that before cutting down military budgets they should be made the subject of study. But such a study could last for decades, and go on and on. To reduce means to reduce military budgets without any red tape-even under a pseudo- scientific cover. This calls for a political decision.
121.	In order to overcome the stalemate, we propose that an agreement be reached on the reduction by States having 
a large economic and military potential of their military budgets, not in terms of percentage points but in absolute figures of analogous magnitude. Such reduction could begin as early as in the coming fiscal year and cover a period of three years, with 10 per cent of the funds released as a result of reductions being channelled towards increasing aid to developing countries.
122.	It must be emphatically stressed that the reduction of military budgets is being given priority not only as an urgent task but also as one which can fairly easily lend itself to solution—provided, of course, there is a desire to solve it.
123.	The peoples of the whole world would heave a sigh of relief if the burden of taxation were reduced. Today, many are reflecting upon the causes for which some States - and not least the economically developed ones-are experiencing economic upheavals. Our answer is as follows: instead of throwing away immense material values on the conveyers which are continuously producing missiles, tanks, planes, guns and other means of killing people, these resources should be diverted to peaceful purposes. The resources thus released could be used to improve the living standards of the peoples of the world, to satisfy their primary needs such as housing, better medical care, education and science, and finally simply to combat famine.
124.	All this emphasizes the great responsibility for solving the problems that face mankind in the field of disarmament, a responsibility which rests primarily with those who determine the policies of States and their line in international affairs.
125.	So, from whatever angle one views the problem of ending the arms race and of disarmament, the Soviet Union is ready to seek appropriate international arrangements. We have submitted concrete proposals to that effect. Naturally, we shall be willing to consider the proposals of other States, too, aimed at achieving this historic task.
126.	The Soviet Union appreciates the efforts by non- aligned States to help get the disarmament problem off the ground. The activity of the non-aligned countries in this direction, just as in other areas of the struggle for peace, is growing, and that is a positive phenomenon in international life.
127.	The General Assembly can do a good service to peace if it facilitates the convening of a world disarmament conference. It is at such a forum that decisions binding on States could be adopted.
128.	It is all to the good that the United Nations is now more actively involved with questions of disarmament. This helps to put the relevant talks more in the limelight of public opinion. Let those who are spurring on the arms race, contrary to the will of the peoples, feel ill at ease. Everywhere in the world a moral atmosphere should be created which would make the opponents of disarmament feel pilloried.
129.	There is no people that does not crave peace. As to the Soviet people, we can say with full responsibility that it does not seek war, nor will it start one. This applies fully to our friends and allies as well. But outside the socialist community, too, there is no people that does not want peace. We are convinced of that. In States that pursue a militarist course the watershed lies not between the peoples themselves, but when the peoples, on the one hand, and the leaders at the helm of policy-making in these States, who have sold their heart and soul to the interests of small groups which are deriving profits from military production.
130.	States are faced with a great many international problems, whose number and complexity are unlikely to diminish with time.. But what are the conditions and what is the atmosphere in which it is easier to solve those problems'? Clearly, it is easier in the atmosphere of detente in the world, not in conditions of an aggravated situation, in a heated atmosphere. This is proved by the experience of many years.
131.	The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, no matter what contrived pretext is used to violate it, has been and remains a corner-stone of international life, of the further progress of detente. Every people that respects itself and every State with self-esteem has given and will always give decisive rebuffs to such attempts. The Soviet Union has not tolerated and never will tolerate interference in its internal affairs.
132.	The course of Soviet foreign policy for peace, detente and disarmament is a firm course. It stems from the fundamental requirements of the social system of our State, expresses the will of the entire Soviet people, and translates into reality the directives and principles adopted by congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
133.	Despite the complexity of the international situation, the Soviet people are looking to the future with optimism. Our confidence rests on the fact that the will of the peoples for peace is indomitable, that the forces favouring the maintenance and consolidation of peace prevail over those who would like to turn the course of world events in the opposite direction.
134.	Assessing world developments in this manner, we ourselves are ready to work without respite, and we call upon all other States to be ready to do the same, notably within the walls of the United Nations, to bring all peoples closer to a reliable peace and to make impregnable and invincible the buttress built against war.















﻿103.	Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to this important office.
104.	We all learned this morning with shock and sadness of the sudden death of Pope John Paul I. His passing deprives the world of a wise and compassionate leader whose brief ministry had already given promise of greatness.
106.	A generation ago the United Nations was created by men and women who shared a vision. They saw the need in the wake of war to create stronger international institutions that could dampen the flames of conflict and life nations and people to a new level of material well-being; they saw the need to afford self-determination to millions; and they saw the need for the world community to take a compelling stand against repression, discrimination and the denial of the rights of man.
107. The men and women who gathered in San Francisco in 1945 raised their sights above the differences and divisions of the moment. They dared to see the world as it could be—a world where- those who are hungry are fed; where those who are poor have escaped the degradation of poverty; where diplomacy among nations is a pervasive substitute for violence among nations; and where the resources of the world are used effectively and shared equitably.
108.	In the years since, the record of the United Nations in working towards that vision has been one of accomplishment. It has played an indispensable part in the process of peaceful decolonization, in defusing tensions among nations through its peace-keeping missions, and in promoting , genuine economic and social progress.
109.	Today the Members of this body still share that common vision. And we understand far better than ever before our common destiny: that no nation acting alone can assure for its people peace and economic security; that the future of each of our nations depends upon the future of all of our nations.
110.	Our challenge today is to summon the political, will to act in concert towards the goals we share, to go beyond the rhetoric of interdependence and to begin to recognize its inescapable implications for the national interests of each of us.
111.	We must build a new consensus on this proposition: that in this new era each nation must weigh more carefully than ever before its long-term interest in a healthy global community when making decisions about its immediate concerns. For only through co-operation and compromise in the short run can we assure our longer-term future.
112.	On crucial issues, the coming months will present turning-points of incalculable importance. In negotiations on the Middle East, on southern Africa, on trade, on arms control and on many other pressing problems, genuine progress has been made. Without continued progress, the gains we have already made can be lost.
113.	This point applies not to any single nation nor any group of nations but to every nation, including my own.
114.	The resolution of dangerous regional disputes and progress in limiting weaponry must always be at the top of the immediate international agenda. I shall return to these issues later. But we cannot so concentrate our energies on the political diplomacy of international peace, essential as it is, that we discover too late that international inequities and poverty and injustice within nations make peace among nations impossible.
115.	So let me concentrate my comments today on those issues that so centrally touch people's lives around the globe-economic security, the equitable development of the earth's resources and individual freedom.
116.	Shared economic progress requires a global consensus on the benefits of co-operation among nations. Cooperation and compromise are often difficult. The economic problems we share require long-term efforts, but we are all constrained by domestic concerns which call for immediate attention; the problems we share are so widespread in their impact that solutions cannot be found by a single nation or group of nations; and these problems require more than general agreements. The application of substantial technical and financial resources is necessary. Debate over sterile texts will neither feed the hungry nor create new jobs for the unemployed. Only common action can be effective. And each must contribute if all are to benefit.
117.	Only three or four years ago there was extraordinary tension between North and South. Each side was deeply suspicious of the other's motives. Each held sharply different perceptions of global needs and priorities. But these differences have been narrowed. From the seventh special session of the General Assembly through the fourth session of UNCTAD, the Conference on International Economic Co-operation and the meetings of this Assembly, and through other serious efforts in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development and the economic summits, agreement has been achieved on several basic issues relating to a new international economic order.
118.	We are agreed on the need to work towards the elimination of poverty in all countries. Concessional aid flows have been increased. More attention is being devoted to food production. Satisfying basic economic needs is becoming a greater priority of the international community.
119.	We are agreed on the urgent need to accelerate equitable non-inflationary growth. The round of multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of GATT now proceeding at Geneva are in their final stages. We are discussing guidelines for international investment. Private capital flows are increasing. The facilities of IMF have been expanded, and discussions are under way to expand the facilities of the multilateral development banks.
120.	We are agreed on the need to reduce economic instability and uncertainty. The IMF is playing a major role in providing balance-of-payments financing to those most severely affected by recent disruptions in the world economy. We are engaged in serious discussions on a variety of commodity arrangements, including a system of internationally co-ordinated national grain reserves.
121.	And we are agreed on the need to facilitate smooth adjustment for workers and businesses that have borne the brunt of changing economic circumstances. The Bonn Economic Summit Conference this year made clear that we must intensify our efforts in this area.
122.	Because we have come far, the road ahead will be even more challenging, for the most difficult issues remain. To maintain our progress, we should be guided by three fundamental principles in the North-South discussions over the coming months. First, every nation must resist the temptation to solve its own economic problems at the expense of others. We must fashion our domestic policies on the basis of global as well as national needs. Secondly, all nations which bear their fair share of responsibility should benefit from a healthy world economy. And, thirdly, all nations must enter international economic negotiations in a spirit of accommodation.
123.	These principles will not by themselves solve the problems we face. But without their general acceptance, there can be no genuine progress. Adherence to them will prevent critical negotiations from turning into polarizing and self-defeating tests of will.
124.	Let me discuss several major issues where the application of these principles can make the difference between success and failure.
125.	First I shall speak of the "Committee of the Whole" that is, the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174. One of our most recent collective efforts to address the economic challenges we share was the establishment of that Committee. The Committee has the potential to look at economic issues comprehensively and to identify longer-term priorities. The United States strongly supports that forum. At its meeting in May it made progress in identifying some important areas of agreement between the industrial and the developing countries. Substantive discussions in the Committee had an important impact on the Ministerial Meeting of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, held on 14 and 15 June, and on the Bonn Economic Summit Conference. We of course shared the disappointment of other representatives that a procedural impasse earlier this month interrupted the Committee's work.
126.	Since the September meeting, we have carefully examined the statements made by others on this issue. We have noted in particular statements made by the Chairman to the Committee on 8 September and to the press on 11 September, and have taken into account subsequent consultations. It is now generally agreed that the Committee would not seek to provide specific solutions to problems outstanding in other bodies. Rather, it would achieve agreed conclusions on fundamental or crucial underlying issues, and only to the extent that all members agreed to decide on them.
127.	We are satisfied that on the basis of these statements sufficient procedural agreement now exists to resume substantive work in the manner suggested by the Chairman at the end of the informal consultations on 6 September [see A[33/34, part two, annex A].
128.	I turn now to the question of trade. The spirit which must guide our work in the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174 applies as well to our policies on trade. The developing world is no longer on the periphery of world trade. Increasingly, growth in the developing countries is important to the health of the industrial countries.
129.	Commitment to open trade, however, is extremely fragile. It is tempting for one nation to use trade restrictions to export its economic difficulties. It is often easy to avoid adjustments which are beneficial in the long run, but which in the short run present difficult problems for workers and for industry.
130.	We must be concerned about rising protectionist pressures, but we should also recognize that world trade has expanded remarkably well in recent; years. Despite a deep recession in the early 1970s, we not only avoided the trading wars of the 1930s, but we continued negotiations to liberalize and to improve the world trading system. Our ability to conclude these trade negotiations successfully this year is a critical test of our commitment to an open trading system. An agreement will stimulate production, it will provide jobs, and it will help reduce inflation.
131.	Beyond our efforts to expand trade, the United States will fulfil our commitment to assist developing nations through differential measures, including, where appropriate, special and more favourable treatment. We, in turn, expect those developing countries which can do so to contribute to trade liberalization by improving access to their markets. Improved access will not only benefit the industrial countries; it will be even more important to many developing countries.
132.	Finally, we believe that in trade, as elsewhere, the developing countries should have a voice in determining the policies which affect them. We have encouraged their full involvement in the Geneva multilateral trade negotiations. We urge developing countries, especially those which play a large role in international trade, to participate actively in
GATT and in the agreements that result from the Geneva negotiations so that their interests are fully represented.
133.	I turn now to the question of commodities. An essential element of trade for most developing nations is their export of basic commodities. At the fourth session of UNCTAD we agreed to intensify our collective effort to address commodity problems. Progress has not always been as fast as we all would like, but this has generally reflected the technical complexity of commodity issues rather than the lack of political will or good faith. We will continue to work for stabilization agreements and other measures that strengthen commodity markets.
134.	Let me affirm that we believe a soundly designed common fund could play a useful role in alleviating commodity problems. A well-structured fund will provide economic benefits to participating countries. We also recognize that the establishment of a fund is of major political importance to the general North-South dialogue.
135.	We will co-operate with others to bring the common fund negotiations to a successful conclusion. Recent consultations have identified a convergence of views on some issues. All agree that a fund could play a useful role in reducing the over-all financial costs of supporting buffer stocks, which effectively stabilize prices.
136.	In addition, there is a growing recognition of the importance of encouraging improved productivity and more effective marketing of many commodities. A separate "second window" of the common fund, based on voluntary contributions and operating under agreed guidelines, might be an appropriate mechanism. We are-prepared to negotiate flexibly on this issue, as on others, if there is a similar approach on all sides.
137.	While progress has been made on some issues, important differences still remain. Movement on all sides of the conference table will be necessary. But we are convinced that with mutual accommodation a workable agreement can be achieved.
138.	As with trade, increased resource flows to the developing world must be part of an international system of shared responsibility.
139.	We ought not to think of resource transfers as a sacrifice for donors or a unilateral benefit for recipients They are an economic investment in the future of all countries. They will contribute to global economic growth, greater trade and enhanced prosperity for us all.
140.	My country is committed to increasing our contributions to both multilateral and bilateral development efforts. We have" done so in the past year: our multilateral commitments increased by 31 per cent and our bilateral programme expanded by 20 per cent. And, because we are determined that United States aid funds will be used effectively, we will concentrate our efforts in countries where programmes are aimed most directly at meeting the essential needs of their people.
141.	The United States believes strongly that a key objective of foreign assistance should be to help meet basic human needs. We recognize that nations will have different development priorities in approaching this goal. Whether emphasis is on enhancing the productivity of the poor, increasing food production, improving health or expanding industry which creates jobs, the critical ingredient in every nation is to have all its citizens—men and women—as active participants in and beneficiaries of their nation's growth.
142.	Finally, we recognize the debt problems that many of the least developed countries face. We will soon have authority from our Congress for retroactive adjustment of certain aid terms which would permit us to help those most in need.
143.	As we work together to promote economic development, we must also ensure an equitable sharing of the world's resources. Four issues demand our immediate attention. Our first urgent priority is ensuring adequate food and stable agricultural prices for all people. Four years have now passed since the World Food Conference, where we agreed on measures we must take for the future.5 But despite our efforts the fundamental problems remain: food production is hardly keeping pace with the growth in population; food deficits in many countries are increasing; and negotiations on grain reserves have dragged on without success. We believe progress must be made.
144.	The United States has created a 9-million-ton farmer-held grain reserve. We have proposed to our Congress the establishment of an international emergency wheat reserve of 6 million tons to provide food for emergency needs in developing countries. We intend to maintain our food aid level at a fair share of the target set at the World Food Conference.
145.	We will continue to support the activities of international organizations devoted to food production such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development. And we intend to make food aid a more effective tool in support of development.
146.	I propose that this Assembly review the world food situation to identify the current obstacles to progress and to restore a sense of urgency in meeting mankind's most basic need. We must not be lulled by good weather and plentiful harvests. Another tragedy is inevitable unless we act now.
147.	Secondly, we must act now to develop new energy resources so that we may avoid a harsh transition to the time when fossil fuels will no longer be plentiful. This task has several dimensions.
148.	There must be an expansion of oil and gas production, and we need to improve our conservation of these energy resources, especially in my country, the United States. The World Bank has expanded its lending to help developing countries increase their fossil fuel supplies. We welcome this, and we also encourage the regional development banks to assist.

149.	The development of nuclear energy will also be central to the future of many countries. We hope the' International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation will provide a consensus on nuclear technologies free from the serious risk of nuclear-weapon proliferation. My Government supports the development of safeguardable nuclear power, including assured nuclear fuel supplies. The developing nations should, of course, participate in the design and management of the institutions which form the basis of an international nuclear energy regime.
150.	Priority attention must be given to the development of renewable energy resources. Many technologies already exist for harnessing solar, wind and geothermal power. All of us can benefit from these technologies, but a special effort should be made to meet the needs of the poorer countries.
151.	Two opportunities now exist for the United Nations to continue to play an important role. The United States supports the proposed United Nations conference on new and renewable sources of energy.  Such a conference could result in a more co-ordinated United Nations energy effort and clearer priorities. It could also provide up-to-date information on renewable energy technology, and examine the role of the private sector in energy development. UNDP might also expand its efforts to help nations assess their own renewable energy possibilities, finance the testing of new technologies and provide training and technical assistance for effective energy management.
152.	The United States is willing to contribute to a major global effort to develop new energy resources. We will intensify our assistance programmes in this area. We will increase domestic research, which can benefit all nations. And we will expand co-operative energy programmes from which we, too, stand to benefit.
153.	Thirdly, we must strive to conclude successfully the negotiations on the law of the sea. At stake is whether that vast expanse of the globe will be an arena of conflict or of co-operation. Considerable progress has been made on a number of issues in these negotiations. These achievements have been obscured, however, by continued stalemate over sea-bed mining. The basis for an equitable solution already exists and is widely accepted. It permits all sides to benefit fully from sea-bed mining, with- private firms as well as an international enterprise being allowed to mine on a competitive basis. A mutually acceptable solution is imperative, and it is, we believe, possible. Time is running out for reaching an agreed solution. Without it, sea-bed mining will inevitably take place, but in the absence of an international agreed framework. That would be less satisfactory than a widely supported international regime.
154.	Fourthly, and finally, there is the critical question of how best to harness technology and science for the benefit of mankind. We hope that the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, to be held next year in Vienna, will focus attention on how all countries can contribute their knowledge to global development. It will be particularly important to find ways for developing nations to enhance their capacity to generate, select and apply technology for their own development priorities. We will contribute to the work of the Conference, and we hope to benefit from it.
155.	Furthermore, to help mobilize the technical talents and knowledge of our nation on behalf of the development of others, we intend to establish during the coming year a new foundation for international technical co-operation.
156.	The ultimate purpose of all our policies is the enhancement of human dignity. The rights to food, to shelter, to a decent education, to adequate health—the' rights which lie at the heart of our approach to economic issues—are hollow without political and civil freedoms: freedom from torture and government mistreatment, freedom to worship, to travel and to speak without fear, freedom to participate in the affairs of one's Government. There is no incompatibility among economic, political and civil rights; no choice that must be made among them. They reinforce one another.
157.	We commemorate in this Assembly the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Dag Hammarskjold described the Declaration as a living document. We have a continuing obligation to keep that document alive in our own nations. And as Members of the United Nations we must strengthen the international machinery that serves to promote the full range of human rights, including political and economic rights.
158.	We have made significant progress in the past year. Concern for human rights is more central to international discourse today than ever before. But more needs to be done. This Assembly should review the activities of the various United Nations human rights institutions. We must resolve in this Assembly to make torture alien to the experience of every nation and to conclude an international agreement to outlaw it. We need to ensure that we are doing all we can to end conditions which are tantamount to genocide. And we must ask what more each of us can do to ensure the vitality of the Universal Declaration, to provide amnesty to prisoners of conscience, to ensure due process for all and to advance social justice and equity for our people.
159.	In addition, the plight of one group of individuals, refugees, demands our special compassion. We urge all nations to increase their support for the vital humanitarian work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
160.	The refugee problem is not confined to any single region. In Africa alone, some 2 million individuals are now outside their native lands. We must do more to offer them sustenance, security and a realistic hope of resettlement or return to their homelands.
161.	In South-East Asia hundreds of new refugees from Indo-China appear daily, some risking their lives to cross borders, others challenging the sea in every form of vessel. We urgently need greater efforts to provide them with sanctuary. We hope that the High Commissioner will consider convening an international conference in the very near future to seek humane solutions to the desperate plight of these refugees.
162.	We propose that consideration also be given at a later date to a general conference on the world-wide refugee problem.
163.	Let me now turn to international peace-keeping. Too often the anguish of the uprooted is grim testimony to our collective failure to achieve international peace. War and strife are the enemies of the fundamental rights I have discussed. Today my Government and many of those assembled here are actively pursuing the path of peace in troubled areas of the world.
164.	The accords achieved at Camp David  offer hope that at long last a turning-point has been reached in the Middle East. The agreements achieved between Egypt and Israel, with active American participation, constitute a framework for a comprehensive peace settlement. Much remains to be done in the ensuing stages of negotiations, but a major step has been taken in resolving the difficult issues that lie at the heart of 30 years of Arab-Israel hostility. As negotiations are pursued on the basis of the Camp David framework a dynamic process will be set in motion that can profoundly change attitudes on the issues that remain to be resolved. That process will significantly advance legitimate Arab objectives while protecting Israel's security. It is our hope that the Members of this body will lend their full support to the task of building a just and lasting peace upon this framework.
165.	In his address before Congress on 18 September  President Carter reviewed the main elements of the Camp David agreements. As the President said, our historic position on settlements in occupied territory has remained constant. As he further said, no peace agreement will be either just or secure if it does not 'resolve the problem of the Palestinians in the broadest sense. We believe that the Palestinian people must be assured that they and their descendants can live with dignity and freedom and have the opportunity for economic fulfilment and political expression. The Camp David accords state that the negotiated solution must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
166.	The Camp David accords make a solid start towards achieving these goals for the Palestinians in real terms. In the West Bank and Gaza, the framework provides that Israeli occupation shall end and a self-governing authority shall be instituted. This can be achieved within a few months. Thus, for the first time the Palestinians have the prospect of governing themselves within the framework that has been agreed.
167.	The Camp David framework also gives the Palestinians a vital role in shaping their destiny by recognizing them as participants in all aspects of the negotiations that determine their future. The Palestinians will participate in the negotiations to set up their self-governing authority, in those to determine the final status of the West Bank and " Gaza, and in those leading to a Jordan-Israel peace treaty. Finally, the agreement on the final status of the West Bank
and Gaza will be submitted to a vote of representatives of the inhabitants for either ratification or rejection. These steps set in motion a political process of the utmost importance to all Palestinians.
168.	The Camp David accords concentrate on the means by which self-government can be established for the Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza, but there was also clear recognition by all three leaders at Camp David that the problem of the Palestinians living outside these areas must also be addressed. We recognize that this problem has political as well as humanitarian dimensions which must be resolved as an integral part of a durable peace settlement. When the Camp David accords call for the resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects, they acknowledge and embrace that central fact. As the political institutions of self-government take shape, West Bank and Gaza through negotiations among parties, the relationship between those institutions and the Palestinians living outside the area should be defined, including the question of admission of Palestinian refugees to the West Bank and Gaza.
169.	The framework provides for the establishment of a committee to decide on the modalities of admission to the West Bank and Gaza of persons displaced in the 1967 war. For the first time the parties to the conflict, Egypt and Israel, have agreed to work with each other and with other interested parties to establish agreed procedures for a prompt, just and permanent resolution of the refugee problem.
170.	As President Carter stated in his address to Congress, the United States is irrevocably committed to bringing about a satisfactory solution to the problem of the Palestinian refugees. We will play an active role in the resolution of this problem. A solution must reflect the relevant United Nations resolutions relating to the refugees. We urge the international community to support Egypt and Israel in establishing procedures urgently to address this issue in all its aspects. And the international community should contribute to a programme to promote economic development in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as to assist those refugees residing elsewhere.
171. We are determined to achieve a fair and just
settlement of the Middle East question in all its parts, and
we hope the Palestinian people will seize this historic
opportunity. It is our hope that the people of the Middle
East will agree that it is imperative to begin the negotiating
process now and not to stand still until every last issue is
resolved. We urge the other interested parties to join the
negotiations without delay.
172. As the Middle East peace process moves forward, it is
vital to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations
peace-keeping role there. It is critical that the mandates of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Forces in the Golan
Heights [UNDOF] and Sinai [UNEF] be renewed this fall.
Those Forces have thus far helped all sides avoid renewed
hostilities; they must now remain to help achieve a stable
peace.
173. Let me briefly review several other regional disputes
of major importance. 
174. In Lebanon, the fighting and tragic loss of life
continue. UNIFIL in southern Lebanon has done much to
stabilize the situation in that part of the country, and we
call on all to support this effort to help reassert Lebanese
authority. Elsewhere in Lebanon confrontation and tensions
continue at a high pitch. President Carter made clear
in his address to the joint session of Congress following the
Camp David summit meetings, and again yesterday, his
determination to spare no effort to assist in finding a
solution to the Lebanese tragedy. As the President said
yesterday, it is time for us to take joint action to call a
conference of those who are involved and to try to reach
some solution. It may involve a new charter for Lebanon.
175. In Namibia the world community faces a fundamental
challenge. I will be commenting on this more
fully this afternoon in the Security Council. Let me
simply say now that "the United States is determined to see
Namibia achieve independence in accordance with the
contact group proposal and Security Council resolution
431 (1978). We call upon South Africa to co-operate fully
with the United Nations so that this critical opportunity for
a peaceful settlement will not be lost.
176. In Rhodesia, time may be running out for the
possibilities of diplomacy. But we will continue to work
with the United Kingdom Government, the Governments in
the region and the parties to seek a negotiated solution, We
condemn the murder of innocent civilians as a matter of
both conscience and reason. The prospects for peace in
Rhodesia will diminish if violence increases.
177. On Cyprus, an opportunity now exists to help the
two communities narrow their differences and achieve a
just and lasting solution to this long-standing problem. The
United Nations has done a commendable job of nurturing
an atmosphere which should now make possible productive
intercommunal negotiations. To grasp this opportunity, we
would welcome and. actively support a renewed effort by
Secretary-General Waldheim to help the parties reach
agreement on a sovereign, bicommunal, non-aligned federal
Republic of Cyprus which would meet the concerns of the
people of Cyprus.
178. In this Hemisphere, we must respond to the agony of
those caught up in the violence and bloodshed of
Nicaragua. We and several countries in Latin America have
offered to assist in the mediation of Nicaragua's internal
crisis. It is our hope and expectation that all parties
concerned will accept these offers and 'agree to a fair
mediation process in which all can have confidence. Only a
democratic solution in Nicaragua-not repression or
.violence-can lead to an enduring stability and to true
peace.
179. As we work together to find peaceful resolutions to
the most dangerous regional disputes, we must also seek in
this Assembly to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping
capability.

180. And while this Organization works to limit violence
among nations, we must not lose sight of the havoc
wreaked by those who perpetrate terrorist acts on innocent
persons. No sin(;k' nation, acting alone, can deal adequately
with this serious problem. Collective action is essential.



181.	We are beginning to make some progress. Last year the General Assembly adopted a significant resolution on aircraft hijacking resolution 32/8. The Joint Statement on International Terrorism adopted on 17 July 1978 at the Bonn Economic Summit Conference  produced a much needed agreement on the harbouring of hijackers. We strongly urge all nations to subscribe to this Statement.
182.	The pursuit of peace and security must go beyond resolving conflicts and preventing violence. The security of all is enhanced if nations limit the weapons of war through mutually negotiated arms control agreements.
183.	We are engaged with the Soviet Union and other nations in a broad range of arms control negotiations.
184.	The conclusion of a strategic arms limitation agreement with the Soviet Union is a fundamental goal of the United States. We hope that we may conclude an agreement as a result of the second series of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks before the end of this year.
185.	The United States hopes that early progress can be made in concluding a comprehensive agreement to end the testing of nuclear weapons.
186.	Increased efforts are critically needed to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It is important to prepare fully for the 1980 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; to continue to make progress in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation; and to recognize one of the important achievements of the tenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament: the decision by several nuclear Powers to pledge, under specific circumstances, to refrain from use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States. We suggest that the Security Council take note of these pledges.
187.	The United States will also work to ensure compliance with the call in the Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action of the special session on disarmament [see resolution S-10/2] for restraint in the transfer of conventional arms. We are actively discussing with the Soviet Union how our two nations might encourage restraint in consistency with the legitimate right to self-defence and international obligations. We are encouraged by the new initiatives already being taken to promote restraint on a regional basis in Latin America and we stand ready to support similar efforts by countries in other regions.
188.	In conclusion, let me emphasize that on all the issues I have addressed today what we share is greater than how we differ. We share the same small planet. We share human aspirations—for better lives, for greater opportunity, for freedom and security. And because we share a common destiny, we are compelled to resolve our differences.
189.	If we focus on these common interests, we can begin to find the common ground for global progress. We can, as Jean Monnet said, "put our problems on one side of the table and all of us on the other".
190.	The measure of our progress will not be whether we achieve all our goals in this generation, for that will surely not be possible. It is whether we can now summon the will to move forward together so that our children may benefit from our efforts and our vision.











﻿223.	I would like to begin my speech by congratulating Mr Indalecio Lievano on his election as President of the current session of the General Assembly. I would also like to take this opportunity to extend warm congratulations to Solomon Islands on its admission to membership in the United Nations and sincerely to wish it new successes in advancing independently along the road to progress.
224.	Since the thirty-second session of the General Assembly last year, there have been new developments and changes in the international situation. The struggle of the people of all countries to win and defend national independence, safeguard international peace and security and oppose imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism has developed vigorously and scored new victories. In this struggle the countries and people of the third world have played the major role. Some Asian and African countries
and peoples have succeeded in defending their national independence and territorial integrity by repulsing military intrusions engineered by a super-Power and frustrating its schemes of subversion and sabotage. The African countries have voiced strong opposition to foreign interference in African affairs. The struggles of the people in southern Africa against racism and for national liberation have developed in depth. The people of the Arab countries and Palestine have fought persistently and resolutely against Israeli Zionism and the rivalry between the super-Powers in the Middle East. The people of the Latin American countries have achieved important successes in safeguarding their independence and sovereignty, developing their national economy and strengthening regional co-operation. The non-aligned movement, withstanding super-Power pressure, has maintained its basic orientation and become an important force in the present struggle of the people of the whole world against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism. There is a clear trend growing among the Western European and other second-world countries towards strengthening their unity, expanding their cooperation and opposing super-Power interference and domination. All these are signs that the international situation has continued to develop in a direction favourable to the people of the world.
225. However, we must not fail to notice that over the past year there has been great turbulence in the international situation, and world peace and international security have been seriously threatened. The two superpowers have intensified their struggle for world hegemony, with one striving to preserve its vested interests and the other trying hard to extend its spheres of influence. Strategically the, focus of their rivalry is in Europe, where the two sides are locked in sharp confrontation as before. To outflank and encircle Europe, social-imperialism has stepped up its aggression and expansion in Africa, the Middle East and the Gulf region, seizing positions and resources of strategic importance and trying to control transportation routes, and this constitutes an important component of its strategy for world domination. Meanwhile, in an effort to strengthen its position in seeking domination in the Asia-Pacific region, it has stepped up its expansion and infiltration, created frictions and conflicts, and thus posed a direct threat to the security of the countries involved. In this period, the salient features of the tactics used by this super-Power in its offensive were as follows: in an increasingly flagrant way it has employed agents, has organized mercenaries and has incited Africans against Africans and Asians against Asians so as to make them pull its chestnuts out of the fire for it. It even has no scruples about using terrorist means of assassination and creating shocking incidents of subversion and disturbance. The social-imperialists' unbridled acts of aggression and expansion constitute a new trend in the international arena which calls for attention. They prove once again that social-imperialism is the more aggressive cid adventurous of the two super-Powers and is the major threat to world peace and security.
226. As a result of the intensified rivalry between the two hegemonist Powers and the accelerated global strategic deployment of social-imperialism, there have been more local wars and the danger of a world war has increased. Therefore, putting off a world war and maintaining world
peace has now become an important task for the people of all countries.
227.	Over the past year, the people of the world, in the face of the threat of a new war, have been increasingly awakened and have waged struggles in many fields. In order to safeguard their independence and security, many countries have been striving to strengthen their defence capabilities. People all over the world have condemned the super-Powers for their arms expansion and war preparations and have voiced a loud demand for a halt to the arms race. A growing number of discerning persons have urged a sharper vigilance against war. All this is no doubt of positive significance for preserving peace and delaying war.
228.	The super-Powers are busy spreading illusions of peace to lull the people of the world in an effort to cover up their plans for war. The social-imperialists babble that "detente has been a dominant feature" in the international political climate. If this were so, why should they spend colossal sums of money every year hectically expanding their arms? Why should they desperately seek an edge in nuclear weapons after establishing a superiority in conventional armaments? Clearly, the social-imperialists have ulterior motives when they foster a false sense of detente.
229.	A correct path must be followed in order to win and maintain world peace and put off the outbreak of war. The approach we stand for is that, first, it is necessary to tell truthfully the people of all countries about the growing danger of war, so that they may heighten their vigilance and make all preparations to comb t the aggressor. Secondly, efforts should be made to reinforce the struggle against the warmongers, frustrate every act of aggression and expansion of theirs, and upset in good time their deployment for war. Thirdly, there should be continued opposition to the policy of appeasement, which means compromises and concessions in dealing with the aggressor. Because, like rearing a tiger and suffering for it later on, such a policy is harmful and simply augments the danger of war. China has been acting on these three principles and will continue to do so in the future.
230.	The super-Powers are outwardly strong but inwardly weak. The more aggressive they are, the stronger the resistance they meet from the people of all countries. Over the past year, social-imperialism has stepped up its aggression and expansion only to teach the people of all countries by negative example and arouse them to a more resolute struggle against it and to bring about the further consolidation and broadening of the international anti-hegemonist united front. Such is the logic of history. The strength of the people is great. It is entirely possible to put off the outbreak of a world war so long as the people of the world get united, wage a tit-for-tat struggle against the superpowers' war plans and constantly thwart their schemes of war.
231.	The rivalry between the super-Powers endangers world peace and poses a direct threat to the independence and security of various countries. So it has become an urgent task for the people of all countries to defend national independence and State sovereignty.
232.	At present, the countries of the third world find themselves in a new and complex situation in their struggle to safeguard national independence. To further its aggression and expansion, social-imperialism is trying to fool people by flaunting a signboard saying "a natural ally of the developing countries" who "supports the national liberation movements". Besides, it is doing its utmost to sow discord among third-world countries. It confers on you the title "progressive" one day, but labels you "reactionary" the next. Now supporting one against another, now the other way round, it stops at nothing in creating dissension and undermining the unity of the third-world countries. The people of the third world have come to realize through their own experience that upholding unity and struggling jointly against the enemy are an important guarantee for victories in the fight to defend national independence. Over the past year, when confronted with the arch-enemy, they have attached importance to the general interest and have sought common ground on major issues while putting aside minor differences. They have upheld unity, opposed division and foreign interference, and have persevered in the struggle against hegemonism. At the fifteenth session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU in Khartoum in July and the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Belgrade also in July, satisfactory results were achieved in the teeth of super-Power interference and sabotage. The Khartoum summit meeting strongly condemned any foreign interference in the internal affairs of the African continent, decided to strengthen African-Arab co-operation and laid stress on the peaceful settlement of disputes between the member States of the OAU and on strengthening unity and economic co-operation. The Belgrade Conference maintained the unity of the non-aligned movement by frustrating super-Power designs to split it. The Conference once again affirmed and safeguarded the nature and principles of the movement, stressed the fight against "all forms of foreign domination and hegemony" [see A/33/206, annex I, para. 10] and kept to its anti-imperialist, anti-colonialist and anti-hegemonist orientation. The two Conferences fully demonstrated the great vitality of the non-aligned movement and the OAU as well as their significant roles in current international relations, and they were an important indication of the further development of the united struggle of the people of the world against hegemonism.
233.	The grave danger of social-imperialist aggression and annexation has also prompted the countries of the second world to pay ever greater attention to the defence of their national independence. Faced with this super-Power's military threat and divisive schemes, the Western European countries and some other second-world countries have further built up their national defences, harmonized their mutual relations and strengthened their economic, political and military alliance. This not only conforms to the interests of these countries in safeguarding their independence and security, but it is also in the interests of the people of -all countries.
234.	The situation in the Middle East merits serious attention. The Israeli Zionists now still adamantly refuse to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories or to recognize the national rights of the Palestinian people, and they are carrying out new threats of war against the Arab and Palestinian peoples. Such truculence on the part of the Israeli Zionists is closely related to the support and abetment given them by the two super-Powers. One super-Power has always been shielding Israel. The other
super-Power, while trying hard to maintain a state of "no war, no peace" in the Middle East, has been stirring up trouble and sowing dissension among the Arab countries in order to undermine their unity and sap their fighting strength so as to fish in troubled waters.
235. The Chinese Government and people have always held that the Arab and Palestinian peoples are the immediate victims of the fierce rivalry of the super-Powers and the aggression and expansion committed by Israel. The settlement of the Middle East question can be realized only when it truly leads to the recovery of the lost territories of the Arab people and the restoration of the national rights of the Palestinian people, and only thus can it bring peace to the Middle East. The struggle of the Arab countries and people against Israeli Zionism is perfectly just, and it is closely linked with the struggle against hegemonism. The Chinese Government and people consistently and resolutely support the Arab and Palestinian peoples in their struggle to recover their lost territories and to regain Palestinian national rights, and we are firmly opposed to the two super-Powers competing for hegemony in the Middle East and grossly trampling upon the interests of the Arab people. We strongly condemn the Israeli Zionist policies of aggression and expansion. We do not recognize Israel and will have nothing to do with it. It is our sincere hope that through patient consultations the Arab and Palestinian peoples will eliminate their differences, ceaselessly strengthen their unity, gradually overcome the difficulties on their road to progress and finally win great victories in their struggle against aggression.
236 Southern Africa remains the biggest colonial region in the world today. Abetted and backed by the imperialists, the reactionary regimes in South Africa and Rhodesia are still zealously pushing their colonialist and racist policies. This state of affairs must not continue but must be thoroughly changed. Under heavy blows from the Zimbabwean and Namibian peoples rising in armed struggle, the racist regimes are h ding for their doom, but they are still putting up a last-aitch fight by pressing ahead with such political tricks as the so-called "internal settlement and making incessant incursions into neighbouring African States in an effort to maintain their reactionary rule. Moreover, there is no slackening in the rivalry between the two super-Powers in this region. The late-coming superpower, in particular, is carrying out infiltration and expansion by every possible means. We have always held that all countries which uphold justice should strongly support the people of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azama in their struggle for liberation. Zimbabwe and Namibia should attain genuine national independence free from any outside interference and on the basis of territorial integrity and unification. South Africa's policy of apartheid must be abolished. The United Nations must follow the historical trend and perform its bounden duty of putting an end to the colonialist and racist rule in southern Africa in accordance with the eager desire and just demands of the African people. China firmly supports the just struggles of the Azanian, Zimbabwean and Namibian peoples. We are sure that the great African people will shatter the last stronghold of colonialism and racism and win .complete independence and liberation for the whole of Africa.
237. The Korean people's just struggle for the independent and peaceful reunification of their fatherland has won
the sympathy and support of the people of the world. At present, the key to a solution of the Korean question is that the United States must withdraw all its troops and armaments from South Korea and that the so-called "United Nations Command" must be disbanded. The United States and the Park Chung Hee clique of South Korea must stop all their scheming activities to create two Koreas". We firmly support the position and efforts of the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to achieve the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. The resolution for promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session resolution 3390 (XXX)] should be implemented in earnest and without delay. The Korean question should be settled by the Korean people themselves free from any foreign interference.
238. Disarmament is' one of the important items on the agenda of the current session. The tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly on disarmament, convened not long ago on the proposal of the non-aligned countries was the first of its kind in the history of the United Nations. At the session, many countries strongly condemned the imperialist and hegemonist policies of aggression and war. Rightly pointing out that the real cause of the intensifying arms race between the super-Powers was their increased rivalry for world hegemony, these countries demanded that the super-Powers carry out genuine disarmament. They also put forward a number of reasonable ideas and proposals. The special session on disarmament has a positive significance inasmuch as it exposed the superpowers' arms expansion and war preparations and demanded that they be the first to carry out disarmament. But the super-Powers were very obdurate. They rejected any genuine nuclear or conventional disarmament. The facts show that the struggle for genuine disarmament is most arduous.
239. Under the pressure of the people of the world for disarmament, the super-Powers have been playing the tricks of sham disarmament to deceive the public. Recently, the Soviet Union put before the current session a new proposal entitled "Conclusion of an international convention on the strengthening of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States". Under the signboard reading "guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States", this proposal is designed to bind hand and foot the numerous small and medium-sized countries and deprive them of their capabilities for self-defence. Not contented with the large amount of nuclear weapons in its possession, the Soviet Union is desperately expanding its nuclear armament. Instead of undertaking the obligation not to use nuclear weapons under whatever conditions against the large number of non-nuclear countries, the Soviet Union wants those countries to abandon their right of possessing nuclear strength for self-defence. This proposal of the Soviet Union is simply designed to allow itself alone to possess large numbers of nuclear weapons, while forcing the non-nuclear countries to act according to its dictates in all docility. Otherwise, those countries would be exposed to its nuclear attacks at any time. Is this not pure gangster's lope, undisguised nuclear blackmail and nuclear threat? We have consistently held that the most effective means of eliminating the danger of a nuclear war and of guaranteeing the
security of all countries is the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. Moreover, we have reaffirmed on many occasions that at no time and under no circumstances shall we use nuclear weapons against the non-nuclear countries. If the author of the proposed "international convention" had the slightest concern for the security of the non-nuclear countries and for international peace, it should at least undertake the obligation not to use nuclear weapons under whatever conditions against the non-nuclear countries, instead of playing tricks of one kind or another.
240.	During the current session, a further decision is to be taken on the machinery for disarmament. It is entirely legitimate for the numerous small and medium-sized countries to demand strongly a change in the super-Power manipulation of the disarmament negotiations and a reform in the disarmament machinery. The decision of the tenth special session to reform the disarmament machinery reflects to some extent the aspiration of these countries. However, the new negotiating body still falls far short of the demand of many countries, and it can hardly free itself entirely from super-Power control and ensure the realization of the reasonable propositions of various countries on disarmament. Of course, the progress of the struggle for disarmament does not depend entirely on the negotiating body; rather it depends essentially on whether the superpowers can be forced to change their intransigent stand. The struggle for disarmament must be closely linked with the struggle to safeguard national independence, defend state sovereignty and territorial integrity, and combat hegemonism. We are ready to continue to work together with the large number of small and medium-sized countries for genuine disarmament.
r
241.	In the past year, the third-world countries have continued their unremitting struggle for the establishment of a new international economic order. United as one, they have made great efforts for the realization of their just proposals in disregard of the threats and promises of the super-Powers. They have greatly expanded their economic and technical co-operation, and various organizations of raw-material-producing countries and regional co-operative bodies have been established and steadily consolidated. The third-world countries have also increased their economic and technical co-operation with many second-world countries. Some developed countries have taken measures to reduce or cancel some debts owed by developing countries. All this has a positive effect on the reform of the old international economic relations and the establishment of a new international economic order and on ,the development of the national economies of the third world.
242.	However, owing to super-Power obstruction and sabotage, no real progress has been made in destroying the old and establishing the new in the international economic field. One super-Power is playing with the words "new order" but is in fact still obstinately defending the old order. The other super-Power has put up the slogan of "democratic reform" but has tried to make international economic relations serve its interests in gaining world hegemony so as to extend and aggravate exploitation and control of developing countries: This is the main obstacle to the establishment of a new international economic order.
243.	The urgent desire of the developing countries for establishing a new international economic order has become a great historical trend. At the same time, it must be noticed that arduous and complex struggles have to be waged before this goal can be attained. We believe that, so long as the third-world countries keep to the correct principles and orientation of the sixth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, persist in solidarity and unite with all forces that can be united and wage a long and unremitting struggle, they will surmount all difficulties and win successive victories. The Chinese Government resolutely supports this just struggle as well as the reasonable proposals of the developing countries, such as an integrated programme for commodities and its common fund, the reduction or cancellation of debts, an increase in funds for development, and better conditions for the transfer of technology so as to promote production and scientific and technological progress in the developing countries. It is also our hope that the second-world countries will all adopt a correct attitude to strengthen their co-operation with developing countries on an equal footing and contribute to the establishment of a new international economic order.
244.	At present, China is in a new period of development. Following the behests of our great leader Chairman Mao Tsetung and beloved Premier Chou En-lai, the Chinese people have set off on a new Long March and are determined to turn China into a prosperous socialist country with modernized agriculture, industry, national defence and science and technology by the end of the century. In high spirits, the Chinese people are working hard to attain this magnificent goal.
245.	In international affairs, China will pursue, as always, Chairman Mao's revolutionary line in foreign affairs. Firmly adhering to Chairman Mao's theory of the three worlds, we will strengthen our unity with the oppressed peoples and nations of the world and with all third-world countries, and unite with all countries which are subjected to super-Power aggression, subversion, interference, control or bullying to form the broadest possible united front against super-Power hegemonism. We will establish or develop relations with other countries on the basis of the Five Principles: mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity; mutual non-aggression;  non-interference in each other's internal affairs; equality and mutual benefit; and peaceful coexistence. We support all the oppressed peoples and Nations in their revolutionary struggles and all countries struggling to safes their independence and sovereignty and to defend international peace and security, and we are opposed to all forms of foreign rule, domination and hegemony.
246.. The past year has witnessed great progress in our friendly relations with many countries. We have warmly entertained on-friendly visits many State leaders from , whom we have received much encouragement, sympathy and support. In the current new situation, our State leaders, -out of a sincere desire for friendship, peace, understanding and co-operation, have taken the initiative of visiting many countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe. Our friendship with many countries and our mutual understanding have been enhanced through sincere and candid talks based on mutual respect. With joint exploration and endeavour, our economic links, scientific and technological co-operation and Cultural exchanges with them have been
markedly strengthened. Our friendly contacts with other peoples have also become more frequent. The Chinese people, and people of other countries likewise, are happy to see mo growth of friendly relations between them. We will continue our efforts in this direction.
247.	This year, our supreme leader, Chairman Hua Kuo-feng, has visited Korea, Romania, Yugoslavia and Iran. These visits, which have had satisfactory results, constitute a major event in China's relations with foreign countries, have received wide attention and have been given a positive appraisal by international opinion. These historic visits have greatly deepened the sincere understanding between China and the countries concerned, have opened up broader vistas for bilateral friendly co-operation, and are conducive to world peace.
248.	Recently, China and Japan signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship after making prolonged efforts and overcoming various obstacles. This treaty records the desire of the Chinese and Japanese peoples to live in amity from generation to generation. It includes the explicit stipulation that "... neither of them should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region or in any other region and that each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony". This is the first time that such a stipulation is included in an international treaty. The treaty is of great importance both to the development of relations of peace and friendship between China and Japan and to the defence of peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region.
249.	The Chinese people ardently love peace and are opposed to a new world war. Moreover, we need an enduring, peaceful international environment in which to build up our country. Faithful to Chairman Mao's teachings, China will never seek hegemony or act like a super-Power, neither now nor in the future, when China becomes a powerful modernized socialist country. Confronted with the growing danger of war, we are determined, while engaging in peaceful construction at home, to do our part, together with the people of all other countries, to safeguard peace and put off war.
250.	Reviewing the international developments of the past year and looking ahead into the future, we see that countries want independence, nations want liberation and the people want revolution-this historical trend is irresistible though the road may be tortuous and the sky may be overcast from time to time. The world belongs to the people, and the future of the world is bright. Of this we are fully confident.




















﻿135.	The Federal Republic of Germany at present holds the presidency of the European Community and in the European Political Co-operation. Therefore, I should like to begin, Sir, by addressing you in my capacity as the spokesman of the nine member countries of the European Community. Let me first carry out a particularly pleasant duty by congratulating you on your assuming your high office. In you we greet the distinguished representative of a country with which the members of the Community maintain close and friendly relations. I am confident that you will give the thirty-third session of the General Assembly firm and effective leadership.
136.	We also congratulate the outgoing President, who was probably the first to preside over four General Assembly sessions-the thirty-second regular session and the eighth, ninth and tenth special sessions. During those sessions we were able to admire the skill with which he guided the proceedings and conducted negotiations.
137.	Our Community also thanks the Secretary-General, who has continuously and untiringly placed himself at the service of the United Nations. We appreciate his efforts to manage the many divergent trends and currents within our Organization for the benefit of us all.
138.	It gives me special pleasure to welcome a new Member in our midst—Solomon Islands. With the admission of every new Member we are moving ever closer to our common aim of the universality of the United Nations.
139.	The world today is in a state of transition, with two realities and philosophies in conflict with one another. The one reality is that of power politics. It finds expression in a gigantic arms build-up, which is constantly escalating and spreading to more and more regions, including regions of the third world. Behind this is the obsolete idea that a State can best safeguard its interests by force and by striving for predominance.
140.	The other, the new, reality is global interdependence. Today, all States need reliable access to the markets of others, to the technology of others, to the raw materials of others. They all need the growth of others to stimulate their own growth. They need co-operation in the fight against international terrorism. They need co-operation to protect the threatened ecological balance.
141.	In our complex world, however, this cannot be achieved by means of power politics. Force means chaos and destruction; force means bondage and loss of freedom for all. But co-operation for everyone's benefit can result only from an order that is accepted by all nations because all nations consider it to be just and because it is in their own interest to contribute to it.
142.	It is this perception that engenders a new international consciousness and awareness. It is nourished by respect for the independence and equality of States, by joint decisions and joint responsibilities of all, by the settlement of conflicts through negotiation and the reconciliation of interests.
143.	It is this consciousness that will determine the future. No one can turn back the wheel of history, however strong and powerful he may be. This world of ours, confronted as it is with huge common tasks, cannot but drift into self-destruction if countries still persist in trying to steer its fortunes by outmoded power politics.
144.	This new consciousness, this awareness of interdependence, gave birth to the Europe of the Community, which believes in a future of equality and partnership all over the world. The Europe we are building aims at realizing the great idea of the dignity and rights of man. It is by its very nature a democratic Europe. It is open to other European democracies, and we are looking forward to the accession of Greece, Portugal and Spain, making the Community of nine members soon a community of twelve. We feel ourselves linked with those European democracies which for reasons of historical tradition or other reasons have not, or have not yet, become members of the Community.
145.	However, the Europe of the nine is not an inward- looking community. Indeed, it endeavours in the wider world as well to promote peace and the welfare of all. It is the biggest trading partner in the world, especially for the third world, and it is the biggest donor of development assistance. It wants to be a centre of co-operation in the world, and it sees itself on the side of those who seek to create an order for that co-operation founded on equality and partnership.
146.	We want one world in which the nations will meet the challenge of global interdependence through global co-operation. But we by no means want a uniform world—quite the contrary; we want a world in which all nations can themselves determine their political, economic and cultural ways of life. Mankind needs diversity if its creative forces are not to fade away.
147.	The European Community is founded on respect for the equality of all its members and on the principle of joint decision-making. On the strength of these qualities and principles it can serve as an example for a global order giving all States, big and small, the same right and the same opportunity to play a part in the shaping of their common future. It can also serve as an example of the countries of a region forming an association and combining their efforts so as to accomplish the tasks at hand and to strengthen the independence, the political stability and the economic growth of that region.
148.	We are glad to see that the idea of regional association among States with equal rights is gaining ground in all parts of the world, and we support this trend.
149.	Under the Lome Convention we are co-operating with 53 African, Pacific and Caribbean States. Another expression of the new form of interregional co-operation is the Euro-Arab dialogue, with which both sides are pursuing the common goal of placing the interdependence of the two regions on a stable basis of comprehensive and long-term co-operation. In Asia, the Europe of the Community is establishing ever closer links with the Association of South-East Asian Nations.
150.	We follow with great interest also the work of other regional organizations, in particular, the Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American States.
151.	The Europe of the Community welcomes the fact that the People's Republic of China is becoming more outward-looking, as is in keeping with its size and its political weight. The trade agreement between the People's Republic of China and the Community expresses the desire of both sides constantly to expand their economic relations and exchanges.
152.	It is now my privilege to describe the role of the Europe of the Community in the world and thus our
position on the central issues up for discussion at this thirty-third session of the General Assembly.
153.	As in previous years the conflicts in Africa and the Middle East again figure prominently on the agenda. With both those regions the Europe of the Community is most closely connected. We have a vital interest in the peaceful settlement of those conflicts.
154.	In large parts of Africa peace has been seriously disrupted. Many African States are in the difficult process of nation-building. In southern African an end to racial discrimination and independence for Namibia are still to be achieved. Thus Africa is confronted with the difficult task of settling internal and external conflicts by peaceful means and at the same time promoting its economic development. The rest of the world must assist Africa in this task. But, instead, conflicts are being aggravated by outside Powers which use the opportunities provided by those conflicts to establish new spheres of influence in Africa. Africa needs peace and Africa needs economic development. It needs, as the Nigerian Head of State said at the Fifteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held at Khartoum from 18 to 22 July 1978: ".. . massive economic assistance ... and not military hardware for self-destruction and sterile ideological slogans",
155.	We, the members of the Community, support the countries of Africa in their quest for peaceful development. We do not seek to impose our political and social system on Africa. We want to see an independent and united Africa whose nations will find African solutions and answers to African questions and problems. And with that Africa we want to co-operate on a basis of partnership, that is, on a basis of equality.
156.	In Namibia—after a hopeful development had begun-we are now confronted with a serious situation. The nine members most deeply regret the decision taken by the South African Government to hold elections in Namibia without the United Nations being involved. We are disappointed at this unilateral step taken by the Government of South Africa. Its action brings forth great dangers for Namibia and, beyond that, for the whole of southern Africa. South Africa in this way is playing into the hands of those who advocate violent solutions in southern Africa.
157.	Over the last 18 months efforts have been made in dogged and persevering negotiations within the framework of the United Nations to pave the way for Namibia to gain independence by peaceful means. Thanks to the understanding and goodwill of all parties concerned it has proved possible time and again to overcome deadlock, crises and setbacks. The South African Government has now conjured up a new serious crisis which calls into question all the efforts undertaken so far. Where the negotiations had helped so far to develop an atmosphere of confidence, understanding and readiness for compromise, the old differences are now re-emerging. The results achieved in laborious and complex negotiations involving African States as responsible participants-in particular the front-line States-are in jeopardy.
158.	The Europe of the Community supports the appeal made by the Secretary-General to continue efforts to achieve a peaceful solution to the Namibia problem on the basis of Security Council resolution 431 (1978) and on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General.  We are convinced that the report by the Secretary-General is in line with the Western plan for Namibia.
159.	The Community urgently appeals to the South African Government to consider the far-reaching consequences of its action. The new South African Government to be formed in the next few days is faced with a historic responsibility. The five Western members of the Security Council-Canada, France, the United Kingdom, the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany-yesterday decided to ask for a meeting of the Security Council in the course of this week and they expect that at that meeting the Waldheim report will be accepted. Such a decision should give an opportunity to the new Government of South Africa to reconsider its position, as we have requested it to do. It will then have an opportunity to put developments back on the right track, on a positive track. Without the participation of all political forces in Namibia and without the involvement of the United Nations, a peaceful, internationally recognized settlement is not possible.
160.	The dangerous situation produced by South Africa constitutes a challenge to the people of Namibia, to the United Nations and to all those who struggle to achieve a peaceful and internationally recognized solution to the Namibia problem. Furthermore the opportunity—and nobody should overlook this-to set an example for the peaceful solution of other problems in southern Africa would be missed.
161.	With regard to Zimbabwe, the members of the Community hope that in spite of all difficulties it will still be possible even at this late hour to arrive at a peaceful settlement with the participation of all parties involved. We are convinced that the British-American plan for Rhodesia still offers the most realistic possibility for peaceful transition to independence. The European Community is ready to offer its aid for development to a Zimbabwe which will substitute for the present minority regime an internationally accepted democratic majority Government.
162.	The nine members of the Community are urgently pressing for peaceful and rapid change in the system of apartheid in South Africa itself. That system of racial discrimination is contrary to everything in which the Europe of the Community believes. South Africa is a multiracial society. That society can find a peaceful future only in a State that guarantees the enjoyment of human rights to all and ensures that all can live together as equal citizens.
163.	We appeal to the future Prime Minister who will be elected shortly to make a new beginning here, too. The nine members of the Community are using the influence they have to bring about a change in this direction. We are still waiting for others to follow the code of conduct for companies of the Community in South Africa'0 which is designed to ensure equal treatment for black and white employees. We have furthermore supported the Security Council decision to impose an arms embargo on South Africa.
164.	The eyes of the world are also on the Middle East.
165.	The events that have occurred since the last session of the General Assembly, especially the courageous initiative of President Fl Sadat and the Camp David meetings, have renewed hope for a settlement to the bitter Middle East conflict which has threatened the security of the world for the past 30 years.
166.	In view of the close ties between Europe and the Middle East, efforts to achieve a peace settlement in that region are of vital interest to us, too. This is reflected in our determination to support all efforts to bring about such a settlement.
167.	The nine member States of the European Community have therefore paid a tribute to the achievements of the participants in the Camp David meetings and its successful conclusion. They have expressed their hope that the results of those meetings will represent another important step on the path to a just, comprehensive and therefore lasting peace settlement.
168.	If such a peace settlement is to be achieved it is imperative that all parties concerned participate in its negotiation and completion. Meanwhile no obstacle should be placed in the way of this process, which should be kept open and should through further development and wider participation lead to a comprehensive settlement.
169.	Proceeding from Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338(1973), which would have to be applied in all their parts and on all fronts, the nine members of the Community continue to believe that the settlement should be founded on the principles which they last set out in their declaration of 29 June 1977 in London, namely: the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force; the need for Israel to end the territorial occupation which it has maintained since the conflict of 1967; respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of every State in the area and its right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries; and recognition that in the establishment of a just and lasting peace account must be taken of the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. It remains our firm view that all these aspects must be taken as a whole.
170.	We uphold the view that a peace settlement in the Middle East will be possible only if the legitimate right of the Palestinian people to give effective expression to its national identity is translated into fact. This would take into account the need for a homeland for the Palestinian people.

171.	In this context it is important that Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) have been accepted by both Israel and its neighbours. This must be the starting-point for any progress in the peace-making process.
172.	The situation in the Middle East is inseparably linked with the situation in Lebanon. After three years of crisis and conflict the restoration of peace and order and the rebuilding of that country still seem remote. The members of the Community are still deeply concerned about this situation, which threatens not only the existence of Lebanon but the stability of the entire region.
173.	Once more they appeal urgently to all who have an influence on developments in that country to be fully conscious of their responsibility for peace, and they hope that all parties concerned will support efforts to strengthen the authority of the Lebanese Government in the whole territory, as called for in the Security Council resolutions on Lebanon. The members of the Community welcome the fact that the Security Council has renewed the mandate of UNIFIL. They appeal to all parties to give that Force their full support in exercising its mandate.
174.	On the Cyprus question there has still been no breakthrough, A solution to the conflict must be based on the principles of the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Cyprus. It can be achieved only through direct negotiations between the two communities in Cyprus. The United Nations can facilitate such negotiations, but can be no substitute for them. The Republic of Cyprus is linked with the European Community by an association agreement. The Community will continue to give every support to the efforts of the Secretary-General to bring the parties together for constructive negotiations.
175.	The efforts to achieve a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Africa, the Middle East and Cyprus have demonstrated time and again how indispensable is the role of the United Nations peace-keeping forces.
176.	The members of the European Community as well as other responsible Members of the world Organization have consistently contributed to the peace-keeping operations of the United Nations by providing troops, logistic support and financial assistance. They regard it as an urgent task to appeal to the sense of responsibility of all Members of the United Nations and ask them to increase their readiness to support peace-keeping measures. They are for this reason preparing a proposal to that effect for submission to the General Assembly. 
177.	The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has provided us with a broad basis on which to shape relations between the Governments and peoples of Eastern and Western Europe. What is important now is to work for the implementation of the Helsinki Final Act in all its parts. The Belgrade follow-up session in 1977 has shown the shortcomings in its implementation, and the Community will call persistently for these to be made good.
178.	The Helsinki Final Act is not important for Europe alone, for detente in Europe and in East-West relations can and should release new political and economic energy to master the great challenge of our times, the elimination of hunger and want from the third world. The developing countries need the support of the Western and of the Eastern industrialized countries. There is nothing they need less than a transfer of the East-West confrontation to their regions.
179.	This year's tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, which was devoted to disarmament was an expression of the awareness that all nations of the world have a vital interest in the success of the efforts to achieve arms limitation and disarmament. The members of the Community participated in that session with joint statements and contributions and attach great importance to its results. That session has strengthened by means of institutional reforms world-wide co-operation in pursuit of disarmament, and the Declaration and Programme of Action included in the Final Document of the session [resolution S-10/2] have established a broad framework for that co-operation. The task now is to develop further what has been achieved so far and use it to establish concrete arrangements. The Community will be playing an active role in these efforts. I shall be setting out the position of my own country in detail later on.
180.	I should now like to turn to economic issues.
181.	In the world of today growth and development have come to be a joint objective and a joint responsibility of all States. We are confronted with the following challenge: to build up an order of co-operation for the purpose of joint management in global economic interdependence, an order towards the establishment of which all States and all groups of States will make a contribution of their own so as to be able to achieve the dual aim of sustained non-inflationary growth in the industrialized countries and an accelerated and proportionately higher rate of growth in the developing countries.
182.	The establishment of such an order specifically requires the reshaping of North-South relations. In line with the present division of labour, the developing countries are supplying mainly raw materials, and the industrialized countries, above all, finished products. But what we need is an order designed to replace this traditional pattern of exchange by increasingly balanced co-operation and a greater degree of equality in this co-operation, and to provide the countries of the third world with more favourable external conditions for their development.
183.	In concluding the Lome Convention the European Community and the States of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group have in a regionally oriented approach undertaken to remould their relations with these objectives in mind. The Convention has already proved its value in practice, and the contracting parties intend to carry it forward in a new, further improved agreement.
184.	Within the framework of the North-South dialogue the Community is, furthermore, willing to help on a global scale to accelerate development and to establish a balanced pattern of North-South co-operation. It reaffirmed its willingness to work towards the achievement of these goals at the meeting of the European Council held in Bremen from 6 to 7 July 1978.
185.	The European Community is committed to free world trade and is ready to accept the structural changes resulting from open markets and to master the problems they create. It will help to ensure that the negotiations within GATT are brought to a successful conclusion by the end of this year. The purpose of these negotiations is unmistakably to pave the way for further liberalization and once more to create a climate of long-term security for international trade. The negotiations are, furthermore, intended to create favourable conditions, in particular, for an expansion of trade between industrialized and developing countries. The Community intends to keep its markets open and to continue widening access within those markets to products, including finished products, from the developing countries.
186.	We are determined to fight protectionism, which is a manifestation of short-sighted self-interest and is particularly detrimental to the third world. The import planning of the Communist industrial countries is also a form of protectionism, which explains why these countries account for only 4 per cent of the third world's exports.
187.	Within the framework of UNCTAD the Community is helping to achieve constructive results as regards a common fund and individual commodity agreements.
188.	On the question of investment in the field of commodities, new forms of co-operation between industrialized and developing countries must be developed. We must prevent any further shift of the exploration and development of commodities to the industrial countries, something which is happening even though in many cases the developing countries have lower-cost deposits at their disposal.
189.	Within the framework of its comprehensive development strategy, the Community and its member countries will increase the volume of their assistance and improve its quality. The poorest developing countries especially must receive an increasing share of official aid. We also seek to meet the needs of middle-income developing countries. This is why we must soon arrive at satisfactory decisions on replenishing the resources of the World Bank, of IDA, and of the regional banks and funds.
190.	It is due largely to the efforts of the member countries of the Community that the ministerial meeting of UNCTAD  was in a position to take a decision on the question of indebtedness [see A/33/15, part two, annex I, resolution 165(S-IX)]. The Community is promoting the transfer of private capital, which is an indispensable means of maintaining an adequate supply of investment capital for the developing countries and is encouraging the developing countries' access to its own capital markets.
191.	In order to ensure that direct investments contribute fully to the development process, we must at long last evolve reliable guidelines for this field of activity. These guidelines must be designed to meet the host countries' requirement of full control over their economies and the investors' requirement of legal security.
192.	In the field of energy the international community is confronted with the challenge of smoothly leading the world out of the era of oil into an era of new and renewable energy sources. This challenge can only met on the basis of world-wide co-operation. Hence the community welcomes the resolution adopted at the sixty fifth session of the Economic and Social Council recommending that a conference on new and renewable energy sources be convened.
193.	Simultaneously with the objective of establishing a more equitable international economic order, nations should pursue the objective of translating an equitable order into reality at home is well. It must be the primary aim of every development policy to satisfy the basic needs of all human beings. The poorest, too. must he given the ability and the opportunity to do productive work
194.	The Community considers the acceleration of that development process and the continuous reduction in the gap between rich and poor countries to he the central task of international politics in the last quarter of this century. We will fully contribute to the solution of these problems and we hope that (lie Communist industrialized countries, too, will begin to provide assistance on a scale commensurate with their economic potential and will open their markets to the manufactures of the developing countries
195.	The Community offered constructive co-operation at the last session of the Committee established under General Assembly Resolution M?4. or the Committee of the Whole and regrets that the Committee was not vet able to fulfil satisfactorily the tasks assigned to it, but hopes that it will soon be able to continue its work in a constructive manner.
196.	In the view of the Community it is. furthermore. important that we take a decision at tins session of the General Assembly on how to prepare the development strategy for the 1980s. The nations of the third world cannot wait any longer
197.	In December the United Nations will be celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. We are conscious that we arc still far from translating that Declaration into reality all over the world. Millions of people are hungry in main parts of the world; millions arc oppressed on account of their race, sex or creed. Tens of thousands of political prisoners languish in camps and prisons. Others are deprived of their citizenship and exiled. And among those persecuted are main whose only "crime" was that they invoked their human rights. This is the reality in the year 1978.
198.	None the less, we must not lose sight of the long-term trend of fusion. Since the proclamation of human rights, people all over the world have increasingly come to demand the realization of their rights, and today human rights are enshrined in the constitutions of most States. But in many countries there is a sharp contrast between constitution and daily practice.
Through the United Nations Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenants cm Human Rights, and a number of other obligations, including the Final Act of Helsinki, the rights of man have also become an international concern. Today they are one of the major issues of world politics.
200.	Human rights comprise civil and political as well as economic, social and cultural rights. Freedom from want is no less a human right than freedom from fear, and vice versa. The United Nations has created a number of institutions and procedures to protect human rights. The Community urges that they should be used more effectively, that they should be developed and unproved. It urges also that those countries which have ratified the International Covenants on Human Rights adopted by the United Nations (resolution 2200 A) should indeed implement the provisions of those Covenants. Signature without corresponding action is worth little, The will to implement a treaty must be recognizable to the world public arid to the citizens of the country concerned.
201.	I should like now to add some remarks on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany.
202.	liver since it came into being, the Federal Republic of Germany has pursued a foreign policy for peace. All democratic parties in our country champion the cause of peace. We have a comprehensive understanding of peace: as a guarantee of peaceful, stable co-operation and of the common responsibility of all States, without which the problems facing mankind today cannot be resolved.
203.	The Federal Government's policy is embedded in the nine-member European Community and the alliance with the democracies of North America. Democracy, freedom and human rights are the unmistakable characteristics of this partnership. The close link between free Europe and the United States and Canada is the indispensable prerequisite for our security. This is a factor of world stability, and it is the hope of all who put their faith in freedom and not in oppression and predominance. This transatlantic partnership is more than a community thinking solely in terms of its own security interests. It is based on the great common aims; freedom, independence, the right of self- determination and human rights, not only for ourselves but for all individuals and all nations. That is why this partnership is irreplaceable - no less so than are our values. Upon these foundations we are helping to build bridges of co-operation across the ideological gulf between East and West. We want also to play our part in steadily reducing the disparity in levels of development between North and South.
204.	European union and Atlantic partnership are indispensable prerequisites also of our realistic policy of detente and a reconciliation of interests with the countries of Eastern Europe, a policy which we pursue together with our Western partners. The Federal Republic of Germany, by means of the Treaties of Moscow, Warsaw and Prague,  has helped to further the process of detente in Europe and in East-West relations and since the conclusion of those treaties has always been ready to assist in seeking further progress. The Federal Government will continue that policy, which of course is a long-term policy. The policy of detente must take account of the indivisibility of peace all over the world.
205.	The development of the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union is of special significance for continuing detente in Europe. During the state visit which the Soviet Head of State paid to the Federal Republic of Germany last May, both sides reiterated their determination to raise the quality and level of their relations in all fields. By means of a joint declaration and an economic agreement they have again emphasized the long-term character of their relations.
206.	The Federal Government also-indeed particularly- includes the other German State in its policy of detente. No nation has a greater interest in detente than the German nation, for the line dividing East and West runs right through our nation. We aim, in accordance with the Basic Treaty,  to develop co-operation with the German Democratic Republic and to widen the contractual framework of that co-operation. We do so also aware of our responsibility for peace and for people throughout Europe. We wish at the same time to make detente something tangible in the everyday life of the people and, above all, to increase the possibilities for Germans on both sides of the border to come together.
207.	On signing the Treaty of Moscow and the Basic Treaty, the Federal Government emphasized that it remained the aim of its policy to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation would recover its unity in free self-determination. Here, too, we are on the side of progress. No one can halt the course of history. It is moving in the direction of unity, not separation; in the direction of progress, not delimitation. Finally, detente must stand the test especially in the very city that lies at the heart of Europe and at the heart of Germany-Berlin'.
208.	The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin  has improved the situation of Berlin considerably. I shall not conceal that there are still difficulties, which both sides must help to remove once and for all-all sides must help to remove them. What matters to us is that West Berlin should be able to prosper and develop, and we shall do everything in our power to ensure that it can do so. We do not want to change the existing situation unilaterally. We are maintaining and developing the ties between Berlin and the Federal Republic of Germany within the framework prescribed by the Quadripartite Agreement and we shall take care that West Berlin is fully incorporated in international cooperation. The strict observance and full application of the Quadripartite Agreement is a major prerequisite for lasting detente in the centre of Europe. Berlin is a symbol and a touchstone of the readiness for detente and co-operation between East and West.
209.	In order to safeguard peace under the conditions of East-West relations there must be a balance of military power. To ensure and maintain that balance is the goal of the security policy which the Federal Republic of Germany pursues, together with its partners in the Alliance. It is our desire to secure that balance, not through an increased build-up of arms but through arms limitation and disarmament. What we want is a stable balance at a lower level,
210.	The Federal Government hopes for an early and successful conclusion of the second series of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. In a system of military balance between the alliances, the Soviet nuclear medium-range missiles should not be left out of consideration. Soviet superiority in this field is a source of concern to us. In the interests of true stability it is necessary that this existing imbalance should be reduced, including also the so-called grey area.
211.	The aim pursued by the Federal Republic of Germany, together with its allies, in the Vienna talks on mutual and balanced force reduction is to establish approximate parity in Central Europe, in the form of a common collective over-all ceiling for ground forces and a reduction of tank disparity. An important result of the visit to Bonn of the Soviet Head of State was that in the joint declaration issued with Chancellor Schmidt the principle of parity was expressly recognized for the first time in an East-West statement. The joint declaration says:
"Both sides deem it important that no one should seek military superiority. They proceed on the assumption that approximate equality and parity suffice to safeguard defence."
212.	This principle must now be translated into reality. In order to achieve, by means of reductions, true parity between East and West in the heart of Europe, the two sides must first agree on the data basis. The discussion on data is therefore now the main topic of the Vienna negotiations and will be continued.
213.	Disclosure of military budgets and confidence- building measures such as the exchange of observers during manoeuvres are therefore important preliminary steps towards verified arms limitation and disarmament.
214.	The Federal Republic of Germany therefore supports all measures calculated to make the balance of military power more transparent and in this way to build up more confidence. It has played a part in the preparatory work done by the Secretary-General to ensure disclosure and comparability of military budgets. The limitation and reduction of nuclear weapons and the non-proliferation of these weapons are of world-wide importance.
2)5. We appeal once again to all countries that have not yet done so to accede at long last to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
216.	Along with the efforts to promote nuclear arms limitation and non-proliferation, the efforts to limit and reduce conventional forces must also be stepped up. The tenth special session of the General Assembly, on disarmament, rightly emphasized this requirement.
217.	The greatly increased volume of weapons transferred has become a problem of the first order. This transfer must be restricted by supplying and recipient countries jointly. The Federal Republic of Germany does not supply any weapons to areas of tension. Moreover, only in exceptional cases does it allow arms to be supplied to countries outside the alliance. The proportion of our arms exports to the third world is 0.2 per cent of our over-all exports.
218.	We consider it intolerable that the world spends in the region of $400 billion every year for military purposes. This is a threat to peace; in a world in which there is much poverty and hunger, this is a challenge to reason and to our moral conscience. It is time that this money was released and earmarked for the economic and social development of all nations, thus also serving to increase the security of every nation.
219.	International terrorism has become an acute problem of increasingly threatening proportions. It can be stopped only if all countries co-operate in a spirit of solidarity.
220.	As long ago as the thirty-first regular session of the General Assembly the Federal Government proposed that an international convention be concluded on measures to prevent the taking of hostages.10 The Committee drafting such a convention has undoubtedly made progress, and I would ask the General Assembly to extend its mandate in accordance with its recommendation.
221.	The countries participating in the Bonn Economic Summit Conference declared their willingness to intensify their joint efforts in the fight against aircraft hijacking in particular,  In cases where a country refuses to extradite aircraft hijackers or to take court action against them, air traffic with that country is to be discontinued. This is an important step forward and other Governments are called upon to join us in this action.
222.	I spoke earlier about the task of jointly managing world economic interdependence. The Federal Republic of Germany is conscious of the responsibility that falls on it as the world's second largest trading country in carrying out this task,
223.	At the Bonn Economic Summit Conference in July we promised that, in order to strengthen our growth we would introduce additional measures to stimulate demand costing about 1 per cent of the gross national product. That promise has been kept.
224.	In the months, indeed years, previous to that we had, moreover, already helped considerably to promote economic activity and growth in the countries with which we trade. In the first half of 1978 our imports increased in real terms by 8 per cent. They increased much faster than our exports and were considerably higher than those of nearly all other major industrialized countries.
225.	With an inflation rate of 2.4 per cent in August 1978, the Federal Republic of Germany is close to price stability. It exports growth and stability, and 1 thank you, Mr. President, for yourself having explicitly expressed appreciation of this.
226.	My country is also making its full contribution in promoting the development of the third world.
227.	"We are firmly in favour of ensuring a steady increase in exports of manufactures from the third world. Indeed, we see in this increase and in the corresponding opening up of markets in the industrialized countries a central element of the evolution of a balanced world economic order. In 1977 our imports of manufactures from the non-oil- exporting, non-European developing countries were up by 10 per cent. That means that they have increased at four times the rate of our national product. This amazing rate of growth impressively demonstrates the openness of the German market. The non-European developing countries, excluding the oil-producing countries, ran up a trade- balance surplus in relation to the Federal Republic of Germany of 2.7 billion marks.
228.	The Federal Government has made a special effort this year and boosted its development assistance budget by more than 20 per cent. It also plans considerable increases for the years ahead, so that it will rise at a rate significantly higher than that of the over-all budget.
229.	In addition, we have further improved the conditions on which aid is given. As from 1978 we are giving aid to the least-developed countries entirely in the form of grants. The Federal Government will also convert into grants development assistance loans already afforded to that group of countries, which amounts to cancelling debts of $2 billion or more.
230.	The Federal Government expects the Committee of the Whole at last to deal with the substance of its work. This body is too important for the North-South dialogue to be allowed to continue any longer to deal with procedural questions. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will do all it can to ensure the success of the Committee's work.
231.	Of great importance for the future of international economic growth and development is the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. Here we must above all find a balanced solution as regards a regime for sea-bed mining. It must give all States and enterprises access to the resources of the deep sea and bring with it the political and economic security needed for the heavy long-term investment in sea-bed mining.
232.	The focal point of all efforts to lead the world, which is in a phase of transition, to an order of equality and partnership continues to be the United Nations. The Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its will to support and strengthen the United Nations.
233.	The United Nations is more than a forum for the formation of international public opinion. It is called upon to act. It must become more capable of action. This applies above all to the important task of safeguarding peace. The Federal Republic of Germany feels that all Members of the United Nations should become more acutely aware of their responsibility for peace-keeping measures. No one should remain aloof where this central function of the United Nations is concerned.
234.	Furthermore, it is necessary to improve the instruments available to the United Nations for preserving the peace; for example, by providing training facilities for personnel required for peace-keeping operations and keeping the Secretary-General regularly informed of available units or logistic capacities for peace-keeping operations.
235. In other areas, too, we must strengthen and develop the institutions of the United Nations. This applies also to the task of the United Nations in establishing an independent institution for the protection of human rights. The stronger the United Nations, the stronger each Member State will feel in exercising its right of self-determination and the stronger every individual will feel in exercising his human rights. The United Nations must be the citadel of equality of rights in the face of hegemony and power politics in any form; it must be the champion of the poor against the rich, the weak against the strong. The United Nations will attain this goal only if it keeps itself free from sweeping judgements, propaganda and agitation, if it is a forum in which reason and the desire for justice prevail. We want to help the United Nations achieve its great aims: to preserve peace, to promote economic and social progress and to protect the human rights of all individuals and the right of self-determination of all nations.
 

﻿
1.	Mr. President, it is a pleasure for me to greet you as the representative of a continent with which we find that we have, through its Latin roots, long-standing affinities that are still very much alive. I also want to pay a tribute to you as an historian, economist and statesman whose training and experience will surely be invaluable to the pursuit of our work. I wish you, as indeed I wish us all, complete success in it and I assure you that you can count on our total co-operation.
2.	By recalling the eminent qualities of our Secretary-General and paying a tribute to his tireless dedication, I am not simply conforming to some kind of ritual. It is only natural that the outstanding debt the international community owes him should be acknowledged publicly and that we should tell him once again how grateful we are to him for serving the goals of our Organization with such wisdom, enthusiasm, energy and competence.
3.	One year ago from this very rostrum1 I observed that the world situation was neither good nor reassuring. Alas, the events that have occurred in the past 12 months are scarcely reason to alter that view. The main points of tension persist; new ones have emerged; still others have reappeared. Economic imbalances and inequalities remain and at times have even widened. While the guiding principles of our Charter are not contested, one has to admit that their application is still inadequate. Finally, human rights are still subject to many violations.

4.	That observation may seem severe but it is not intended to be pessimistic. The United Nations today is represents ? e of almost the entire world community. It has been enlarged again by the admission of Solomon Islands, which we are pleased to welcome. Mindful of the countless ties it has long had with the Pacific region, France hopes to enjoy the best of relations with that new State.
5.	As our Organization draws still closer to being universal it is acquiring growing influence in world affairs. As a founding Member of the United Nations, and having fully integrated its goals and principles into our own political philosophy, France welcomes this course of events. As we have shown just this year, we are prepared to associate ourselves directly with the efforts of our Organization on behalf of peace. Indeed, now more than ever France is convinced of the value of collective action and the need for genuine international co-operation, without which our quest for peace and prosperity would be but an illusion.
6.	France pursues that policy first and foremost in its natural environment, Europe. With its eight partners, France is continuing the work begun more than 20 years ago to build a prosperous and peaceful community able to make its own contribution to international life. The current President of the European Community has described to the Assembly our views on the main questions it is to debate this session [see 8th meeting, paras. 135-200]. He expressed our shared determination to steer the development of our peoples on a course that is more rational and more generously open to the world. The many countries of every continent that are associated with the Community, as well as those nearby that are preparing to join, are aware of the determination behind this endeavour. They know the price and appreciate the difficulties in the present economic situation.
7.	Beyond the context of the nine countries members of the Community, France applies in Europe the principles of detente which it helped define and to which it remains deeply committed. Whatever the vicissitudes or stumbling-blocks, that policy is still the only reasonable one; therefore it must be pursued and developed to the full dimensions given to it by the Final Act of Helsinki.2 It must also be extended elsewhere in the world, for clearly areas outside Europe must not become the object or stakes of a confrontation between the major Powers, or the very process of detente will be imperilled.
8.	Long ago we established without reservation ties with European nations having social systems different from our own, and my country reaffirms its commitment to co-

operation with the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe. In the same way, it welcomes the development of its relations with the People's Republic of China. It intends to make those relations commensurate with the physical, human and political dimensions of that great country.
9.	"To maintain international peace and security": that is the principal goal the Charter assigns to our States. Now, even more than last year, persistent tensions or current conflicts are jeopardizing international peace. We are all aware of them. They are located primarily in the Middle East, in Africa and in the Indo-Chinese peninsula. The draft text on peace-keeping, which my colleague from the Federal Republic of Germany presented on behalf of the European Community [A/SPC/33/L.19J, deserves the full attention of the Assembly, because it invites us at a very opportune moment to lend the Organization our assistance in this essential matter of collective security. Occasions for doing so, I am sorry to say, are not lacking.
10.	In view of the crisis provoked by the Israeli intervention in southern Lebanon, my Government decided last March to participate in UNIFIL. Its decision to make a contingent available to the Organization was a concrete expression of its often stated commitment to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of that friendly country and of its support for President Sarkis's efforts to Strengthen the authority of the State and reconcile the communities within Lebanon. Who can fail to see that a free and united Lebanon is an indispensable element for the equilibrium of the entire region? But who can fail to see also that its tradition of freedom and openness exposes it more than any other State to the impact of the tensions and crises that surround and penetrate it?
11.	It was therefore justifiable for the international community to give the people of Lebanon, who had already been so severely tried, direct evidence of support following the occupation of southern Lebanon by Israeli armed forces. The operation undertaken by the United Nations has unfortunately not achieved all the objectives set for it. Although the withdrawal of Israeli troops was achieved, they are still overtly supporting rebellious elements along the border which refuse to submit to legitimate Lebanese authority and keep tension alive by dangerous acts of harassment. Security has not yet been restored to the entire area, mainly because it has been impossible for the units of UNIFIL to deploy along the border.
12.	With regard to restoring the authority of the Government of Beirut, the obstacles to this are not ones that UNIFIL has the mission or the means to overcome. The Force cannot take the place of the Government in the exercise of its sovereignty. While the Force—and we should pay tribute to it since the difficulties of the task are unprecedented for an operation conducted by our Organization—may draw on all the resources available to it in the framework of its mandate, it is not its job to maintain law or to impose a settlement the implementation of which would require also the co-operation of forces outside its sphere of action.
13.	UNIFIL would be diverted from its real goal if the protection it provides permitted the status quo to continue
and the parties to become immured in their intransigence, deaf to the suffering of the people and blind to the dangers of allowing the wound to fester. This was the meaning of the Security Council's resolution 434(1978) of 18 September to renew the mandate of the Force for four months. The stability of the region requires measures to be taken without delay to restore the authority and sovereignty of Lebanon, and everyone who understands this will find encouragement in this extension of the Force's mandate. But the time-limit imposed on the mandate should serve as a warning to those who entertain the illusion that the presence of the Force will from now on be a permanent factor in the situation.
14.	I do not want to leave the subject of Lebanon without stressing my Government's concern at the persistence of tensions in other parts of that country, particularly in Beirut. I should like to remind you once again of our constant position: that there can be no solution to the crisis in Lebanon unless it is founded on respect for the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of that country. Any undertaking that did not recognize this requirement would be doomed to failure and would risk destroying, along with itself, the very cause it claimed to serve.
15.	The situation in Lebanon cannot be dissociated from the Middle East situation, which has greater repercussions on that country than on any other in the region. After the historic initiative taken by the President of Egypt, Mr. El-Sadat in going to Jerusalem last fall, a new situation emerged Both those who approved and those who disapproved recognized it. Everyone realized that what was at stake was no longer Israel's existence but the terms of its coexistence with the Arab countries.
16.	This breach in the wall of distrust that had separated Israel and its neighbours for 30 years was not turned to as much advantage as had been hoped; the process begun last winter stalled too quickly. The President of the United States, Mr. Carter, tried to inject new life into it, and I want to pay a tribute to his courage and tenacity in his personal involvement in the Camp David undertaking. This meeting, unprecedented in style, has ushered in a new phase. Clearly, there is still great uncertainty in it. But we would like to hope that under the. shadow of ambiguities, precaution and silence, the complex texts adopted by two of the parties directly concerned can be used to further progress towards the necessary settlement.
17.	We believe that, for this phase to be decisive and to lead to peace, it must pave the way to an over-all settlement, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), with which all the interested parties would be associated, including the representatives of the Palestinian people. This settlement, may I repeat, must be based on withdrawal from the territories occupied in 1967, on recognition of the right of the Palestinians to a homeland, on consideration for the legitimate concern for security of all the States in the region, naturally including Israel, as well as on the mutual recognition of boundaries and on the gradual establishment of peaceful relations among the States concerned. Only respect for these principles can bring about the just and lasting peace to which all the peoples of the region aspire.
18.	We deplore the fact that in Cyprus the renewed efforts of our Secretary-General have had little success in breaking the stalemate. In order to strengthen the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus and to restore trust between the communities, these communities must resume their talks and must be prepared to conduct them on a reasonable basis. The de facto state of affairs must not become law; pre-conditions cannot lead to negotiation. My country is too closely linked with that part of the Mediterranean not to know how deep and firmly rooted the concerns of each party are, but our own historical experience has shown us how much can be overcome by the determination of leaders and peoples. It is this impetus that we urge the parties to find, and we are
always ready to encourage them to do so. 
19.	Africa has suffered new ordeals this year, without a settlement being found for certain problems too long discussed by our Organization. That continent, one of the cradles of humanity, has begun a new chapter in its history. Many recently independent States, which have not yet firmly established internal equilibrium, today find themselves involved in rivalries which are not their own and which thus hurt their chances in the only struggle that is worth while, the struggle for development.
20.	In Rhodesia the recent turn of events has increased the dangers. The illegal regime in Salisbury continues to defy the international community. The agreement reached last March between Ian Smith and certain nationalist leaders with the aim of promoting a so-called "internal solution" only deepened divisions and heightened tensions. The application of the Anglo-American plan drawn up last year at this time would doubtless have paved the way for Zimbabwe's independence to be accepted, but we see today that violence is on the rise. Only direct negotiations among all the interested parties under the aegis of the administering Power could make it possible for Zimbabwe to accede peacefully to independence. But time is passing, intransigent positions are becoming more entrenched, and a storm is brewing. It is high time to listen to reason.
21.	In rejecting the implementation of the plan to settle the question of Namibia-a plan it had accepted four months previously—South Africa has created a crisis that could have grave consequences if the Government in Pretoria does not reconsider the position it has taken in defiance of international opinion.
22.	France again asserts that there is no essential difference between Mr. Waldheim's proposals and the settlement plan of the five Powers. In finding fault with some adjustments that alter neither the spirit nor the basic terms, the Republic of South Africa seems to be looking for pretexts to back out. In agreement with its Western partners, France has asked that the Security Council meet as soon as possible in order to adopt the Secretary-General's proposals.
23.	Confident as it is of the support of the African countries and, above, all of those the front-line countries,
and mindful as it is of the suffering of the Namibian people, who have waited too long for the right to self-determination to be accorded them, and assured as it is, along with its four partners, of the support of the international community, France again most solemnly calls upon South Africa to refrain from setting out on a dead-end road which can lead it only to suicidal isolation. Let me add that Namibia's independence will be effective only if prepared in co-operation with the international community.
24.	In the Horn of Africa, where violent clashes occurred last year, the situation is still disturbing. It is high time that the disputes that are setting Africans against each other were left to the Africans alone, so that they may seek the paths of a settlement through procedures of their own. Accordingly, it falls to the Organization of African Unity [OAU] to continue its efforts at rapprochement, without which tension and resentment will persist.
25.	Three other situations especially hold our attention: they involve Chad, Western Sahara and Zaire. I will discuss these at somewhat greater length because France's position has not always been understood, nor has there always been a desire to understand it. Because France has on three occasions been led to give direct assistance to the countries concerned, it has been claimed in some quarters that France sought to play some kind of role as "gendarme of Africa". I want once again to refute these accusations, which show little understanding of the reasons for our policy, which is based on two principles that I have already explained on several occasions but that I should like to reiterate.
26.	First, it is for African countries themselves to settle their disputes. This means that their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity must be free from all interference that would make Africa the arena for rivalries from outside the continent; it means that they must remain free to decide their political options for themselves.
27.	Secondly, it is with strict respect for the sovereignty of States that France shows its solidarity with Africa. "Africa for the Africans" does not mean rejecting this solidarity or erasing friendships.
28.	Though France did intervene on the African continent, it was always at the express request of the recognized Government of the country in question, and the extent and duration of French assistance were limited according to the necessities of the situation. In each case France was responding to an appeal from States which were victims of aggression originating from or supported from the outside; these States were trying to defend themselves within their borders and did not yet have the military means to ensure their own security.
29.	Accordingly, my country remains true to the policy of non-interference and of co-operation that it has always followed; no one can accuse France of straying from it and following supposed neo-colonialist or other designs.
30.	These supportive actions do not of course imply that we have taken any position on the substance of the issues or made any attempt to impose a solution. To our mind, the settlement of disputes is the exclusive domain of the parties concerned.
31.	In Chad, unmistakable aggression developed this past spring in violation of the Sebha and Benghazi cease-fire agreements; this aggression was clearly backed from the outside and led the Government of Chad to request our support. The sole objective of our action was to make it possible to restore the security necessary to the quest by the people of Chad—and by them alone-for national reconciliation. Today this endeavour is well under way, as everyone can see.
32.	In the different situation that prevails in the western reaches of the Sahara, France similarly answered an appeal from Mauritania, a country without substantial material resources or military forces which was the victim of aggression supported from the outside on uncontested national territory. In this matter France, which has longstanding ties with all the States involved in the conflict, has but one wish, and that is to see these States re-establish friendly and fruitful co-operation with each other. Accordingly, we note with interest the recent turn of events that is more favourable to restoring calm. We hope this trend grows. Since we had no part in the Madrid agreements, we would not be party to the dialogue that might begin. But we are prepared to encourage such a dialogue so that a peaceful solution might at last be found, with the help, if need be, of international organizations. As for us, it is in the forum of the United Nations that we have stated our commitment to the self-determination of peoples.
33.	For the second consecutive year, Zaire has had to endure bloody incursions in Shaba province by elements from the outside. To all indications, the toll of this attack in human lives, and material terms would have been even heavier without rapid international support. Since our soldiers have long since returned to their bases on our territory, who today can question the strictly humanitarian concerns that motivated us?
34.	France's action in Africa has never been aimed at jeopardizing the sovereignty or security of any country on that continent. Our sole ambition is to contribute, when the desire for this is expressed and when we are asked, to the development and well-being of the peoples of Africa, who have as much right as anyone else to stability and security.
35.	As for the Comoros, I emphasized last year that France had a feeling of solidarity with countries to which it was especially bound by history, and that we were ready to demonstrate this feeling toward the new State. I am therefore pleased that diplomatic relations have now been established between the Comoros and France and that the door is thus open for co-operation. Our co-operation can only facilitate better understanding between the Comorians and their neighbours in Mayotte, who have freely chosen a different path but who, I repeat, will have another opportunity to express their wishes regarding their future.
36.	Therefore, was it necessary to enter the question of Mayotte on our agenda again? Allow me to express some
doubt about the usefulness of such a debate if in fact the aim is, as everyone must hope and work for it to be, the restoration of an atmosphere of trust between the peoples in question.
37.	In South-East Asia, France can only deplore the fighting that has resumed on the Indo-Chinese peninsula, so long afflicted by war. This fighting is between two peoples with which we have historically had very close relations and for which we still feel deep friendship today. We hope that all the States of the region can devote themselves to the priority tasks of development and establish true cooperation between themselves, with respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of each of them, free of all undue interference from Powers outside the area.
38.	One of the most painful consequences of the situations of confrontation that we deplore is the exodus of part of the population. France, traditionally a land of asylum, could not remain unmoved, especially when this ordeal involves peoples that were once linked to it. This is why we took in 150,000 refugees, nearly one third of whom came from the Indo-Chinese peninsula; and we are keeping our doors open to other refugees, from this area to a limit of 1,OCO a month. Since this is an eminently humanitarian endeavour, we hope the burden can be shared to a large extent by the members of the international community.
39.	With the fate and protection of the human being at stake, how could we fail to mention the pledge made by our States when they adhered to the Charter, namely, to respect human rights?
40.	We mast be exacting in this, but also humble. Human rights are too sacred to be used for partisan ends; and they are precious enough for respect to be demanded for them everywhere.
41.	France has not forgotten that it was in Paris on 10 December 1948 that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted; we are celebrating its thirtieth anniversary this year. But who would venture to claim that this is also the anniversary of its application?
42.	In view of the continued violations of these rights, we are forced to admit that there is still a wide gap between the most solemn statements and actual behaviour.
43.	Political persecution, racial discrimination, torture and arbitrary sentences are still a painful reality today. The news offers too many examples of something that is all too common. There should be no hierarchy of arbitrary priorities in human rights, whether individual or collective. To tolerate selection would be to legalize all violations in advance.
44.	Unless there is respect for the supremacy of the individual, no progress can be made toward human equality and dignity; both would bet flouted, here in the name of economic imperatives, there in the name of security requirements. Neither the cause of peace nor the cause of development can justify the persecution of individuals or groups who ask only that international texts endorsing their basic rights be respected.
45.	In this connexion I should like to recall our staunch condemnation of the policy of apartheid. We denounce it not only as the manifestation of indescribable disdain for human beings but also as a potential detonator of dangerous conflicts. France has associated itself with the sanctions taken last November against a regime whose blindness makes a constant policy of such disdain. We therefore strictly apply the embargo on arms sales to Pretoria.
46.	Granting individuals and peoples every civil and political freedom and the means to enjoy it in peace was already the goal of our States a few decades ago. Today we all agree that it is important for them to have the economic means to exercise those freedoms. Furthermore, development, which should remedy the most blatant economic inequalities, is itself a factor for peace. Has it not been said at this very rostrum that development is the new name for peace?
47.	Nevertheless, when we speak of development, let us beware of taxing the peoples' patience. We are nearing the end of the Second United Nations Development Decade. What contribution has it made to the most impoverished among us? What has been its real impact on world hunger? Have we at least established the conditions that could, on the basis of national economic take-off, generate a process of self-development? Alas, that hardly seems to be the case.
48.	If public opinion in the developed countries and in countries benefiting from co-operation for development is not to become discouraged, the third development decade will have to respond in a more concrete manner to the needs of peoples and will have to be expressed more consistently in practical ambitions that mobilize support. It is important that the next decade attest to the commitment of the international community to deal realistically—that is, in the concrete terms in which they are presented—with the acute problems that confront a number of Governments daily and affect the lives of hundreds of millions of individuals. Therefore this decade must usher in, if not another type of development, at least a more pragmatic and diversified approach, and it must reject fruitless discussions on the nature of basic needs.
49.	In this regard we welcome the agreement reached recently at the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries in Buenos Aires; it opens up new prospects for international technical co-operation to further development.
50.	New elements may also be expected from the fifth session of UNCTAD, which is to be held in Manila next year, from the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development and the Third General Conference of UNIDO. Those elements should be integrated into a comprehensive whole and should be guided by master plans that serve to enlighten the mind and mobilize the spirit of determination.
51.	Instead of waiting passively for guidelines from the 1980 special session of the General Assembly, it is our duty to start thinking now, individually and collectively, about an outline for the third decade. While the objectives of the present Decade, which were defined globally [resolution
2626 (XXV)], will undoubtedly establish the general frame of action for the 1980s, changes in the world economic situation and the lessons learned from experience should none the less make certain priorities clearer.
52.	By the same token, the fight against the most dire effects of poverty is certainly a task in keeping with the possibilities of our Organization, and one that would enable it to respond to the hopes people place in it.
53.	The basis for such a project exists. It is the programme of action, adopted unanimously in 1976 by the tripartite world employment conference.7 But the programme should be expressed in terms of strategy by an effort of planning and by wide-ranging consultation, in particular with a view to eliminating any misunderstanding. The way was opened, inter alia, by the Conference of non-aligned countries which met last July in Belgrade. That Conference pointed out [see AI33/206] that the policy defined in Geneva - and I agree with this view—is based on the need to promote a new international economic order; it noted that such a policy did not dispense with the need for a global strategy designed to accelerate the economic growth of the developing countries; and, lastly, it stressed that those countries themselves were responsible in the first place for their own development and particularly for satisfying the basic needs of their peoples.
54.	I might add that that policy, rightly attentive to rural development and to the problems of unorganised urban concentrations, must not be used as an excuse for neglecting the indispensable geographical redistribution of industry.
55.	I have mentioned the necessary industrialization of the developing countries. I hope they will know how to control it and will avoid the mistakes we made in our own industrialization.
56.	Moreover, we, like the developing countries, are opposed to any international division of labour, old or new, that would imprison certain peoples in certain tasks. Faced with competition in some sectors from young industries in the third world, we decided, at the price of imposing real sacrifices on our companies and workers, to reject the facile solution of protectionist measures. We have allowed adaptations and reconversions to take place in the context of free trade and realistic pricing. We believe that by so doing -we have served honestly the interests of all.
57.	The third development decade, as 1 have said, needs some master plans. It also needs a sense of method and instruments for its implementation. With respect to this, the current restructuring of our Organization's machinery
in the economic and social domains, which has included the creation of a high office in the Secretariat, entrusted to Mr. Kenneth Dadzie, increases our confidence in the capacities of the system. The implementation of the General Assembly resolution [resolution 32/197] should be continued, especially with regard to strengthening the role and increasing the effectiveness of the Economic and Social Council.
58.	I should, however, like to point out one serious and paradoxical short-coming in our complex system, and that is the lack of any framework for genuine discussion on the fundamental issue of energy. By that I mean not the "energy crisis" that made headlines in the press but the crisis facing us, the one that must compel us all to adopt an active policy to conserve energy, which my country has embarked on with determination and success; the crisis that forces us to make a difficult, yes, but inevitable choice between various sources of energy with due regard for the balanced development of the entire planet, for the protection of our natural and man-made environment and for nuclear energy by guaranteeing that it will be used for peaceful purposes. To this end, while France has banned the export of sensitive equipment that could facilitate access to nuclear weapons, it is also anxious not to deprive any country of the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy or the advantages of the most promising technologies. For this reason we have agreed, pending the results of consultations under way in the framework of the international nuclear fuel-cycle evaluation programme, to provide our eventual partners with every service in the fuel cycle.
59.	The problem of energy, therefore, needs to be approached globally, without any spirit of confrontation, in order to take into consideration the interests of the international community as a whole. I thus welcome as a positive element resolution 1978/61 passed by the Economic and Social Council which retains the principle of an international conference on new and renewable sources of energy. The French Government will take an active part in preparing that conference.
60.	With regard to the 1980 special session of the General Assembly, we regret that the work of the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, known as the Committee of the Whole, is to be suspended, this being an irreplaceable forum for pursuing the North-South dialogue to which France is committed. Certainly starting such a dialogue on economic and development problems at the world level is an ambitious and arduous undertaking whose difficulties I underestimate less than anyone. Some divergences have become apparent on the interpretation of certain aspects of the mandate of the Committee. Nevertheless, the formula that found acceptance at the start of the month with a large majority of delegations is still entirely valid, in our view, and should enable the Committee, with the active collaboration of one and all, to tackle the main problems at last.
61.	Without the security to which our nations are rightfully entitled, no development is in effect possible. Yet security should not command an excessive share of our resources. In other words, the disarmament undertaking is an obvious necessity and one that should concern us all.
62.	The tenth special session of the General Assembly, by malting it quite clear that disarmament should be the affair of the entire international community and not of just a few State, has at last placed the debate in its real perspective.
This is not the only thing to its credit; it also provided us with the means to pursue the undertaking.
63.	In this matter, no one should entertain doubts about France's determination. The participation of the President of the Republic in person in the work of the special session attests to this. The presence of France in the place reserved for it in the new Committee on Disarmament, a presence that I now officially announce from this rostrum, confirms that this momentum will be maintained.
64.	The recognition of the central role that should fall to the United Nations and the concomitant reform of the machinery for negotiation and deliberation, with greater participation, better regional equilibrium and more democratic functioning through the dismantling of the co-presidency in Geneva, guarantee, in our view, that a new phase can now be entered. It has, therefore, become possible for France to join the Committee. It has become necessary for us to assume the role dictated by the importance of the stakes, for all our States.
65.	I should like to pay a special tribute at this point to the President of the special session, who was also the President of the thirty-second session of the General Assembly, Mr. Lazar Mojsov, whose political understanding, dedication and great competence were invaluable to him in successfully carrying out the mission entrusted to him by the Assembly.
66.	With the help of revised machinery, the work envisaged last June could now begin. A set of principles and a time-table have already provided useful reference points, although we believe that in certain areas, notably in the nuclear domain, a different wording would have been better suited to the realities of the situation. This document, which is an attempt to cover a set of particularly complex and sensitive problems, nevertheless bears witness to a remarkable consensus within the community of nations on several key points.
67.	Let me mention: the right of all States to security; the special responsibility that must be shouldered by the great Powers in the area of disarmament, since they themselves recognize that they have arsenals far in excess of the requirements of strategic balance; the importance not only of nuclear but also of conventional disarmament, in view of the fact that the build-up of conventional weapons, particularly in Europe, constitutes an increasingly serious threat to peace; the need for effective monitoring of disarmament measures; and, finally, the allocation of funds thus freed for economic and social development.
68.	France has, moreover, presented concrete suggestions on some of these points which should be studied right here or in specialized bodies. I am referring to proposals for a satellite monitoring agency and a disarmament fund for development, as well as the establishment of an institute for disarmament studies, all initiatives whose usefulness has been widely recognized.

69.	The realistic approach to disarmament that should be encouraged leads us to recommend that measures of a regional nature be studied. It is within this framework that balanced solutions can be found which take into account the role deterrence plays in the security of part of the planet. We have therefore proposed to the countries interested in the security of the European continent that a conference on disarmament be convened.
70.	A regional consultation could also bolster efforts to limit the transfer of conventional arms. The geographical entity that a region constitutes is most often an arena for threats just as it is for co-operation. So it is at this level that the exigencies of each State's right to security and those of non-discrimination among partners must be assessed. Real progress cannot be made from the outside, by some cartel of producers or through unilateral actions. It can be based only on the common will of the interested States and their common understanding of the purpose and scope of a verifiable regional agreement. In this context the initiative recently taken by a group of Latin American countries sets an example and should be commended.
71.	I am addressing this Assembly as the representative of a country that is mindful of its independence and intent on preserving it. But mine is also a country convinced of the growing solidarity which links together all the countries of our planet. In the face of the crises, upheavals and threats of all kinds to which our peoples are exposed, none of us—whether a small, medium-sized or even very large Power-can expect to act alone and emerge unscathed. Co-operation is no longer a choice; it is a necessity that we must accept. Let us give it the means to grow stronger here.
72.	We must of course be realistic. Disunity too often pervades this privileged gathering place. Resistance to change is tenacious. And much imagination and political determination will be needed, it is true, to ensure that man, wherever he lives and whatever his race, religion or national origin, will enjoy personal dignity, a fair share of the world's resources and a part of the responsibility for decisions that concern him.
73.	"As the strange dawn of the third millennium draws closer", as the President of the Republic said in this very forum last May,12 the undertaking offers enormous scope for our intelligence and efforts. France for its part is determined to take part in it.
﻿107.	







108.	Mr. President, let me first extend to you my congratulations on your election. Your experience and skill will help to ensure a fruitful
Assembly session. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Mojsov of Yugoslavia, who ably led the Assembly through no less than four sessions during his year of office.
109.	When the United Nations was established at the end of the Second World War, the British Empire covered one eighth of the world's land surface and had a population of over 500 million. In the years since then, 35 independent States have emerged from among the people and territories that made up that Empire and have taken their place among the nations of the world. There can be no clearer testimony to the commitment of successive British Governments to the principle of self-determination.
110.	Today we are left with a handful of small dependent Territories which, because of their particular circumstances, have not become independent States.
111.	It has been the firm policy of the present British Government to give every encouragement and support to those Territories which seek independence. It was in fulfilment of that policy that Solomon Islands became an independent nation earlier this year and so the one hundred and fiftieth Member of the United Nations. In a few days' time, on 1 October, yet another country, Tuvalu, will celebrate its independence and will apply for membership in the specialized agencies. The Gilbert Islands have already reached the stage of full internal self-government, and we hope they will achieve independence in 1979. In the Anglo-French condominium of the New Hebrides, a programme has been agreed which will lead to independence by 1980. Among the West Indies Associated States, which are in voluntary association with Britain, Dominica will move to independence on 3 November this year. Discussions are continuing on the constitutional future of the other States.
112.	Our policy is to respect the wish of the peoples of our remaining dependent Territories to determine their own future in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter, to uphold that Charter in all its respects, and to put support for the United Nations at the centre of our foreign policy.
113.	People all over the world read in their newspapers day by day graphic accounts of systematic murders, cold-blooded tortures and the debilitating ravages of famine and disease. They watch pictures on television of grotesque sufferings caused by the dictatorial actions of Governments or by natural disasters. Most people hope that those countries and agencies which can do so well take practical steps to alleviate this misery; they do not want to find themselves in similar circumstances. Discussion and words of condemnation or sympathy are not enough. Ordinary people want to see real evidence that those who offend against the norms of civilized society are not accepted as members of it and that the effects of malnutrition and monsoon are mitigated for everyone. One of the United Kingdom's major aims is to encourage the strengthening of the United Nations capacity to protect human rights.
114.	In upholding our Charter commitments, we, the Member States, must pay more attention to the mechanics of how in our daily business we move from dialogue to negotiation, from general principles to specific detailed agreements, from rhetoric to action and from general support to binding commitments. No world organization can ever build up its strength, authority and effectiveness without developing and adopting a machinery which would enable its member States as a whole to make decisions sure in the knowledge that they will be carried out. It is, of course, not a new problem, but it is an urgent one. It is not enough to have a dialogue between rich and poor to redress inequalities. The millions outside looking in on our meetings, debates, special sessions and committees rightly expect progress. Most of them are realistic -- they recognize the limitations; but once year at least we should examine our record objectively and seek to learn from the past year to improve our performance for the coming year.
115.	It cannot yet be said our people have fully appreciated the immense importance of the relationship between the developed and the developing countries. The North- South dialogue in which we are engaged is not an elaborate stalking operation, where bureaucrats spend days and weeks locked in discussions which produce little agreement. It is potentially a deeply divisive issue and a central factor in world economic management. It can mean literally life or death for millions. There is a challenge here for the Governments of all countries. For the more developed countries the challenge is to be prepared for adaptation and change in the creation and distribution of new wealth in the world, and to generate the fullest public support for tackling the great disparity between the standards of life in fortunate countries, such as mine, and those which obtain over vast areas of the globe. For the less developed countries the challenge is to maintain the necessary disciplines both to enable them to achieve a rapid but stable expansion, with an equitable sharing of the benefits, and to continue to take part constructively in the search for an agreed approach to the problems and a shared responsibility for finding solutions.
116.	It would be a failure of statesmanship on both sides if the North-South dialogue, as in the early 1970s, became again an exchange of sterile slogans between spokesmen for the developing countries on the one hand and spokesmen for the developed countries on the other. Conducted in these terms the dialogue becomes a forum for rhetoric and confrontation instead of a co-operative enterprise from which all our countries and all our peoples will gain. We have risen above this, but we have not yet focused our attention collectively, and with understanding, on the specific problems: for example the optimal management .of the world's limited resources of raw materials, energy, finance, the transfer of resources from the rich to the poorer countries, and the problem of coping imaginatively with problems of adjustment so that the output of the newly industrialized countries can find its place in the world's markets. We will need more understanding, greater political resolve and imagination in the months ahead as we approach the fifth session of UNCTAD in May of next year and the special session in 1980. The United Kingdom recently decided that, as part of our aid policy, we would take immediate steps to relieve the debt burden of the poorest countries. The total amount of principal and interest involved in some £900 million, or $1.8 billion. This was a decision to give practical expression to the agreement negotiated within UNCTAD. It reflects our willingness to take action to show low genuine compromises can be achieved within the North-South dialogue. So far seven countries have taken a similar decision. For us it was a tough, political decision, which will undeniably cost jobs at home and be a charge on our balance of payments. There is no comfortable solution. Politicians will have to fight for these measures in the world; and then defend them at home.	
117.	Understanding and imagination will need to be shown by those relatively rich countries which at present stand aside from the common efforts of the rest of the world to help the developing countries. I believe that the Soviet Union and its partners are beginning to realize that there is a growing recognition among developing countries of the irrelevance of the time-worn excuse that the so-called "colonial legacy" of former imperial Powers means that the Communist countries can absolve themselves of any responsibility for helping the developing countries. I hope they also realize that the increasingly close economic interrelationships between countries of different systems and at different levels of development give all countries a- shared interest in helping the less fortunate to make progress.
118.	The divide between rich and poor is everyone's problem and everyone's responsibility. The economics of all countries are now so closely interlinked that none of us can find solutions by battening down the hatches and hoping to find some isolated-or protected-salvation. On the contrary, continued economic growth in the developing countries has an important part to play in supporting the health of the world economy. But the scope for sustained growth in the developing countries will of course be limited until the economies of the industrialized countries move out of recession- Recession in the West-or North—means receding hopes for the economies of the South. This is the reality and this is one of the reasons why my Government has spared no effort this year to bring about concerted action to restore confidence and growth round the world. The results of the July Bonn Economic Summit Conference show that there is a collective understanding at the highest level in the Western world of the need to stimulate growth, to make the most of our scarce energy resources, to avoid taking precipitate protectionist action and to get increased resources flowing 'to those countries where they are most needed.
119.	A major and acknowledged obstacle to these endeavours is the vast accumulation of military power which drains away scarce resources urgently needed for economic and social development. Four months ago here in this Assembly Heads of Government and Foreign Ministers attended the tenth special session on disarmament. We hoped to see moves to check this process of gathering and spending of money on armaments and take some practical action towards arms control and disarmament.
120.	Where did we get? While all States in the United Nations agreed on a Final Document [resolution S-10/2] expressing for the first time the views of all Member States on disarmament, much of it was so watered down that one gets the impression that everyone is in favour of disarmament until the moment that any proposal could actually affect them. The session admittedly encouraged more
States to take an active interest in disarmament. Two nuclear-weapon States which previously had not been involved in multilateral discussion of disarmament following the reform of the negotiating committee in Geneva will, it is hoped, now participate, and this is a welcome step. The involvement of non-governmental organizations in the debate was helpful and the special session stimulated greater public interest. The United Kingdom and other nuclear-weapon States gave the non-nuclear-weapon States important assurances that they would not be the subject of nuclear attack.
121.	The need for action to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons—one of the most crucial issues facing mankind- was recognized. But the dilemma of how to make available to all who need them the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear, energy without the risk of weapons proliferation was not squarely faced. My country has for some years made a financial sacrifice in not exporting some civilian nuclear equipment, materials and technology because of a fear of adding to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The existence of adequate safeguards to ensure that there is no fear of adding to the proliferation of nuclear weapons is also an essential condition of nuclear exports from the United Kingdom. But sophisticated countries still compete ruthlessly in the nuclear market place, and nuclear installations have become symbols of national sovereignty, so that any unwillingness to supply is wrongly seen as a political act. The Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1980 must look deeply at these matters, for I believe that it is possible for the equipment and services which are essential to a successful civil nuclear industry to be made available while minimizing the proliferation risk. Of course, one way to reinforce the non-proliferation regime is through the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones.
122.	It was natural that many countries at the special session should place the emphasis on nuclear disarmament. That must be the major concern. But let us not forget that four fifths of the military expenditure in the world goes on conventional forces and weapons. The system of nuclear deterrence has helped to keep the peace in Europe for over 30 years. But what has happened elsewhere? According to one estimate, there have been over 120 wars in the world since 1945. Not one day has passed in which a war was not being fought somewhere in the world. War casualties since 1945 number tens of millions, all caused by conventional weapons.
123.	We should give more attention to conventional arms control. The Final Document of the special session makes a negligible contribution to balanced reductions in military budgets and a halt to the world-wide build-up of conventional weapons. The brief and rather qualified reference to consultations on limiting transfers of conventional weapons is inadequate. The passage on reduction of military budgets is general and, unlike the Western draft programme of action, does not call for the testing of a means of measuring budgets so that actual reductions can be planned, with all the social and economic benefits that could ensue. In short, do not let anyone delude himself: an historic opportunity has been missed and we must resolve to achieve more at the next special session on disarmament. Otherwise another expensive session and a stream of words
will produce cynicism rather than commitment. A major reform is needed in the way we negotiate the final document. The political leaders make the speeches, but the final document is negotiated by officials. One senses in reading the words no clash of political view, no give-and- take. We appear to talk at each other rather than to each other, and so the bureaucratisation of international politics relentlessly proceeds. Declarations, principles abound, but action is relegated to second place.
124.	At least in the bilateral negotiations being conducted between the United States and the Soviet Union to achieve a second strategic arms limitation agreement, one is aware of a political debate at the highest level between Presidents and Foreign Ministers. This is a vitally important negotiation and needs to be followed as soon as possible by further reductions in strategic offensive weapons as well as by controls on qualitative improvement.
125.	My country, the United States and the Soviet Union are involved in negotiations on a comprehensive test ban. This would be entirely non-discriminatory; it could, if properly designed, curb the development of nuclear weapons and hinder their spread to more countries. We should like to see the widest possible adherence to the treaty, but that will only come if the non-nuclear-weapon States see the nuclear States as making a step-like change downwards in their development programme. There are some who want to take no action and to continue testing without any impediment to their scientific and technical plans- oblivious of the wider implications that would have for those States that need to be persuaded not to engage in testing themselves.
126.	Another priority is to maintain and accelerate the momentum injected recently into the Vienna talks on mutual and balanced reduction of forces in Central Europe. The Eastern response to the latest Western proposals has been encouraging, although serious difficulties remain unresolved. The Western participants will be ready at the right moment to propose that the talks be raised to ministerial level. Without this kind of political input, caution will predominate, the years will go by, and we shall all complain about the gap or the imbalance in forces while it widens before our very eyes, as it has done in every year that the negotiations have continued. The prize for us all is an agreement providing a more stable relationship and a lower level of military confrontation in Europe. It could be a major achievement in arms control and detente, but it will not be achieved at the present tempo and style of the negotiations.
127.	In one key area-peace-keeping—the United Nations has responded extremely well throughout the year. My Government is totally committed to the concept of United
• Nations peace-keeping. With our fellow-members of the European Community we shall be appealing to all members of the United Nations to reaffirm their support for United Nations peace-keeping measures. We have backed this support of principle with men, facilities and money.
128.	We have recently reviewed our own national capacity to assist in the preparation and conduct of peace-keeping operations, and I am pleased to be able to make the following offer of support, which is in addition to our current contribution to United Nations forces in Cyprus
and Lebanon. If requested, and subject to national commitments and exigencies, the United Kingdom will make available an infantry battalion group or a Royal Marine commando group for up to six months. The force will be available at seven days' notice and we shall airlift the force and its equipment to the area of operation. We shall also be willing to provide a small number of military personnel for duty as observers, and we shall consider as sympathetically as possible requests for other types of forces or forms of military assistance. In view of the experience which the United Kingdom armed forces have acquired in peacekeeping, we stand ready to share our knowledge and experience with others.
129.	When I addressed this Assembly a year ago,  I singled out Lebanon as an example of a situation where the United Nations should be involved in trying to resolve a major crisis before it occurred. In retrospect, I think we would all wish it had been possible to take more preventive action in spite of the difficulties. It took the Israeli military involvement in south Lebanon last March to make the international community fully aware of the vital need for the United Nations to play a part in that troubled country. Thereafter, the Security Council acted with admirable speed in securing the creation of UNIFIL to bring about the withdrawal of Israeli forces and to help the Lebanese Government to reintroduce its authority in the south. UNIFIL has undertaken its task with remarkable tenacity. It has faced great obstacles, but has nevertheless progressively fulfilled its mandate by military courage and skilful diplomacy. Already it has carried out the first part of its mandate; the complete withdrawal of Israeli forces has been effected. The difficult task of restoring the authority of the central Government in the south still lies ahead.
130.	But this is not a problem they can solve in isolation. A solution to the problems in the south depends on a solution to the larger political crisis which still racks Lebanon. All Members of the United Nations committed to the restoration of the authority of the Lebanese Government throughout the country should make a determined effort to work urgently for a political solution to Lebanon's problems. Only a political solution can guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon and put an end to the internal fighting which threatens to destroy the country.
131.	Peace in Lebanon depends also upon a solution to the wider conflict between Israelis and Arabs. The Camp David meetings have given renewed hope that a just, durable and comprehensive settlement can be achieved. Many major questions remain to be resolved, and I do not underestimate the difficulties. Nevertheless, the gap between the two sides has narrowed significantly. 1 believe that the success of the Camp David framework agreement  was because it did get into detail, not just declare principles, and because it involved the two Presidents and the Prime Minister. The detailed provisions in the Sinai Accord for demilitarization, force reductions and United Nations involvement  are something which my Government has long advocated. The Camp David agreements provide, too, a reasonable basis on which realistic interim arrangements for the most difficult problem, the West Bank, can now, given the will, be negotiated in greater detail.
132.	Those who condemned the agreements so hastily should, look at them again more carefully. They are based upon the principles of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and upon the international consensus in its favour. A perfect settlement cannot be achieved by exchanging declarations of principle any more than by making speeches at one another. Politicians have to be prepared to get down to what I term the "nitty-gritty" detail and then explain and defend the position to their own people. For our part, we have set out on a number of occasions—in particular in the statement on the Middle East made by the European Council in London on 29 June 1977-our views on the principles which should govern a peace settlement. The Camp David agreements are a positive step in that direction and they have our full support.
133.	Another major initiative has been that undertaken with regard to Namibia. We will be debating this issue in the Security Council, and I will reserve my remarks until then. But the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations Transition Assistance Group, the political commitment and atmosphere of patient diplomacy that has characterized the whole process, is an example of how the United Nations can act. At all times these negotiations have involved political leaders, whether foreign ministers or nationalist leaders, and their officials and supporters. African nations and leaders, as well as those of us outside Africa, have worked for an African solution and an international solution. It would be a tragedy for southern Africa if, at this late stage, the opportunity for Namibia to become independent was rejected. The alternatives—another Transkei, continued fighting and an escalating confrontation between South Africa and the world-would represent a shameful retreat from the ideals to which all parties have, I believe, been committed. Yet success here could not fail to have an impact upon the fundamental issue of racialism which haunts southern Africa, besides giving hope for a negotiated settlement in Rhodesia.
134.	Racism is one of the greatest evils which we face in the world community today and, in this International Anti-Apartheid Year, it is imperative that we should make clear our absolute, united condemnation of apartheid.
135.	Sadly, we see no real sign of movement towards fundamental change in South Africa since the General Assembly last met, but the message must go out again. Change is inevitable, and time is not on our side if that change is to be peaceful.
136.	At the time we meet, a new State President and Prime Minister are about to be chosen in South Africa. I
hope that these new leaders will respond to what I believe to be the true aspirations of the South African people for change, and will show courage and resolution in bringing that country back to its place in our community of nations. I believe that a united South Africa, through the efforts of all its people, can meet this challenge in the knowledge that failure will have the gravest consequences not only for the people of South Africa but for the world as a whole.
137.	Africa, and all of us outside Africa, are pledged to bring about majority rule, a return to legality, and independence in Zimbabwe. We want to do so without further bloodshed and in a way acceptable to the people as a whole. The objective for us all is a non-racial society in an independent Zimbabwe.
138.	The gravity of the present situation cannot be exaggerated. Deaths in the war have been over 3,000 this year. Civilian casualties since 1972 include nearly 3,000 Africans and some 600 whites. Intimidation and fear grow daily; atrocities have been committed on all sides. There is a growing refugee problem both inside and outside the country. One thousand people per week flee to Botswana. Inside Rhodesia the rural population affected by the war is fleeing to the cities, homeless and jobless. If the war continues, and the farmers do not plant and sow for next year, there are growing prospects of widespread famine in a country once endowed with plenty.
139.	The effect on the economic stability of southern Africa is now marked. There is a danger of foreign intervention and of embroiling the whole of Africa in a conflict out of all proportion to its original dimensions. The threat to the security of neighbouring States—Zambia, Botswana, Mozambique-is already only too evident, and has been highlighted by the latest raids into Mozambique.
140.	The < United Kingdom has never administered Rhodesia. In 1965 following the unilateral declaration of independence we came to the United Nations because we decided then, and have not shifted from that view since, that the United Kingdom acting alone could not end the rebellion and bring about majority rule. We accept our responsibilities and have tried to live up to them.
141.	We have striven for a negotiated settlement on the basis of the principles endorsed by the United Nations and the principles approved by the British Parliament. One of these principles is that, before granting independence, it must be established that any settlement is acceptable to the people of the country as a whole.
142.	Progress has been slow, but, encouraged by the support of many African States and the international community, we are urgently making every effort, together with the Americans, to bring about a satisfactory solution. But no one, including Britain and the United States, has a magic formula for peace in Zimbabwe. Ultimately it is for the people to decide the basis of their independence. It is not for any of us to impose a particular constitution or a particular leader on Zimbabwe.
143.	It is frankly recognized in private but often ignored in public rhetoric that, in contrast to most other liberation struggles, the Zimbabwean nationalist movement is not united. Its divisions are long-standing and have constantly bedevilled negotiations. It has been a major tactic of the regime to exploit these differences. It has never been part of our philosophy to seek to split the liberation movement or to widen divisions between the nationalists. Greater unity within the nationalist movement would make a comprehensive settlement far easier and a cease-fire a reality. The OAU has wisely endorsed the right of all the leaders to participate in elections. There must be no exclusions; we want an inclusive settlement.
144.	We are committed to working by persuasion and negotiation: we cannot impose, and this is a restraint which is not always recognized.
145.	Most of us in the United Nations support the objectives of freedom and of independence of the various liberation movements in southern Africa. Some support the armed struggle. My Government does not supply arms. To do so would gravely inhibit our ability to work for a negotiated settlement between all the parties to the conflict. I regret, though acknowledge, that many people have felt driven to take part in the armed conflict. No one can deny that this struggle has had a considerable effect, in addition to sanctions and diplomatic pressures, in making the possibility of majority rule a real one. Yet if the armed struggle continues with no negotiations it will result in massive damage to Zimbabwe: not just to its economy but perhaps above all to the chances of its being a non-racial society.
146.	Armed intervention by the United Kingdom ".vas ruled out in 1965 and there is no question of Britain or any other Western Power sending troops now to impose a settlement. We have committed ourselves to seek a solution through the international community and in the context of the Anglo-American proposals published on 1 September last year  and debated in the Security Council. Within that framework, we will honour our obligations, play a major part in any settlement, and contribute fully in terms of money, manpower and expertise. But we are not about to assume a colonial role which we have never exercised, which was rejected in 1965, and which is even more inappropriate in 1978.
147.	My Government's objective is to do everything possible to bring about a peaceful settlement through negotiations providing for majority rule and independence on a basis acceptable to the people of Zimbabwe as a whole.
148.	We have listened carefully to the criticisms of the detailed proposals we put forward a year ago. We have been trying to find common ground and, in elaborating and refining our proposals, we have had to take account of the strong views of those of the parties who wish to reduce the powers of the proposed resident commissioner. After the Geneva Conference i7 we thought that the inability of the parties to agree on a form of power-sharing could be quickly circumvented only by giving powers to the resident commissioner. Events have shown that judgement to be wise. We never sought those powers for ourselves; they were 
onerous and difficult. We willingly proposed that they should be exercised in concert with the United Nations. We advocated a special representative of the Secretary-General, a United Nations peace-keeping force and a United Nations civilian police element to monitor the existing police force. We have wasted a year arguing about the powers of the resident commissioner. I hope now, that after our consultations with the parties, we have found a workable formula for an executive and legislative council with powers on law and order reserved to the resident commissioner.
149. We now must agree on: the balance of representation on the council and the decision-making procedure; the appointment of a resident commissioner and the length of time he should remain; the timing of elections and the timing of independence; the details of the proposals put forward by the resident commissioner designate for the Zimbabwe national army and already explained in the presence of General Prem Chand to all the parties; the establishment of a unified command of all armies; the time-table for a cease-fire; and the structure of the United Nations Zimbabwe force.
350. We have presented some of these proposals to the parties in the form of options. We have not issued ultimatums. The detail is negotiable, but, if the parties continue to argue over the structure of a settlement, then-let us" be clear-the war will continue, and the bloodshed will increase; and neither the United Kingdom nor the United States will be able to prevent a fight to the finish.
151. All these preparations have been done in the belief that it is necessary to prepare the ground for final negotiations. Nothing has been pre-empted. The parties must decide for themselves; yet no decisions can be made without compromise. If they agree, then the United Kingdom is poised to enact the necessary legislation immediately. I hope the Security Council would then pass the necessary resolution for the establishment of a United Nations Zimbabwe force as speedily as in the case of Lebanon. In playing a neutral role as peace-keeper, the United Nations has never been partisan. The United Nations will stand up for the rights of all the people of Zimbabwe, as it will for the people of Namibia.
152.	This is a critical moment: if we are to prevent the escalation which could take all parties over the brink, then the voice of the international community must make itself heard in support of a negotiated solution and of our proposals. More insistent still is the voice of the people of Zimbabwe themselves, weary of war and seeking a just peace. They want a settlement; they want an all-party conference; they want majority rule; and above all they want peace.
153.	That is our commitment. We are actively preparing the ground now for round-table talks. I hope we can in the near future issue invitations to all the parties to come to negotiate a final settlement for an independent Zimbabwe. I hope that all of us as Members of the United Nations will do everything in our power to make such a meeting a success. The next few months in southern Africa are critical for us all, and the United Nations has, in my view, a major role to play. 

  





﻿




1.	Mr. President, may I extend to you on behalf of my delegation and myself our warm felicitations on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. Your elevation to this high office is as much a tribute to your diplomatic skill and eminence as it is a recognition of the constructive role played by your country, Colombia, in world affairs.
2.	We are glad to welcome on this occasion the Solomon Islands as the one hundred and fiftieth and youngest Member of the United Nations. We have every hope that this newest partner of the family of nations will make a useful contribution to the work of this world body.
3.	Enduring peace, the maintenance of which is one of the principal purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, is the age-old aspiration of mail. It is one of the abiding yearnings of the common man in all parts of our planet. It is both an elemental urge, like freedom from starvation and want, and the ultimate objective of every society. It is the yardstick with which to measure the excellence of any social organization; a happy society is where peace reigns supreme. That is why the prayers of all, irrespective of religion and belief, end with an invocation to peace.
4.	And yet, in spite of centuries of care and nourishment bestowed upon it, world peace still remains a tender plant buffeted by occasional whiffs of cold war, threatened by injustice and inequity, and dwarfed by the indignities that are still heaped by man upon man.
5.	Even though the clouds gathering over the international horizon have lifted of late and the process of detente,
6.	One of the principal causes of the continuing threat to peace is that world politics, as well as the world economy, are dominated by the interests of a few countries. That is not a new phenomenon; it has its roots in history. The compulsion to gain strategic advantages and the propensity to exploit differences continue to characterize the international climate. Institutions of multilateral militarism are being maintained and the urge to deploy them for sectarian purposes is growing instead of diminishing. Some of those institutions are known to have lost their relevance or usefulness, yet the political courage to bury them is lacking.
7.	There is no doubt that the big Powers could do a great deal more to improve the international atmosphere by exemplary behaviour and by displaying greater understanding of each other's legitimate interests, but that understanding must be within the framework of an equitable international order in which smaller and medium-sized countries would enjoy assured peace, equality and justice. Without a genuine acceptance of the principle of peaceful coexistence, the desire to live and let live and the determination to convert cold-war confrontation into competitive co-operation, the process of detente will not show the desired results.
8.	Detente is only a first step in creating the climate for finding long-term solutions to problems with a view to achieving durable peace. We welcome The process of detente because of its multiplier effect, if it is pursued in the right spirit. We have therefore been urging its extension to all fields of activity and to all parts of the globe.
9.	Each member of this body is endowed with its own national genius and its distinctive national personality and ethos. Each follows its own socio-economic system and has its specific pattern and strategy of development. Any attempts to impose conformity based on ideological and other considerations and to reduce the rich diversity of nations 
 to a common denominator will not only divest this world of its infinite variety but also pose serious threats to peace.
10.	The Charter prohibits the use of force save in self-defence or in the common interest and requires the settlement of disputes by peaceful means, yet nations have resorted to force against each other, quite often aided and abetted from outside with the consequent dangers of exploitation and domination. We have seen that, while such conflicts may sometimes be brought to an end as a result of external intervention, the cessation of hostilities is seldom followed by genuine peace. The root-cause of the conflict often remains unresolved while the strategic interests of outside parties become deeply entrenched.
11.	In the long run, disputes and conflicts can be amicably settled only through mutual understanding and accommodation. By building solid foundations, of mutual cooperation, nations can develop a stake in peace, stability and good neighbourliness which will be impervious to the outbursts of momentary differences, which are bound to apse from time to time,
12.	As recommended in the Declaration of the Conference of Ministers, for Foreign Affairs, of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Belgrade in July 1978 [A/33/206, annex I], governments involved in disputes should themselves make every, effort to reach a peaceful settlement through bilateral negotiations. Some regional organizations, as well as the United Nations, itself; provide- mechanisms for conciliation, although their efficacy obviously den-ends on the spirit, goodwill and mutual accommodation that the parties themselves, can show,
13.	Peace continues to be endangered also because the resolution of major international disputes has been delayed or neglected for far too long. Differences among nations, as among, individuals, if not resolved expeditiously, tend to erode trust, which is the basic pre-condition for resolving them.
14. By far the most potent threat to world peace is the continuing arms race, particularly in nuclear armaments. It militates against the fundamental objective of the United Nations "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". The arms race undermines the sovereignty and stability of nations. It goes against such principles of the Charter as refraining from the threat or the use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes. It is contrary also to the objectives of the international community to establish a New International Economic Order. We must keep reminding ourselves of the relationship between disarmament -- which could save up to 400 billion annually of unproductive expenditure - and development, which is chronically hampered by the lack of funds.  The contrast is unavoidable and the irony is inescapable. There is no greater distortion of resource allocation at the global level than that of those devoted to the arms race. 

15. Decades of efforts have yielded only a few arms limitations measures, such as the prohibition of certain kinds of nuclear tests, the agreement on the limitation of strategic arms and the prohibition of bacteriological weapons. 

16.	In spite of three rounds of talks on the Indian Ocean between the United States and the Soviet Union, there is no perceptible movement towards the goal of implementing the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace [resolution 2832 (XXVI)]. What is ironic is that the littoral countries, which are affected most by the big-Power rivalry in the Ocean, are not directly involved in those talks. We have been told that the talks will be resumed shortly and we trust that this will lead to the speedy elimination of big-Power rivalry and military presence in the Indian Ocean, thereby facilitating the implementation of the General Assembly resolution declaring the Indian Ocean a zone of peace.
17.	In the field of nuclear disarmament there has been little real progress. That is indeed disturbing because of the threat that nuclear weapons pose to the very survival of mankind. The nature of the current negotiations and their direction are not such as to assure mankind that the probability of a nuclear war will be reduced, even if not removed. We, the non-nuclear-weapon States, are entitled to that assurance, for the right to survival is basic to all other rights. We cannot, therefore, be indifferent to the outcome of the current negotiations. On the contrary, we would expect them to take fully into account the aspirations of the overwhelming majority for peace and security in a world free of weapons of mass destruction.
18.	India believes that partial measures such as the creation of zones free of nuclear weapons comprising the nuclear "have-nots" are not likely to generate any genuine feeling of security unless there is, at the same time, significant progress towards nuclear disarmament. Surely, the more urgent task is to reach agreement on measures for the non-use and the phased reduction and elimination of nuclear weapons and on a moratorium on all nuclear tests pending the conclusion of a genuine and non-discriminatory comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. It was with this in view that at the tenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, India took the initiative of submitting two draft resolutions covering these two aspects of disarmament.3
19.	The final objective must of course be to bring about general and complete disarmament under effective international control,, to which we, all subscribed in the historic resolution adopted by the General Assembly in November 1959 [resolution 1378 (XIV)]. It was obvious, then as it is obvious now that, disarmament should, be general in the sense of its universal application and it should be complete in the sense of its covering all weapon systems.
20.;	We. continue to believe that all aspects of disarmament both nuclear and conventional, are important. Yet, it has been our consistent, policy that nuclear disarmament must be given the topmost priority. The foremost task facing, humanity is to dismantle and to destroy nuclear weapon. The . concept of a security system of which nuclear weapons, represent the most dangerous and totally unacceptable component must be abandoned.
21.	We. must recognize and accept the primary role of the United. Nations in this field, It is a matter of great
satisfaction to us that the special session succeeded in bringing disarmament deliberations and negotiations squarely within the United Nations.
22.	It is the considered view of the Government of India that if we are to make progress in moving towards our goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control, we should implement the following six measures: first, the cessation of the qualitative improvement and development of nuclear weapons, including, in particular, the early conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty, pending the achievement of which there should be a moratorium on the further testing of nuclear weapons; secondly, the cessation of the production of nuclear weapons and of fissionable material for nuclear purposes; thirdly, the reduction and eventual elimination of existing stockpiles of nuclear weapons within an agreed timeframe; fourthly, the conclusion of a convention oh the non«use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances; fifthly, the elimination of all other weapons of mass destruction; and sixthly, the limitation and gradual reduction of armed forces and conventional weapons within the framework of a comprehensive programme of disarmament.
23.	Apart from the disarmament problem, there are other major issues of global concern which, if not resolved expeditiously and in a just and fair manner, could tear asunder the fragile fabric of world peace.
24.	In the Middle East there are at present some new moves and counter-moves and in the current fluid situation, when the parties themselves are engaged in reassessing developments, it would be premature for us to pronounce any judgement. Suffice it to say that Security Council resolutions 242(1967) and 338(1973) and the relevant General Assembly resolutions on the Palestine question constitute a principled basis for a comprehensive and lasting peace settlement. We should like to reaffirm in this connexion certain principles that are fundamental for the establishment of enduring peace. These are  the non-acquisition of territory by force and the vacation of Arab and Palestinian territories occupied by Israel since 1967; the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and to a nation-State of their own; and the right of all States in the Middle East to exist in security and peace within internationally recognized boundaries.
25.	The situation in Lebanon is a source of continuing concern for all of us. Here is an unfortunate country which has fallen prey to the power politics of the Middle East and where at the moment, by a strange twist of fate, Arabs are killing other Arabs, encouraged and assisted by outside forces. There is no doubt in our mind that, first and foremost, national reconciliation in Lebanon must be achieved in order to immunize the country from external pressures. I am glad that the parties concerned have responded positively to the Security Council's call for an immediate cease-fire. It is important that the cease-fire should be scrupulously maintained. I hope that initiatives for a just and honourable reconciliation will be supported by all peace-loving peoples.
26.	Although the situation in divided Cyprus has remained peaceful during the past year, chiefly due to the presence of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, there
has been no progress either in regard to the withdrawal of foreign forces or in the search for an agreed basis for the resumption of the intercommunal negotiations. The dimensions of the Cyprus problem, both the external and internal aspects, are such that the problem can be solved by peaceful means provided that the parties concerned recognize the legitimate rights and interests of each other and are willing to display a spirit of mutual accommodation. However, no solution will last unless it respects the unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and non-alignment of Cyprus.
27.	The Preamble of the Charter reaffirms "faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations, large and small". This objective is directly related to the purpose of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. For peace does not He in a mere cessation of hostilities or a containment of conflicts, or even in disarmament measures concluded in a general environment of violence, coercion and subjugation. As Gandhi said: "The way to peace is the way to truth." Truth lies in equality and justice. An individual cannot pursue truth, the highest urge of his soul, unless he is able to exercise his fundamental freedoms and human rights.
28.	Nothing is more degrading to human dignity than the practice of discrimination on the ground of race. Similarly, a first step towards ensuring equality among nations is to take the process of decolonization to its logical conclusion.
29.	In southern Africa we continue to witness the most pernicious combination of colonial domination and racial discrimination. The minority white regime of South Africa, in a bid to preserve its privileges, has been subjecting the majority population to the worst forms of human degradation, including torture, brutal repression, slavery and the denial of all fundamental freedoms.
30.	The United Nations has been seized of this matter since India raised it for the first time in the first session of the General Assembly in 1946.4 Since then, the South African Government has openly and flagrantly flouted all United Nations resolutions, decisions and sanctions. It has done so partly e cause of the supporting defiance of United Nations resolutions by other countries. We must not let our reiteration of opposition to this racist policy become a mere ritual at annual sessions of the General Assembly. The international community cannot evade its responsibility for taking effective measures to liquidate the dehumanizing practice of apartheid.
31.	With the adoption of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) on 29 September there is some hope that the illegal occupation of Namibia by the South African Government can be ended peacefully. Namibia can emerge as an independent country with majority rule, not through the sham internal settlement whose promotion is sought by the South African regime, but only through full implementation of the Security Council resolution. If the South African Government rejects the plan approved by the
Security Council5 and reverts to its familiar path of intransigence and defiance of world public opinion, the armed liberation struggle is bound to be intensified. The Security Council would then be fully justified in invoking the application of measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.
32.	We believe that the present stalemate in Zimbabwe is largely due to the ambivalence of some Powers on the question of the internal settlement.6 The only effective way to end the stalemate and perpetuation of the illegal regime of Ian Smith is to transfer power to the elected majority on the basis of "one man, one vote", and an agreed plan for the transition to a genuine independence. Meanwhile we should continue the sanctions against the racist regime, widen their scope and apply them more rigorously.
33.	Decolonization, the elimination of racism and racial discrimination, and the economic liberation of peoples are essential pre-conditions for securing the fundamental rights of peoples and for the promotion of human dignity and the free exercise of human rights. Equally important is the need for national Governments to assume primary responsibility for safeguarding and promoting the fundamental freedoms of the individual.
34.	The historic mandate of the Indian people in favour of fundamental freedoms left no doubt regarding the deep-seated and basic commitment of our people to human values and human rights. We therefore attach great importance to the activities of the United Nations devoted to this important issue of our times.
35.	We cannot achieve a durable and just peace until there is a transformation of the very quality and structure of the present world order. Characterized by glaring inequalities and imbalances among nations and the widening chasm between the rich and the poor countries, the existing order works inexorably against the interests of the poorer countries.
36.	The prevalence of mass poverty among a sizeable portion of the world's population living in developing countries-as many as 800 million persons—is in large part attributable to the inequities of the present international economic system. Poverty breeds tension, debases human personality and makes a mockery of the achievements of science and technology.
37.	Recent developments have shown that basically there is an unwillingness on the part of the major developed countries to begin serious negotiations to restructure the world economic order. The Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, also known as the Committee of the Whole, was expected to be the supreme United Nations body to monitor, supervise and impart momentum to negotiations on major development issues in all United Nations forums. But, almost a year after its creation, it has not even got off the ground. We hope that
following a discussion of this subject in the plenary meetings an agreement will soon be reached enabling the Committee to resume its work on the basis of its original mandate.
38.	The developed countries have till now not agreed even to discuss at the international level the question of bringing about structural changes in their economies to achieve optimal utilization of world resources and specifically to facilitate increased imports from developing countries.
39.	Some of the developed countries have recently refused even to reiterate their commitment to attaining the target of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade (resolution 2626 (XXV)] of providing 0.7 per cent of their gross national product as official development assistance to developing countries.
40.	There is, on the other hand, a resurgence of protectionism in the developed market-economy countries in the form of an increase in the incidence and scope of selective non-tariff barriers as well as of anti-dumping duties.
41.	The measures that the developed countries are prepared to adopt are still in the nature of tinkering with the present world economic order and hesitant ad hoc concessions.
42.	The developed countries have sought to justify these retrogressive actions as a means of dealing with their admittedly real problems of unemployment and "stagnation". It should, however, be obvious that these short-term and short-sighted measures, apart from having disastrous consequences for the development prospects of the developing countries, are neither conducive to healthy growth of the world economy nor in their own long-term interests. No lasting solution to the malaise afflicting the world economy can be found until a concerted effort is made to provide adequate purchasing power to two-thirds of the world population. It is therefore incumbent upon the developed countries to adopt a global, comprehensive and long-term approach to deal with their present economic problems.
43.	This Assembly's call for the ushering in of a new era of international economic relations has given rise to worldwide expectations. We therefore cannot afford the present stalemate in the negotiations between the developed and the developing countries. We must exercise our collective will to continue the onward march towards our common goal. It is necessary: first, to conclude, well before the fifth session of UNCTAD, the ongoing negotiations to establish the common fund, adopting a code of conduct for the transfer of technology to developing countries for the extending of special preferential trade concessions to developing countries within the framework of the multilateral trade negotiations; secondly, to arrest the present protectionist trend by strictly adhering to the commitment not to raise fresh barriers, to dismantle existing protectionist barriers and to take positive steps to improve the access of the exports of developing countries to the markets of the developed countries; thirdly, to commence negotiations within a time-bound framework on other key issues having a vital bearing on the restructuring of the international economic system, such as concluding a comprehensive series of commodity agreements, ensuring an adequate flow of financial resources on a dependable basis and on the softest of terms and conditions, evolving a multilateral framework for debt renegotiation, reforming the international monetary system, formulating a code of conduct for transnational corporations, and so on; fourthly, to initiate negotiations with a view to adopting an international programme to set in motion an adjustment process in the world economy and to bring about structural changes in the economies of the developed countries geared to utilizing fully the development potentialities of the developing countries; fifthly, to formulate a new international development strategy conceived within the framework of the New International Economic Order embodying a set of consistent and interrelated goals and objectives and commitments to adopt time-bound means of attaining these objectives; and, sixthly, and finally, for the developing countries to go ail out to utilize the vast potentialities of mutual co-operation by strengthening existing links and forging new links of economic, commercial and technical collaboration.
44.	The negotiations which have been going on for about five years at the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea have far-reaching implications for the efforts of the international community to evolve a new world order. While it has been possible to make headway on certain important issues, the main problem, that of establishing a regime for the exploitation of the resources of the sea-bed area lying outside the limits of national jurisdiction, remains unsettled. This is mainly due to the persistent hesitation of the major developed countries to recognize fully the legitimate interests of the developing countries in this common heritage of mankind. It is incumbent on all of us to ensure that the work of the Conference comes to a successful conclusion as expeditiously as possible. If, at this critical stage of the work of the Conference, any State adopts unilateral mining legislation, it will seriously affect the future negotiations to the detriment of the interests of the world community as a whole.
45.	On all these important issues, the non-aligned nations have always adopted a consistent and principled approach. From a small beginning in 1961, this movement has grown, within the span of two decades, into a mighty force, encompassing almost two-thirds of the countries of the world. The non-aligned movement not only has enabled the newly-independent nation's to consolidate their political freedom but has also given them the strength to resist all forms of foreign domination, overt and covert, obvious or subtle. It has thrown its weight in favour of international peace and justice.
46.	It is indeed heartening to note that some of the big countries that earlier used to frown upon the movement now recognize its role and its validity. The movement has been able to preserve its unity—despite multitudinous diversities of geography, race, language and religion, differing social and political systems and varying stages of economic development-because of its strict adherence to the principles of the equality of nations, large and small, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of others, and non-interference in the internal affairs of others.
47.	As a signatory of the United Nations Charter and as a founder member of the group of non-aligned nations, India has assiduously tried to conduct its international relations in a manner Intended to promote peace, understanding and co-operation throughout the world. India has taken a number of significant initiatives towards stability and peace in the South Asian region. In this we have accorded the highest priority to improving the climate of co-operation with our neighbours. We sincerely hope that our endeavours will ultimately overcome the old suspicions and irritations, thus paving the way to undertaking new ventures of mutual co-operation. With the vast majority of the developing countries we have joined hands in trying to shape a world free of want and injustice.
48.	Our policy is to develop bilateral relations with a11 nations on the basis of the imperative of close economic co-operation and shared ideals. It is our firm belief that the tapestry of world peace can be woven only with the strands of such bilateral relations.
49.	We are in favour of an ever-expanding role for the United Nations and of bringing within its purview all issues of universal concern so that it may be instrumental in the promotion of international peace, justice and co-operation. We reaffirm our commitment to making this body a more effective instrument for bringing about a qualitative change in the world situation. We attach great importance to the role of the United Nations as a forum for formulating, negotiating and supervising the implementation of global development strategies. We may not, in the foreseeable future, be able to establish a world government; but we can at least move towards the realization of the goal of one world by devising and implementing, under the aegis of the United Nations, international development plans and programmes - both overall and for as many sectors of human activity as possible.
50.	We must build, on the foundations of the United Nations, a better world for all of us. Modern science and technology have opened up immense opportunities which can either be used for jeopardizing the very future of our planet or be harnessed to bring about progress and prosperity. Instead of wasting our energy on petty squabbles and frittering away our resources on the piling up of arms, we must employ them for wiping every tear from every eye and eliminating every ache from every heart. I trust that in the critical years ahead of us we shall demonstrate our determination, realism and sagacity to realize the dreams of our saints and savants for universal peace based on freedom and justice. I should like to conclude by reciting a quotation from Thiruvalluvar, one of the most famous ancient poet-saints of South India:
 "Where there is no terrible famine, no cruel pestilence, no foreign enemy to invade and ravage, where peace always reigns, that is the ideal land."
Hail one world!















﻿70.	Mr. President, permit me to join the representatives who have spoken before me in this general debate by offering you the congratulations of the delegation of Israel on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. My delegation is confident that you will guide this session with fairness and wisdom.
71,	It is my pleasure also to congratulate Solomon Islands on its independence and admission to the United Nations.
72	As we reflect upon the work of the United Nations over the past year one undertaking stands out above all others: it is the noble attempt to reach an agreement on disarmament, to divert precious resources to improving the lot of the common man
73	In the Middle East we recently witnessed an unprecedented escalation in the quantity of weapons purchased by the Arab States, amounting to $11 billion in orders since the beginning of 1977. Indeed, over the past five years the arms agreements signed by those States mean that they have outstripped both the countries members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the countries members of the Warsaw Pact Organization in the ratio of their arms build-up.
74.	Israel is prepared to play its part in the reduction of the arms race and it remains ready to enter into agreements on arms limitation with all States in the Middle East. There is no doubt, however, that the appropriate way to bring about an arms reduction in the Middle East is through peace treaties which would include limitations on armaments within their framework Indeed, the mere transformation from a state of war to one of peace will move the States involved to dedicate their resources to economic development rather than military aims.
75.	Terrorist groups continue to threaten the lives of innocent men, women and children in different parts of the world. Once again it must be emphasized that terrorism could be virtually eliminated if certain countries did not continue to provide arms, training and refuge to its practitioners. Yet we are gratified that States which once stood helplessly by have begun to assert themselves.
Mention should be made, for example, of the Federal Republic of Germany's rescue operation in Mogadishu and of the joint statement on international terrorism of the Heads of State 'or Government at the recent Bonn Economic Summit Conference,6 wherein they recognized the need for immediate action to cease all flights to and from a country which refuses to extradite or prosecute hijackers of aircraft. It is only through such concerted and effective action that the world can be freed from organized terrorism.

76.	In the field of human rights no State should ignore a violation of human rights wherever it may occur in the world.
77.	Israel continues to follow closely the situation of Jews in the Soviet Union. We welcome the recent increase in the number of exit visas issued, although a large number of Jews are still denied the elementary human rights to emigrate. In addition, administrative obstacles and arbitrary restrictions still threaten the social and economic livelihood and personal freedom of Jews seeking to emigrate.
78.	We have been particularly concerned by the harsh prison sentences passed this year on Jews whose only crime is their desire to rejoin their families in Israel-Grigorij Goldstein, Iosif Begun, Ida Nudel, Vladimir Slepak, Simon Shnirman and Anatoly Scharansky. Those sentences caused bitter protest and indignation throughout the world. The Soviet Union should release these and other prisoners of conscience and allow those who want to emigrate to Israel and rejoin their families to do so.
79.	We cannot be silent in the face of the increasing incitement of feeling against and defamation of the State of Israel and the Jewish people, their religion, culture and national movement, manifested day after day in the official Soviet media. Those anti-Semitic attacks, unprecedented in their intensity, may have most dangerous consequences. In this regard it must be noted that the Soviet authorities still do not permit Jews to practise their ancient traditions and culture, and in fact take severe measures against Jews who wish to do so. We appeal Jo the Soviet Union to allow Jewish culture to be expressed freely.
80.	We also deeply regret that the Syrian Government continues to violate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other relevant international conventions by refusing to permit its Jewish citizens to leave and be reunited with their relatives residing in other lands.
81.	One of the most important trends in world , politics today remains the determined aspiration of the new and under-developed nations to take their place in the international political and economic arena. Being a developing nation itself, Israel strongly identifies with the aspirations of nations in Africa, Asia and Latin America to transform their political independence into a full and equal economic partnership with the older-established nations of the world.
82 To that end the North-South dialogue, with its guidelines on the transfer of resources, marks an important
beginning, and the Government of Israel appreciates the efforts of the United Nations and its agencies in encouraging this process. My Government particularly welcomes the results of the United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries in Buenos Aires, where Israel proposed a voluntary agreement for the exchange of technical assistance among developing countries. Israel has been co-operating for more than 30 years with other developing nations in fields such as irrigation techniques, seed production, desalination, solar energy and the agricultural development of arid and semi-arid zones. We view the expansion of such co-operative efforts as vital if the serious food shortages that still exist in so much of the world are to be overcome .
83.	A year ago I addressed this Assembly on the prospects of launching a peace process in the Middle East. Today I have the satisfaction of being able to address the General Assembly on the new and positive developments that have taken place recently.
84.	As all members of the Assembly know, a few weeks ago at Camp David two framework agreements8 were signed by President Anwar El-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel and witnessed by President Jimmy Carter of the United States of America. Within a very few days from now negotiations will start between Israel and Egypt for the conclusion of a peace treaty between them.
85.	It is my hope that these negotiations will be successful and that before the year is out we shall witness the beginning of a new era in the Middle East. It is our desire that the peace process should eventually embrace the other States that are our neighbours—Jordan, Lebanon and Syria-so that we may achieve a comprehensive settlement in the area.
86.	The gratitude of my country goes out to President Jimmy Carter, whose devoted efforts have made the Camp David developments possible When this achievement ends with an Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty, President Carter's name will be recorded in history as that of a great peacemaker.
87.	I also wish to express my country's deep appreciation to President Anwar El-Sadat of the Arab Republic of Egypt for his wisdom and faith. His visit to Jerusalem in November 1977 turned a new page. He decided to enter into negotiations with Israel, to recognize Israel and to make peace with Israel. This change in policy ushered in a historic change in the relations between Egypt and Israel. The previous policy based on the "three Nos" of Khartoum 19679—no negotiations, no recognition and no peace with Israel—prevented any progress towards a peace settlement.
88.	Now the road to peace lies open. The warm reception accorded to President El-Sadat by the people and Government of Israel constituted an acknowledgement of this change in the Egyptian policy. A new era of peace, for which Israel has been longing since its establishment, has started. Prime Minister Begin's courage and leadership were a decisive factor. Without his readiness and ability to assume responsibility for very painful decisions, the achievements reached at Camp David would not have been conceivable.
89.	Not only since the founding of the State of Israel but since the very beginning of the Zionist movement our dream has always been of a Middle East in which Jew and Arab would live in harmony and co-operation for the mutual advantage of both peoples.
90.	The Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel is a step in this direction. It provides for a withdrawal of Israeli armed forces and civilian population from Sinai; for the establishment of normal relations between the two countries, including diplomatic, economic and cultural relations, and full recognition; the termination of economic boycotts and of barriers to the free movement of goods and people, and mutual protection of citizens by due process of law. It also stipulates that there shall be free passage of Israeli ships through the Gulf of Suez and the Suez Canal, and that the Straits of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba are international waterways to be open to all nations for navigation and over flight.
91.	In view of the several wars launched by our neighbours, we are conscious of our security needs. Therefore, in addition to the establishment of normal relations between the two States, there will be security arrangements concerning the limitation of armaments and forces in the different areas on the basis of reciprocity.
92.	Moreover, the framework for the conclusion of a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel also provides for the stationing of United Nations forces at Sham el Sheikh to ensure freedom of passage through the Straits of Tiran. Similarly, there is a provision for their being stationed in northern Sinai, thus creating a "buffer zone" between the forces stationed in El-Arish and those in Gaza. These forces will not be removed unless such removal is approved by the Security Council of the United Nations. It should be noted here that in recent years the United Nations forces in the Middle East have played a constructive role with the framework of the various agreed arrangements in the. region.
93.	It has never been the wish of Israel to exercise control over the lives and activities of the Arab inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza.
94.	We want to live as equals with the Arab inhabitants of those areas. We want to live with them, not to replace them; but at the same time we do not regard ourselves as foreigners in those areas. The Israeli settlements in Judaea and Samaria and in the Gaza district are there as of right. It is inconceivable to us that Jews should be prohibited from settling and living in Judaea and Samaria, which are the heart of our homeland.
95.	We maintain our army positions in those areas in order to ensure the security of the population of Israel, the majority of whom live in the Mediterranean coastal area. The Israeli forces are there in order to protect Israel and not in order to interfere in the lives of the Arab inhabitants. Under the agreement for the Framework for Peace in the Middle East, the Israeli military government and its civilian administration will be withdrawn from those areas once a self-governing authority is freely elected by their inhabitants. The Israeli defence forces will be redeployed in those areas and maintained for security purposes. The final status of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza and their relationship with their neighbours will be negotiated during a period of five years following the establishment of the self-governing authority.
96.	One of the subjects that will be discussed between the parties will undoubtedly be the question concerning Jerusalem. For us, the city of Jerusalem is the one and only eternal capital of Israel. We have not, and we shall never have, any other capital city, whether or not others recognize it as such. This eternal city is holy to three religions—Judaism, Christianity and Islam. However, our connexion with it is not just religious, but derives from the totality of Jewish national history. Jerusalem is the heart and soul of the Jewish people. It is now united once again, as it should be, free and open for all to come and go. All religious communities should be in complete control of their own holy places and of their own religious life, and all should enjoy the rights of free worship. The inhabitants of the city should live together in harmony with a representative municipal council supervising all essential functions. We have resolved never again to compromise the unity of Jerusalem, and it is our hope that other peoples will share our position.
97.	It was agreed at Camp David that a peace settlement in the Middle East should be based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) of the United Nations Security Council. Resolution 242(1967) is a carefully worked out set of principles establishing a framework of peace to be negotiated among the contending States. It makes clear mat the final borders must be negotiated bilaterally among the States concerned.
98 Let us hope that all those whose co-operation is essential in obtaining peace in the Middle East will not short-sightedly remain outside the peace process. We have to find agreed and appropriate ways for Jews and Arabs to live together in equality, trust and mutual respect.
















﻿
















25.	
26.	It is my great pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your election as President of this session of the General Assembly and to wish you well in the discharge of your onerous responsibilities.
27.	I also extend a special welcome to the newest Member of this Assembly, Solomon Islands, whose application for membership New Zealand was privileged to sponsor. We are neighbours in the South Pacific, members together of the South Pacific Forum and the Commonwealth. In those settings, and now in this one, New Zealand looks forward to a close, warm and co-operative relationship with Solomon Islands.
28.	New States enter upon their nationhood today at a difficult time. As an international community we face enormous political and economic problems. If the measure of a healthy civilization is its ability to govern itself, to match its demands to its resources, to manage its technology and its institutions in a sane and rational way, then we are heading for trouble. The problems we face as a global community, as a group of "united nations", are both menacing and daunting: issues of peace or war in many parts of the world, the crippling and dangerous arms race, the risk of nuclear catastrophe by deliberate decision or mischance, the widespread denial of human rights, food shortages, energy problems, population pressures, dwindling non-renewable resources and a whole range of economic ills, including high rates of inflation, unemployment and protectionism, low levels of investment and unstable commodity markets.
29.	It is not altogether surprising that, confronted with these awesome and intractable problems, some countries, in effect, opt out. Consciously or not, they decide to hold on to what they have, to settle for the protection and enjoyment of whatever resources they possess without too much regard for the effects of that policy on others. If, by way of regional or other association, this self-interest can be reinforced, then the wider grouping is pursued, with great emphasis on the value of regional co-operation. The motive in fact is national self-interest, and the manifestations of such groupings are high walls and barriers of one kind or another to keep the world at bay.
30.	This is not, in New Zealand's view, the way to deal with the great issues of the day. Self-indulgence and self-interest proved fatal to earlier civilizations; they may well, unchecked, be fatal to ours. The international community, of which the United Nations is the symbol, cannot survive let alone prosper if we, the members of it, withdraw into our shells. The agenda of international problems, however frightening, needs to be addressed by all of us squarely and determine and, mindful of course of our responsibility for the security and welfare of our own people but mindful also of the needs of the global community. We need, in short, fewer barriers between us, better machinery for consultation in the economic, social and political spheres, and above all the political will to engage in the sort of co-operation which allows us at least to make a start towards correcting the gross social and economic injustices that now prevail.
31.	This is not simply an economic issue. If we are to move in a discernible way to cure current ills the issues of national security, of international law, of intergovernmental organization—all the major political issues of the day—are of paramount importance. Solutions to those problems will determine the freedom of States to make the appropriate responses in the economic sphere. Nor is it, as I have pointed out, the concern of just a few States; the problem is an immediate one for all pf us.
32.	The great Powers, however, have a primary role. Their attitudes to each other condition the environment in which we all live and operate. What the great Powers do, and what they do not do, carry consequences for all of us. We welcome therefore those co-operative arrangements that betoken an effort to contain crises, to co-operate in the avoidance of nuclear war, to reach agreement on arms- control measures, to extend relations over a broad range of social and cultural fronts and to reduce the harshness of the rhetoric between them.
33.	It is not, of course, only up to the great Powers. International relations are both intricate and complex and there are opportunities for constructive contributions from the small and middle-sized Powers as well as from the great.
34.	These opportunities would be immeasurably enhanced if the smaller States learned to work together. In New Zealand's part of the world, the south Pacific, we are making an effort to do so and we are attempting to build up a sense of partnership in the region. I have just come to
New York from a meeting earlier this month of the South Pacific Forum-a regular conference of the Heads of Government of all the independent and self-governing States of the south Pacific. Among the major topics discussed at the Forum was the enactment of legislation creating a 200-mile exclusive economic zone by the countries of the region. This offers to many of these smaller island States an opportunity, for the first time, to capitalize on what is in some cases their only substantial resource. These Pacific island States, together with New Zealand and Australia, have decided to move at once to set up a Forum fisheries agency to advise their Governments, many of whose scientific resources are slender, on the conservation, utilization and management of the living resources, including highly migratory species, of their 200-mile economic zones. At the same time, they are continuing to explore the question of what kind of long-term regional fisheries arrangements will serve the Pacific best.
35.	Another major topic discussed at the Forum was economic development and ways of minimizing the twin evils of protectionism and declining terms of trade. We suffer from these in New Zealand and we understand the difficulties facing developing countries and in particular our south Pacific neighbours, most of whom have an even narrower range of export products and less stable markets than we do. To tackle these problems we have together established an industrial development scheme to provide financial backing and incentives for companies to develop manufacturing industries in the islands. In addition, we are currently reviewing the numerous factors affecting entry of island exports to the New Zealand market. Our bilateral aid programme continues to have its primary focus in the south Pacific and this year 60 per cent of New Zealand's bilateral aid will be directed to the region. In the fields of shipping and civil aviation substantial progress has been made. A regional shipping line started operations in May and the number of direct air services between countries of the region is increasing.
36.	These are practical issues-a serious effort on the part of all the regional States to stimulate new thinking and to create greater opportunities for the development of trade and economic advancement in our part of the world. Their purpose, however, goes beyond mere economic considerations. Solutions are vital if democratic processes and political stability are not to be placed in jeopardy.
37.	In New Zealand's view, the same sort of co-operative effort—and for the same reasons—is needed in the global arena. As I see it, the world's economy today is distinguished by two rather paradoxical characteristics-its interdependence and its diversity. We have to grapple with both. Take interdependence. I do not question the argument for individual countries fostering a degree of economic self- sufficiency. There are certain skills and certain industries which every country needs to have even when the cost of establishing those skills is, by international standards, high. I believe, however, that most countries, including my own, have far snore to gain from participating in the international economy than from standing outside it. Decisions made in the world's major trading nations have a critical effect on the economic well-being and on the development patterns of the more peripheral economies. In the reverse aspect, recent years have shown that the world's major trading
countries also depend, to varying degrees, upon economic events in the less economically powerful countries. Raw material supply is an obvious area. Another is the importance of some developing countries as sources of demand and as areas of investment for the products and capital of the richer nations. There is evidence stretching back over a long period of the economic benefits for richer countries of increasing their imports, particularly of labour-intensive goods, from the newly industrializing countries. For these countries political stability is inseparable from economic stability.
38.	If countries are to produce and export those things which their human and material resources and their historic development priorities suggest as logical and economically efficient, they must do so within an international economic environment that allows scope for their diversity. That means an open international trading system. Protectionism must be resisted, especially in the area of agricultural commodity, trade, where there is a dangerous disposition among the richer developed countries to apply more restrictive policies than in the industrial commodity area. I recognize that the principles of an open multilateral trading system raise difficult domestic political problems, but economic development is about change and innovation and we need to look at today's problems with our eyes very firmly fixed on the longer term. These wider principles are very much at stake in the current series of the GATT negotiations. Only to the extent they are recognized, and acted upon, will the Tokyo round of negotiations be judged successful.
39.	The maintenance of an international trading system is not, by itself, enough. An international economy to which all countries and all people are contributing to the maximum extent possible needs to take account of the diversity of the international economy in another sense too. We need to recognize that there are very different kinds of economies. I do not mean that we should endeavour to come up with a new and sophisticated classification; rather that we should recognize, in the interests of the international economy, as well as in the interests of peace and justice, that some countries will need special assistance on a long-term basis, the world's poorest nations will need special aid and trade measures; so might the land-locked countries and the developing island countries. The aid and trade policies of some. countries, including my own, are already taking account of these special requirements, and the more advanced developing countries are following suit. Technical co-operation among developing countries, a concept which the United .Nations had done much to promote, has in this last month been the subject of a world conference in Buenos Aires.  It is a most welcome development and one which exemplifies the sort of practical co-operation I have been advocating.
40.	This sense of community, of co-operative partnership, of working together to discuss and solve problems, not only must underpin our aid and trade initiatives; it must be demonstrated also in our- treatment of political problems if our systems and institutions are not to become irrelevant.
There are few people in the world who do not wish for peace. There are even fewer who believe that peace can be secured other than through the co-operation and partnership l the people concerned themselves. Enforced solutions rarely endure. The only sure foundation for the peaceful settlement of disputes is the will of the parties involved to work for reconciliation and peaceful co-operation.
41.	This is surely the lesson of what is now happening in the Middle East New Zealand has no special knowledge of the Middle East question nor would we presume to offer an answer to the tangled web of issues at stake. But it does seem to us that certain fundamental principles need to be accepted if the will to reconcile and co-operate, which has been demonstrated in a dramatic way by the leaders of Egypt and Israel over the past year, is to be turned into a fair and lasting peace. Above all, we believe that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) contains the essential elements which should form the basis for a negotiated settlement. But just as our support for Israel's right to exist as a sovereign State within secure and recognized boundaries is fundamental to our approach to the dispute, so we are convinced that the rights of the Palestinians, including the right to self-determination and to establish an independent Palestinian State if they so desire, must be recognized. It is clear that a settlement which meets these -two criteria requires that Israel withdraw from areas occupied in 1967, so as to permit the Palestinians full freedom to exercise their right of self-determination. A Middle East settlement would not only confer inestimable benefits on Israel and its Arab neighbours, but would remove a potential and ever-real danger to world peace. We have therefore been tremendously encouraged by the will for peace and reconciliation displayed at the recent Camp David summit meetings. Early progress in pursuit of the agreements reached at Camp David by the leaders of Egypt and Israel, with the active partnership of the United States, must be our common hope in this Assembly.
42.	It is true also that these lessons of co-operation have still to be learned in southern Africa. The history of relationships between black and white in that continent, between those who exercise power and those who, though in an overwhelming majority, have had no say in their destiny, is one - of so many opportunities lost to work together in harmony and co operation. In Namibia recently, it is true, there has been encouraging progress towards independence as a result of the persistent efforts of the five Western members of the Security Council and the front-line African States. It would be tragic if progress were to be held up now by intransigence on the part of any of those involved. It is New Zealand's hope that free elections will be held at the earliest practicable date and that Namibia will soon be able to take its rightful place as a Member of this Organization. New Zealand is anxious to support this process in practical ways. Most recently my Government has contributed substantially to a Commonwealth fund for the education and training of Namibians who will soon be in a position of responsibility in their own country.
43.	In Rhodesia it is clear from the increasing scale of the armed conflict that the "internal settlement" introduced in March of this year  has failed to produce the cease-fire that
the Salisbury regime predicted. On the contrary, there has been an escalation of violence, with innocent people as the not infrequent victims. These senseless and tragic killings must be stopped. The only way is through the speedy conclusion of a negotiated settlement. The best hope is for all the elements in Rhodesia and the Patriotic Front to come together in an all party conference on the basis of the Anglo-American proposals.  This is a course which we urge as the first step towards a cease-fire, the holding of fair and fair elections, and ultimate independence for Zimbabwe and its people.
44.	Other States, and especially the neighbouring African States, can play a constructive part in creating the climate for a settlement through mediation and diplomatic support. Or they can meddle, as some States far from Africa have chosen to do in various parts of the continent, by encouraging divisions and even by direct intervention. That is a prescription for conflict, not for settlement. We trust that the pattern we have already seen in some African countries will not be repeated elsewhere.
45.	Even after peace is established in other parts of southern Africa, the most difficult problem of all will remain in South Africa itself. It is there that a co-operative effort, even a dialogue, is most desperately needed. The institutionalized racism which is apartheid offers no hope of a peaceful future for South Africa. It must be abandoned. Change must come. There is no other way. A policy of apartheid is not only wrong; it is suicidal. It seeks to impose what cannot be imposed, to deprive people of rights and freedoms that cannot be denied. The delusion of those in power in South Africa that they can succeed in their purpose if they are tough enough and determined enough is a delusion common to Governments which refuse to listen to the voices of those they oppress. Sooner or later those voices make themselves heard and the result is both predictable and destructive. There is still time to avoid that result in South Africa, but not much. New Zealand is and always will be utterly opposed to apartheid. We want to see justice and common sense prevail. This is the oily way to prevent conflict.
46.	Our concern for human rights in southern Africa must not blind us to deprivations that occur elsewhere. New Zealand upholds the principles enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, proclaimed 30 years ago by this Genera] Assembly—among those rights: freedom of movement, the right to leave one's country and to return, the right to a nationality, the right of freedom of opinion and expression. We are concerned when these rights are denied, wherever that denial takes place, and it is shameful that, 30 years on, there are countries, including some who were founder nations of this Organization, who still deny their millions of citizens these basic human rights. How can the international community ignore that?
47.	In New Zealand this year the Human Rights Commission Act came into force, establishing a national Commission on Human Rights to deal with complaints of racial, religious or sexual discrimination, in conjunction with the
Race Relations Act of 1971. This new legislation codifies that respect for human rights which has had a central place in our traditions. We have regarded the two International Covenants on Human Rights as legal documents of substantial value and importance, and have not wished to ratify them merely on the basis of our general attachment to the principles they enunciate. We have now completed a comprehensive review of our legislation and are satisfied that our laws are in compliance with the requirements of the two International Covenants. I am pleased to announce therefore that New Zealand will ratify the International . Covenant on Political and Civil Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide during this session of the General Assembly.
48.	I want before I close to turn very briefly to two major issues that have preoccupied the international community, and this Assembly in particular, over the past year—the law of the sea and disarmament.
49.	On 1 April of this year New Zealand brought into force its jurisdiction over a 200-mile exclusive economic zone. Some 330 foreign fishing vessels from three countries are now licensed, pursuant to agreements with New Zealand, to catch fish which is surplus to the capacity of the New Zealand fishing industry. The expansion of the New Zealand industry, upon its own initiative and through joint ventures, represents a significant economic opportunity for us.
50.	I want to emphasize therefore the importance for New Zealand, and for very many of the small and middle sized countries in the Pacific and elsewhere, of a speedy and successful conclusion to th3 Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The adoption of a widely acceptable international convention will give us and many other countries a secure and stable basis upon which to plan and develop the utilization of the resources within the 200-mile zone. It is in no one's interests that the oceans should become a battleground for competing claims and the focus of conflicts over the extraction of resources. Both our national interest and a wider interest in the rule of law and a stable regime for the oceans lead my Government to attach great value to the achievement of a wide-ranging treaty along the lines on which the Conference is now working.
51.	In last May and June this Assembly met in its tenth special session in an attempt to stem the arms race and to begin, in a real sense, the process of disarmament. There will be differing views on the success of that session. New Zealand's view is that we have made a small beginning, that the special session has given a modest impetus to the disarmament cause and that the establishment of machinery for discussion and negotiation marks a step forward. We hope that other steps will soon follow, among them the early conclusion of a treaty putting an end to nuclear- weapon testing in all environments. Time is short, but it should still be possible, in New Zealand's view, to present this treaty to this thirty-third regular session of the General Assembly.
52.	My Government sees disarmament as among the most urgent requirements of our time. Progress has been slow.
We must do better, not by calling for far-reaching measures that have no hope of acceptance, but by working for and participating in a realistic short-term programme of action which will result in agreements that are balanced, practicable and verifiable. Between now and the next special session, New Zealand will support each and every measure of disarmament that meets these criteria.
53.	The world is an increasingly complex place. Within our own societies, and in our international life, there are forces at work that are changing our perceptions, altering our values and demolishing our traditions at a bewildering pace. There are many competing interests to be accommodated, conflicting philosophies and approaches to be reconciled. We can accommodate and reconcile them only by being honest, understanding, straightforward and fair with each other-not only with our friends, for that is relatively easy, but more importantly with those with whom we may disagree. If we can work towards this sense of co-operation and partnership as a world community we can, I believe, if not solve all our problems at least reduce them to a manageable dimension. For its part my Government pledges itself to work with others in this spirit and to this end.
﻿35.	Mr. President, the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics wishes to congratulate you on your election to the post of President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly of the United Nations and to wish you full success in that high office.
36.	It has become customary for representatives of practically all States to expound the views of their Governments concerning the crucial issues of war and peace at regular sessions of the United Nations General Assembly. Indeed, the United Nations, the most representative international forum, is the right place to raise in their full dimensions issues on whose solution largely depends the future of mankind.
37.	The United Nations was established specifically for that purpose. It emerged immediately after the fiery steamroller of the Second World War had driven over Europe and a considerable part of the rest of the world. Today, memories of those days are still fresh in our minds. Words fail to describe fully what that war visited upon mankind.
38.	Both the generation that had to live through the war and the present generation realize that the victory won over the forces of fascism and aggression is of historic world significance. It changed the political image of the planet and brought to an unprecedented pitch the activities of forces working for peace, national liberation and social progress. The sword of justice smote those who had instigated the aggression. Such are the lessons taught by history itself-history, the most authoritative teacher.
39.	Looking back over the path traversed in international affairs over the post-war decades, including the troubled years of the "cold war", peoples, Governments and political figures—unless of course they are laymen in politics—cannot afford to ignore the major imperative of bending every effort to prevent another military catastrophe which would be even more disastrous for mankind than the two world wars taken together.
40.	The fact that it has proved possible to avoid a major war for almost a third of a century is undoubtedly a great achievement of the peoples. They are increasingly showing that they hate war, reject and curse it as a means of resolving international disputes and controversies.
41.	Representatives of the Soviet Union, speaking in various international forums on behalf of our people and of the Communist Party, which is the nucleus of the political system of Soviet society, have always emphasized the theme of peace, and will continue to do so. The fundamental law of the Soviet State, its new Constitution, declares: "The USSR steadfastly pursues the Leninist policy of peace and stands for strengthening the security of nations and broad international co-operation."
42.	We are implementing that policy, hand in hand with our friends and allies. The recent meeting in the Crimea of Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev with the leaders of fraternal parties and States has shown with new strength that the socialist community firmly follows the course of peace, detente and international co-operation.
43.	The fraternal socialist States are justly proud of the fact that through their consistent activities year after year, month after month, almost day after day, they are making no small contribution to preserving peaceful conditions for the life and creative work of peoples on earth.
44.	Yet it would be naive to deny another thing: peace will not become more durable, detente more reliable, unless the efforts of socialist States are reciprocated by other countries. That in turn calls for a willingness, despite differences in social systems, to resolve controversial issues at the negotiating table, without seeking unilateral advantages.
45.	The participants in this General Assembly session will probably agree that we have not gathered here merely to express our satisfaction at the fact that, so far, peace has been preserved. What is much more important is to mobilize additional efforts and find new possibilities of shielding the peoples from aggression and from a world conflict in the future as well.
46.	The will of the Soviet people and the policy of our State was expressed in a penetrating and meaningful manner by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev in these words:
"The major thrust of our struggle for peace in the present conditions is to lessen the risk of another world war, of the mass annihilation of people through the use of nuclear weapons."
47.	It is indeed true that all peoples are inspired by one idea, one aspiration: peace. Yet the situation in different parts of the world is taking shape differently, for the world is full of contradictions and the influence exercised by those forces which are working for stronger international security and the freedom of peoples and that exercised by those who on the contrary are attempting to encroach on them is felt differently in various parts of the world.
48.	The continent of Europe has made the greatest headway towards establishing durable peace. It is in Europe that major moves towards peace on a collective and bilateral basis have been accomplished in recent years. Several hurdles have been surmounted, one after another, in improving relations between countries with opposing social systems. The political climate in Europe today is clearly healthier than before.
49.	The results of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe have been a fresh and considerable impetus. It is no secret that from time to time attempts are made to put the durability of those results to a test. However, detente has been and continues to be the dominant trend in European international life. And surely this is demonstrated by the development of relations between the Soviet Union and other socialist countries on the one hand and France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Finland and the Scandinavian and many other States on the other.
50.	Europe now appears to have reached a stage where the opponents of detente are hard put to it to reverse the course of events. However, this does not mean that (he fruits of improved relations between States will fall by themselves into the hands of the peoples. On the contrary, sustained efforts are required, and. provided States are on the side of detente, they have great opportunities for mutually beneficial co-operation in the most diverse fields. For its part the Soviet Union will spare mi effort to this end.
51.	Close attention is riveted today on the continent of Africa. Africa, with its 400-million population, is seething, Newly-liberated States are in the process of self-assertion, shedding the last shackles of colonialism. Following the adoption by the United Nations in I960 of the historic Declaration oil the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples almost all of them hare gained their national freedom almost all, but not all. The colonial order still persists in Rhodesia, Namibia and the Republic of South Africa, with its barbaric forms of racial discrimination.
52.	How many words and how much paper are wasted in casting aspersions on the policy or the Soviet Union and other socialist countries in connexion with the situation in some parts of Africa. And who is doing all this'? Those who are clinging to the remnants of colonialism and racism. Aware that what they are doing is hardly popular, to say the least, they are attempting to cover up their neo-colonialist moves and to deceive the peoples. Apparently such devices will be resorted to m the future as well. Yet, deceit will get no one very far; the peoples will know how to tell the truth from a lie.
53.	Colonialism and racism must be fully and irrevocably eliminated from the African continent too. Those who want to preserve the racist regimes, which are so odious to the peoples of Africa, must realize that their cause has been lost, and lost irretrievably.
54.	As in the past, we make no secret of the fact that our sympathies are tin the side of the peoples fighting for their national independence and social progress. But we are not seeking any advantages fur ourselves either in Africa or in the developing countries in other continents. The Soviet Union does not covet political domination, concessions or military bases.
55.	When the States of Africa or other parts of the world request aid to repel aggression we repeat, aggression or an armed attack, they have every right to expect support from their friends. Or perhaps the provision of the United
Nations Charter on the "inherent right of individual or collective self-defence" is no longer valid?
56.	The objective, inexorable laws of historical development will prevail. The day is not far off when the hour of independence will strike for the peoples of southern Africa, too. and when the entire African continent to the last inch will become free.
57.	There is an area at the crossroads of three continents which could be described as a "powder keg", as the Balkans once used to be called. That area is the Middle Hast. Hardly anyone would dare to say that the situation in the Middle East is not fraught with the danger of another explosion.
58.	What is the root-cause of such a situation? It lies in the fact that 10 years after the aggression its consequences have still not been eliminated, while the aggression itself goes unpunished. Israel continues to hold sway over territories it has seized. Unfortunately, even in the Arab world there are some politicians who display no concern about Arab lands and who are inclined to neglect the legitimate rights of the Arabs, especially the Palestinian Arabs, and to cringe and surrender to the demands of the aggressor and those who protect him.
5V. The Soviet Union has repeatedly stated its willingness to play a part in ensuring peace in the Middle East and to participate in the most stringent international security guarantees for alt States of that area. Israeli spokesmen contend that they have no use for international guarantees. This is no more than empty polemical bravado. If Israel genuinely cared for its security - real, not illusory, security it would seek a political solution. For the fact is that with existing means of warfare the distance from the borders to which a neighbouring State has withdrawn its guns is of little consequence. What is required here is a radical breakthrough towards a situation in which the guns would be altogether silent.
60.	Only a solution that would guarantee the right to independence and security of all States and peoples in the Middle East, including the Arab people of Palestine, who are fully entitled to a national home, a State of their own, can lay the foundations for a lasting peace in that part of the world.
61.	All the accumulated experience, particularly recent experience, indicates that a radical and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East can be achieved only oil the basis of joint efforts by all the parties directly concerned. Separate deals at the expense of the Arabs have only side-tracked the solution of the problem.
62.	And such, precisely, is the nature of the understandings reached at the recent three-sided meeting at Camp David. If one looks at things realistically, there are no grounds for believing that they, as claimed, bring a Middle East settlement closer. On the contrary, what this is all about is a new anti-Arab step making it more difficult to achieve a just solution of this pressing problem. That is why a campaign of artificial and affected optimism can mislead no one.
63.	There is machinery specifically established to achieve peace in the Middle East, and that is the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. The sooner an end is put to attempts to keep it in a state of paralysis, the nearer will be the moment when the solution of the Middle East problem can be tackled with a chance of success.
64.	For many years, many decades, the peoples of Asia, the most heavily populated continent in the world, have been concerned about how to ensure peace, security and possibilities for development and progress in that area. The key to this, in our view, lies in joint action by all Asian States without exception. This is particularly urgent in the present conditions when developments in Asia are revealing certain disquieting traits. It is not fortuitous that among Asian countries there is a growing realization of the fact that conflicts, crude pressure and interference in internal affairs, which not so long ago went so far as to assume the dimensions of military intervention, and attempts to pit Asian States one against the other should give way to a stable peace.
65.	It is in this perspective that the creation of a unified Viet Nam, which had expelled the aggressors from its territory and is today pursuing a peace-loving policy, is of tremendous importance. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has heroically lived through all the hardships of a long and bitter war, is now courageously defending its sovereignty. From the United Nations rostrum the Soviet Union once again declares its solidarity with Viet Nam and states that the hegemonistic claims with which it is being confronted are totally inadmissible.
66.	The Soviet Union favours good relations with those Asian States which in turn seek mutual understanding and good-neighbourly relations with us. Such are our relationships with most Asian States, and in several cases they go back a good many years. Along with equal and mutually advantageous co-operation based on the principles of mutual respect, strict observance of sovereignty and the principle of non-interference in each other's internal affairs, we are united with those countries by our common concern for strengthening peace and security in Asia, our joint struggle against the designs of the forces of imperialism, colonialism and racism.
67.	One striking example of multifaceted friendly cooperation, of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems, is the relationship between the Soviet Union and India. This relationship, with long-standing traditions of good-neighbourliness, is steadily on the rise, in its development on the firm basis of the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Co-operation.  It is consonant with the vital interests of the peoples of the two countries and constitutes an important and effective factor for peace on the Asian continent and throughout the world.
68.	If we do not have such relationships with all Asian States, the responsibility for that is not ours. It rests squarely on those who persist in following a hostile line with regard to our country, a line which is hostile to the cause of peace in general. Those who, while themselves pursuing hegemonistic aims, try to peg the label of hegemonism on others are making a travesty of the facts.
69.	Of course, it is not immaterial to the interests of peace in the Far East and the Pacific to note what policy is followed by Japan. Unfortunately, its policy has been showing some disquieting trends. One may well wonder whether that country might not eventually step on to the path that has led in the past to enormous sufferings for other peoples and plunged Japan into catastrophe. I should not like to draw any final conclusions; yet serious attention should be paid to all this. We believe that our concern is shared by many.
70.	Our policy with regard to Japan has been and will remain a policy of principle. We stand for good relations with that country, for genuinely good-neighbourly relations. However, appropriate moves by Japan are also required.
71.	Let us now turn to another continent, Latin America. Its role in world affairs is on the rise, and what is particularly noteworthy is that Latin American countries increasingly seek to have an independent voice. Accordingly there are growing opportunities for co-operation between those countries and States in other parts of the world. This is a positive and important factor of international life. The Soviet Union wishes the countries and peoples of Latin America nothing but good.
72.	During the current session of the General Assembly another independent State, Solomon Islands, has become a Member, the one hundred and fiftieth Member, of the United Nations. Oceania is very far from us, but we wish to maintain normal and, where possible, friendly relations with the countries of that area as well. Here, too, we regard with sympathy the aspirations of the peoples to gain independence and to free themselves from foreign tutelage, in both the literal and the figurative meaning of the word.
73.	In this connexion, one cannot ignore the actions of the United States in respect of Micronesia in a bid to lay its hands on a Territory which is temporarily under its trusteeship and to make those islands serve its own military and strategic plans in violation of the United Nations decisions and in circumvention of the Security Council.
74.	What follows from this review of the state of affairs in the world, brief as it is? First of all, despite the contradictory nature of the current world developments, the international situation on the whole is better than, say, 10 or 15 years ago.
75.	At the same time, it is clear that the international situation does not depend solely on the state of affairs in this or that area of the world. There are international problems which it is difficult or even impossible to fit into a geographical framework. The most crucial, most burning and most truly global problem affecting all countries and peoples is the ending of the arms race and disarmament.
76.	The truth which is recognized today by all is that enormous resources are being spent to manufacture engines of destruction. It is indeed a fact that in this time of peace more than 25 million men are in military uniform; and there are many more people who are directly or indirectly engaged in military production. All this represents a colossal drain on the material and intellectual resources of mankind.
77 There are those who may say that something is nevertheless being done to contain the arms race. Recently, for example, a special session of the United Nations General Assembly devoted to disarmament was convened. It reflected the determination of peoples to do away with the arms race and to direct the course of events towards disarmament and eventually general and complete disarmament. The session did adopt a comprehensive Final Document [resolution S-10/2/ which on the whole is a good one.
78.	The Soviet Union can note with satisfaction that many ideas that it proposed became an organic part of the Final Document. Like all those who are not merely paying lip- service to disarmament but are actually seeking disarmament, we believe that the decisions taken at the special session must be translated into the language of practical deeds by States, failing which they will remain empty phrases.
79.	If one is to take a sober view of things, one must recognize, however, that the arms race has not diminished one whit. A group of States and everyone knows which- has decided to earmark huge additional appropriations for an arms build-up over many years to come. The decision taken by the North Atlantic Council session of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Washington and the subsequent steps to intensify military preparations in a number of countries can only be interpreted as a challenge to those who are working for disarmament.
80.	Regardless of all the attempts of the instigators of the arms race to make things look as if the security of States will be all the more reliable the bigger their military arsenals are, the facts are quite different. As the number of weapons grows, as new and ever more destructive types of weapons emerge, the risk of war also increases. People will not accept any excuses such as references to a "threat from the USSR". Such references are completely spurious.
81.	Who but the Soviet Union is making one proposal after another designed to halt the arms race, to check it from this or that angle, and to prevent the development of new means of warfare? And who is rejecting these proposals out of hand0 The opponents of disarmament are doing this.
82.	By now and Western statesmen recognize this-there exists an approximate equality or parity in weapons. The Soviet Union-and we reaffirm this does not intend to change this correlation in its favour. What is more, we have been and are proposing now that the levels of military confrontation be reduced that is, that the security of each and every one be ensured with lesser quantitative and qualitative parameters of armaments and armed forces.
83.	As was clearly emphasized by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, ". .. there is no type of armaments, and above all weapons of mass destruction, that the Soviet Union would not be prepared to see limited and banned reciprocally, in agreement with other States, and then eliminated from the arsenals".
84.	Our country has a comprehensive programme for curtailing the arms race. Our proposals were put forward here in the United Nations only a few months ago. It will be recalled that they will remain the subject of further discussion in various bodies dealing with disarmament. We shall never tire of taking such initiatives, and they will not become tarnished because of this, since the need for specific action in all the sectors of the struggle for disarmament, for the prevention of another war, is increasing rather than diminishing.
85.	In circumstances where the arms race is being stepped up and the world is sliding downhill in this respect, the first thing to do is to stop completely and further quantitative and qualitative build-up of arms. Clearly, this applies above all to States with large military potentials.
86.	It will be recalled that on a practical plane the Soviet Union has urged the discussion of a set of sweeping measures which could be carried out within a. specified limited period; cessation of the production of all types of nuclear weapons; cessation of the production, and prohibition of, all other types of weapons of mass destruction; cessation of the development of new types of conventional armaments of great destructive capability; renunciation by the permanent members of the Security Council, and by countries which have military agreements with them, of the expansion of their armies and the build-up of their conventional armaments. We expect those proposals to be treated seriously and to be examined in practical terms.
87.	The greatest threat to peace-and this is something that is now recognized everywhere-stems from the nuclear- arms race. Consequently, priority should be given to nuclear disarmament. On this matter we see eye to eye with most States of the world, including the developing countries.
88.	Why is it not possible to couch in treaty language an obligation by States to discontinue the production of all types of nuclear weapons so as to move then to a gradual reduction of their stockpiles, and all the way to their complete destruction? But such obligations cannot materialize out of thin air; they are produced in the course of negotiations-and we have been insisting on the necessity for such negotiations.
89.	In the opinion of the Soviet Union, what is required is that all the nuclear Powers as well as a certain number of non-nuclear States get together at a conference table and that an exact date for the beginning of the negotiations be set And this session of the General Assembly should have its say in this regard and make an appropriate appeal to all the nuclear Powers in the first place.
90 Any major task, and particularly that of nuclear disarmament, calls for maximum realism once you have begun to tackle it. In the world of today it is inconceivable that such a task can make any headway unless action is taken at the same time to strengthen political and international legal guarantees for the security of States. In this connexion, the proposal to conclude a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations is becoming ever
more urgent.
91.	While emphasizing as a great achievement of the peoples the fact that peace has been preserved for more than a third of a century now, we should not forget even for an instant how great are the dangers that lie in wait for mankind. Fully to deliver the peoples from the threat of nuclear war: this is what underlies our proposal.
92.	The same purpose is served by concrete initiatives of the Soviet Union, and today we are stressing them again, expecting that they will elicit the understanding and support of the General Assembly.
93.	What is involved here in the first place is the strengthening of security guarantees for non-nuclear States; and secondly, the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territory of States where there are no such weapons at present.
94.	It will be recalled that recently our country has taken a step conducive to instilling among non-nuclear States greater confidence in their security. The Soviet Union has declared that it will never use nuclear weapons against countries which renounce the production and acquisition of nuclear weapons and which do not have them on their territory.
95.	Following our lead, the United States and the United Kingdom, for their part, have made declarations to the effect that they would not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States. On the whole, this could be regarded as a positive fact, were not such declarations replete with all kinds of reservations rendering them valueless.
96.	The Soviet Union has not confined itself to a solemn declaration regarding the non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States which renounce the production and acquisition of nuclear weapons and do not have them on their territory. We have expressed our readiness-and this still stands—to enter into special agreements to that effect with any of those countries. The USSR calls upon all the other nuclear Powers to act in a similar manner and to assume corresponding obligations.
97.	At the same time, it is clear that, if the problem of safeguarding non-nuclear States from the use of nuclear weapons against them is to be tackled in the most effective manner, agreed guarantees on the part of the nuclear Powers and a multilateral arrangement are required. In other words, it is necessary that we have an international agreement based on a pledge by those Powers not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States parties to such an agreement provided the latter do not produce, acquire or have such weapons on their territory. A similar obligation could be extended to armed forces and installations under the jurisdiction and control of non- nuclear States—that is, to make it even more sweeping in scope.
98.	Do non-nuclear States stand to benefit from their participation in an international agreement of this kind? Of course they do. They would be provided with security guarantees universally formalized in international law, whereas they themselves would not be required to do anything but strictly to observe their non-nuclear status. At the same time, this would be to everyone's advantage, for the threat of a nuclear conflict would diminish, and the climate throughout the world would improve.
99.	Taking all this into consideration and in response to a relevant appeal of the United Nations General Assembly at its tenth special session, on disarmament, the Soviet Union has proposed the inclusion in the agenda for this session, as an important and urgent matter, of an item entitled "Conclusion of an international convention on the strengthening of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States" [A/33I241 J. Seeking to put things on a practical footing from the outset, we have also submitted the draft text of such a convention [ibid.].
100.	We feel that one of the merits of our initiative is that, given the goodwill of States, and of course of the nuclear States above all, it may yield practical results fairly soon. Following discussion on this question at the current session of the General Assembly, the Committee on Disarmament could immediately proceed to negotiate the text of the convention so that it would as soon as possible be open to signature by all States of the world.
101.	I should like to turn now to our second proposal, concerning the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there are no such weapons at present. It can hardly be disputed that this is a reliable way to prevent nuclear weapons from spreading all over the globe.
102.	Here, too, we take into account the point of view expressed by a large group of States. Many countries are becoming increasingly aware of the risks stemming from nuclear weapons and they are not at all eager to have them on their territories.
103.	In our view, this could be achieved through an international agreement to be based on a clear and simple pledge by the nuclear Powers not to station nuclear weapons on territories where there are no such weapons at present. Such an obligation would cover all types of nuclear weapons—warheads, bombs, shells, mines and so on— whether deployed as combat systems or kept in depots and storage facilities. At the same time, non-nuclear countries would formalize their intention to refrain from any steps which directly or indirectly could lead to the presence of nuclear weapons on their territories.
104.	If all the nuclear Powers were to agree not to station nuclear weapons where there are no such weapons at present—and our country has already declared its willingness to do so—it would not be too difficult to reach international agreement. The Soviet Union would like to hope that the United Nations General Assembly will respond favourably to its proposal.
105.	The implementation of the initiatives which we are putting forth at this session would also result in a much stronger regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons without affecting in any way the possibilities of using nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. By the same token, our proposals, which are consonant with the idea of creating nuclear-free zones, provide even greater leeway for putting these ideas into practice through the collective or individual efforts of States.
106.	The need to prevent the development of new types and new systems of weapons of mass destruction is being increasingly felt. Upon our initiative, the Committee on Disarmament has started negotiations to that effect; but these negotiations are proceeding very slowly. The Soviet Union is in favour of the reaching of agreement on this extremely important matter and of the stepping up of the preparation of special agreements on individual types of weapons wherever necessary.
107.	This applies first and foremost to such inhuman weapons as the neutron weapon. The situation would become much more dangerous if the plans for its production, stockpiling and deployment materialized. It is in the interests of peace that those plans be irrevocably abandoned.
108.	Rapid progress in military science and technology- this frenzy of armament, so to say is increasing the risk that a point could be reached beyond which it would become absolutely impossible to verify compliance with the existing arms limitation agreements or those in the process of preparation.
109.	Wherever disarmament negotiations are taking place and whoever the participants arc, our line is directed towards achieving concrete results. An early conclusion of the Soviet-American talks on limiting strategic offensive arms is of particular importance. The essence of the problem lies in setting limits for the deployment of the most dangerous and destructive types of armaments, to be followed by negotiations with a view to a substantial decrease in their levels.
110.	It is to be hoped that a sober-minded and well- considered line in United States policy with regard to this extremely important matter will prevail, because a new agreement is needed equally by the Soviet Union, the United States and the world at large.
111.	Many countries on various continents welcomed the beginning of negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States on certain questions related to the problem of disarmament and the cessation of the arms race, including the talks on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in the Indian Ocean and on the limitation of the sales of conventional weapons.
112.	Positive results could have been achieved long ago at the talks concerning the Indian Ocean. However, ever since last February they have been "frozen" -through no fault of ours. This is giving concern to many States which cherished hopes that the talks would help turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace.
113.	What is required, in the first place, to limit the sales of conventional armaments and their transfer to other countries'' The political basis for solving this question is to be found in criteria of international law which would take care both of the task of limiting arms sales and of the legitimate interests of peoples fighting against aggression, for their freedom and independence.
114.	Of late, some progress has been achieved at the negotiations between the USSR, the United States of
America and the United Kingdom on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. It has been agreed that the treaty under preparation must impose a ban on any test explosions of nuclear weapons in any environment. It is all the more important to bring these negotiations to a successful conclusion. But for some reason or other our negotiating partners are stalling,
115.	It is in all earnestness that the Soviet Union has been raising the question of limiting conventional armaments and armed forces. Even today the role of conventional armaments is quite important, while the efforts by States to limit them are insufficient.
116.	No real headway has yet been made at the Vienna talks on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. Throughout the talks we have witnessed one and the same line pursued by our Western partners: "You socialist countries", they say, "should reduce more and we less". Of course there is no proof—there could not possibly be any proof-that such a unilateral approach is justified. This is nothing but an artificial piling up of obstacles.
117.	Our position is simple: without effecting any changes in the correlation of armaments and armed forces, their level should none the less be reduced by both sides. Some people who want to inflict damage on the socialist countries by changing the ratio of forces in favour of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ought to curb their appetites.
118.	The socialist countries have recently put forward in Vienna new proposals whose constructive nature is recognized even in the West. We are expecting a practical and positive response to them.
119.	In connexion with the problem of disarmament, it is appropriate to stress how acute are the problems of economic development of many countries which are asking for assistance. They are compelled to overcome great difficulties. Suffice it to say that according to United Nations data 1.5 billion people, that is to say over one third of mankind, are deprived of elementary medical attention, while some 700 million people suffer from systematic malnutrition. At the same time, enormous amounts of money, unprecedented in history, are being wasted on war preparations. And, what is more, military appropriations continue to swell.
120.	The Soviet Union has for a long time been proposing that military budgets, primarily those of the States which are permanent members of the Security Council, be reduced by a certain percentage, and that part of the funds thus saved be used to provide assistance to developing countries. This would be a major step of tremendous importance. Yet, what are we told in reply is that before cutting down military budgets they should be made the subject of study. But such a study could last for decades, and go on and on. To reduce means to reduce military budgets without any red tape-even under a pseudo- scientific cover. This calls for a political decision.
121.	In order to overcome the stalemate, we propose that an agreement be reached on the reduction by States having 
a large economic and military potential of their military budgets, not in terms of percentage points but in absolute figures of analogous magnitude. Such reduction could begin as early as in the coming fiscal year and cover a period of three years, with 10 per cent of the funds released as a result of reductions being channelled towards increasing aid to developing countries.
122.	It must be emphatically stressed that the reduction of military budgets is being given priority not only as an urgent task but also as one which can fairly easily lend itself to solution—provided, of course, there is a desire to solve it.
123.	The peoples of the whole world would heave a sigh of relief if the burden of taxation were reduced. Today, many are reflecting upon the causes for which some States - and not least the economically developed ones-are experiencing economic upheavals. Our answer is as follows: instead of throwing away immense material values on the conveyers which are continuously producing missiles, tanks, planes, guns and other means of killing people, these resources should be diverted to peaceful purposes. The resources thus released could be used to improve the living standards of the peoples of the world, to satisfy their primary needs such as housing, better medical care, education and science, and finally simply to combat famine.
124.	All this emphasizes the great responsibility for solving the problems that face mankind in the field of disarmament, a responsibility which rests primarily with those who determine the policies of States and their line in international affairs.
125.	So, from whatever angle one views the problem of ending the arms race and of disarmament, the Soviet Union is ready to seek appropriate international arrangements. We have submitted concrete proposals to that effect. Naturally, we shall be willing to consider the proposals of other States, too, aimed at achieving this historic task.
126.	The Soviet Union appreciates the efforts by non- aligned States to help get the disarmament problem off the ground. The activity of the non-aligned countries in this direction, just as in other areas of the struggle for peace, is growing, and that is a positive phenomenon in international life.
127.	The General Assembly can do a good service to peace if it facilitates the convening of a world disarmament conference. It is at such a forum that decisions binding on States could be adopted.
128.	It is all to the good that the United Nations is now more actively involved with questions of disarmament. This helps to put the relevant talks more in the limelight of public opinion. Let those who are spurring on the arms race, contrary to the will of the peoples, feel ill at ease. Everywhere in the world a moral atmosphere should be created which would make the opponents of disarmament feel pilloried.
129.	There is no people that does not crave peace. As to the Soviet people, we can say with full responsibility that it does not seek war, nor will it start one. This applies fully to our friends and allies as well. But outside the socialist community, too, there is no people that does not want peace. We are convinced of that. In States that pursue a militarist course the watershed lies not between the peoples themselves, but when the peoples, on the one hand, and the leaders at the helm of policy-making in these States, who have sold their heart and soul to the interests of small groups which are deriving profits from military production.
130.	States are faced with a great many international problems, whose number and complexity are unlikely to diminish with time.. But what are the conditions and what is the atmosphere in which it is easier to solve those problems'? Clearly, it is easier in the atmosphere of detente in the world, not in conditions of an aggravated situation, in a heated atmosphere. This is proved by the experience of many years.
131.	The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, no matter what contrived pretext is used to violate it, has been and remains a corner-stone of international life, of the further progress of detente. Every people that respects itself and every State with self-esteem has given and will always give decisive rebuffs to such attempts. The Soviet Union has not tolerated and never will tolerate interference in its internal affairs.
132.	The course of Soviet foreign policy for peace, detente and disarmament is a firm course. It stems from the fundamental requirements of the social system of our State, expresses the will of the entire Soviet people, and translates into reality the directives and principles adopted by congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
133.	Despite the complexity of the international situation, the Soviet people are looking to the future with optimism. Our confidence rests on the fact that the will of the peoples for peace is indomitable, that the forces favouring the maintenance and consolidation of peace prevail over those who would like to turn the course of world events in the opposite direction.
134.	Assessing world developments in this manner, we ourselves are ready to work without respite, and we call upon all other States to be ready to do the same, notably within the walls of the United Nations, to bring all peoples closer to a reliable peace and to make impregnable and invincible the buttress built against war.















﻿103.	Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to this important office.
104.	We all learned this morning with shock and sadness of the sudden death of Pope John Paul I. His passing deprives the world of a wise and compassionate leader whose brief ministry had already given promise of greatness.
106.	A generation ago the United Nations was created by men and women who shared a vision. They saw the need in the wake of war to create stronger international institutions that could dampen the flames of conflict and life nations and people to a new level of material well-being; they saw the need to afford self-determination to millions; and they saw the need for the world community to take a compelling stand against repression, discrimination and the denial of the rights of man.
107. The men and women who gathered in San Francisco in 1945 raised their sights above the differences and divisions of the moment. They dared to see the world as it could be—a world where- those who are hungry are fed; where those who are poor have escaped the degradation of poverty; where diplomacy among nations is a pervasive substitute for violence among nations; and where the resources of the world are used effectively and shared equitably.
108.	In the years since, the record of the United Nations in working towards that vision has been one of accomplishment. It has played an indispensable part in the process of peaceful decolonization, in defusing tensions among nations through its peace-keeping missions, and in promoting , genuine economic and social progress.
109.	Today the Members of this body still share that common vision. And we understand far better than ever before our common destiny: that no nation acting alone can assure for its people peace and economic security; that the future of each of our nations depends upon the future of all of our nations.
110.	Our challenge today is to summon the political, will to act in concert towards the goals we share, to go beyond the rhetoric of interdependence and to begin to recognize its inescapable implications for the national interests of each of us.
111.	We must build a new consensus on this proposition: that in this new era each nation must weigh more carefully than ever before its long-term interest in a healthy global community when making decisions about its immediate concerns. For only through co-operation and compromise in the short run can we assure our longer-term future.
112.	On crucial issues, the coming months will present turning-points of incalculable importance. In negotiations on the Middle East, on southern Africa, on trade, on arms control and on many other pressing problems, genuine progress has been made. Without continued progress, the gains we have already made can be lost.
113.	This point applies not to any single nation nor any group of nations but to every nation, including my own.
114.	The resolution of dangerous regional disputes and progress in limiting weaponry must always be at the top of the immediate international agenda. I shall return to these issues later. But we cannot so concentrate our energies on the political diplomacy of international peace, essential as it is, that we discover too late that international inequities and poverty and injustice within nations make peace among nations impossible.
115.	So let me concentrate my comments today on those issues that so centrally touch people's lives around the globe-economic security, the equitable development of the earth's resources and individual freedom.
116.	Shared economic progress requires a global consensus on the benefits of co-operation among nations. Cooperation and compromise are often difficult. The economic problems we share require long-term efforts, but we are all constrained by domestic concerns which call for immediate attention; the problems we share are so widespread in their impact that solutions cannot be found by a single nation or group of nations; and these problems require more than general agreements. The application of substantial technical and financial resources is necessary. Debate over sterile texts will neither feed the hungry nor create new jobs for the unemployed. Only common action can be effective. And each must contribute if all are to benefit.
117.	Only three or four years ago there was extraordinary tension between North and South. Each side was deeply suspicious of the other's motives. Each held sharply different perceptions of global needs and priorities. But these differences have been narrowed. From the seventh special session of the General Assembly through the fourth session of UNCTAD, the Conference on International Economic Co-operation and the meetings of this Assembly, and through other serious efforts in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development and the economic summits, agreement has been achieved on several basic issues relating to a new international economic order.
118.	We are agreed on the need to work towards the elimination of poverty in all countries. Concessional aid flows have been increased. More attention is being devoted to food production. Satisfying basic economic needs is becoming a greater priority of the international community.
119.	We are agreed on the urgent need to accelerate equitable non-inflationary growth. The round of multilateral trade negotiations within the framework of GATT now proceeding at Geneva are in their final stages. We are discussing guidelines for international investment. Private capital flows are increasing. The facilities of IMF have been expanded, and discussions are under way to expand the facilities of the multilateral development banks.
120.	We are agreed on the need to reduce economic instability and uncertainty. The IMF is playing a major role in providing balance-of-payments financing to those most severely affected by recent disruptions in the world economy. We are engaged in serious discussions on a variety of commodity arrangements, including a system of internationally co-ordinated national grain reserves.
121.	And we are agreed on the need to facilitate smooth adjustment for workers and businesses that have borne the brunt of changing economic circumstances. The Bonn Economic Summit Conference this year made clear that we must intensify our efforts in this area.
122.	Because we have come far, the road ahead will be even more challenging, for the most difficult issues remain. To maintain our progress, we should be guided by three fundamental principles in the North-South discussions over the coming months. First, every nation must resist the temptation to solve its own economic problems at the expense of others. We must fashion our domestic policies on the basis of global as well as national needs. Secondly, all nations which bear their fair share of responsibility should benefit from a healthy world economy. And, thirdly, all nations must enter international economic negotiations in a spirit of accommodation.
123.	These principles will not by themselves solve the problems we face. But without their general acceptance, there can be no genuine progress. Adherence to them will prevent critical negotiations from turning into polarizing and self-defeating tests of will.
124.	Let me discuss several major issues where the application of these principles can make the difference between success and failure.
125.	First I shall speak of the "Committee of the Whole" that is, the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174. One of our most recent collective efforts to address the economic challenges we share was the establishment of that Committee. The Committee has the potential to look at economic issues comprehensively and to identify longer-term priorities. The United States strongly supports that forum. At its meeting in May it made progress in identifying some important areas of agreement between the industrial and the developing countries. Substantive discussions in the Committee had an important impact on the Ministerial Meeting of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, held on 14 and 15 June, and on the Bonn Economic Summit Conference. We of course shared the disappointment of other representatives that a procedural impasse earlier this month interrupted the Committee's work.
126.	Since the September meeting, we have carefully examined the statements made by others on this issue. We have noted in particular statements made by the Chairman to the Committee on 8 September and to the press on 11 September, and have taken into account subsequent consultations. It is now generally agreed that the Committee would not seek to provide specific solutions to problems outstanding in other bodies. Rather, it would achieve agreed conclusions on fundamental or crucial underlying issues, and only to the extent that all members agreed to decide on them.
127.	We are satisfied that on the basis of these statements sufficient procedural agreement now exists to resume substantive work in the manner suggested by the Chairman at the end of the informal consultations on 6 September [see A[33/34, part two, annex A].
128.	I turn now to the question of trade. The spirit which must guide our work in the Committee Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174 applies as well to our policies on trade. The developing world is no longer on the periphery of world trade. Increasingly, growth in the developing countries is important to the health of the industrial countries.
129.	Commitment to open trade, however, is extremely fragile. It is tempting for one nation to use trade restrictions to export its economic difficulties. It is often easy to avoid adjustments which are beneficial in the long run, but which in the short run present difficult problems for workers and for industry.
130.	We must be concerned about rising protectionist pressures, but we should also recognize that world trade has expanded remarkably well in recent; years. Despite a deep recession in the early 1970s, we not only avoided the trading wars of the 1930s, but we continued negotiations to liberalize and to improve the world trading system. Our ability to conclude these trade negotiations successfully this year is a critical test of our commitment to an open trading system. An agreement will stimulate production, it will provide jobs, and it will help reduce inflation.
131.	Beyond our efforts to expand trade, the United States will fulfil our commitment to assist developing nations through differential measures, including, where appropriate, special and more favourable treatment. We, in turn, expect those developing countries which can do so to contribute to trade liberalization by improving access to their markets. Improved access will not only benefit the industrial countries; it will be even more important to many developing countries.
132.	Finally, we believe that in trade, as elsewhere, the developing countries should have a voice in determining the policies which affect them. We have encouraged their full involvement in the Geneva multilateral trade negotiations. We urge developing countries, especially those which play a large role in international trade, to participate actively in
GATT and in the agreements that result from the Geneva negotiations so that their interests are fully represented.
133.	I turn now to the question of commodities. An essential element of trade for most developing nations is their export of basic commodities. At the fourth session of UNCTAD we agreed to intensify our collective effort to address commodity problems. Progress has not always been as fast as we all would like, but this has generally reflected the technical complexity of commodity issues rather than the lack of political will or good faith. We will continue to work for stabilization agreements and other measures that strengthen commodity markets.
134.	Let me affirm that we believe a soundly designed common fund could play a useful role in alleviating commodity problems. A well-structured fund will provide economic benefits to participating countries. We also recognize that the establishment of a fund is of major political importance to the general North-South dialogue.
135.	We will co-operate with others to bring the common fund negotiations to a successful conclusion. Recent consultations have identified a convergence of views on some issues. All agree that a fund could play a useful role in reducing the over-all financial costs of supporting buffer stocks, which effectively stabilize prices.
136.	In addition, there is a growing recognition of the importance of encouraging improved productivity and more effective marketing of many commodities. A separate "second window" of the common fund, based on voluntary contributions and operating under agreed guidelines, might be an appropriate mechanism. We are-prepared to negotiate flexibly on this issue, as on others, if there is a similar approach on all sides.
137.	While progress has been made on some issues, important differences still remain. Movement on all sides of the conference table will be necessary. But we are convinced that with mutual accommodation a workable agreement can be achieved.
138.	As with trade, increased resource flows to the developing world must be part of an international system of shared responsibility.
139.	We ought not to think of resource transfers as a sacrifice for donors or a unilateral benefit for recipients They are an economic investment in the future of all countries. They will contribute to global economic growth, greater trade and enhanced prosperity for us all.
140.	My country is committed to increasing our contributions to both multilateral and bilateral development efforts. We have" done so in the past year: our multilateral commitments increased by 31 per cent and our bilateral programme expanded by 20 per cent. And, because we are determined that United States aid funds will be used effectively, we will concentrate our efforts in countries where programmes are aimed most directly at meeting the essential needs of their people.
141.	The United States believes strongly that a key objective of foreign assistance should be to help meet basic human needs. We recognize that nations will have different development priorities in approaching this goal. Whether emphasis is on enhancing the productivity of the poor, increasing food production, improving health or expanding industry which creates jobs, the critical ingredient in every nation is to have all its citizens—men and women—as active participants in and beneficiaries of their nation's growth.
142.	Finally, we recognize the debt problems that many of the least developed countries face. We will soon have authority from our Congress for retroactive adjustment of certain aid terms which would permit us to help those most in need.
143.	As we work together to promote economic development, we must also ensure an equitable sharing of the world's resources. Four issues demand our immediate attention. Our first urgent priority is ensuring adequate food and stable agricultural prices for all people. Four years have now passed since the World Food Conference, where we agreed on measures we must take for the future.5 But despite our efforts the fundamental problems remain: food production is hardly keeping pace with the growth in population; food deficits in many countries are increasing; and negotiations on grain reserves have dragged on without success. We believe progress must be made.
144.	The United States has created a 9-million-ton farmer-held grain reserve. We have proposed to our Congress the establishment of an international emergency wheat reserve of 6 million tons to provide food for emergency needs in developing countries. We intend to maintain our food aid level at a fair share of the target set at the World Food Conference.
145.	We will continue to support the activities of international organizations devoted to food production such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development. And we intend to make food aid a more effective tool in support of development.
146.	I propose that this Assembly review the world food situation to identify the current obstacles to progress and to restore a sense of urgency in meeting mankind's most basic need. We must not be lulled by good weather and plentiful harvests. Another tragedy is inevitable unless we act now.
147.	Secondly, we must act now to develop new energy resources so that we may avoid a harsh transition to the time when fossil fuels will no longer be plentiful. This task has several dimensions.
148.	There must be an expansion of oil and gas production, and we need to improve our conservation of these energy resources, especially in my country, the United States. The World Bank has expanded its lending to help developing countries increase their fossil fuel supplies. We welcome this, and we also encourage the regional development banks to assist.

149.	The development of nuclear energy will also be central to the future of many countries. We hope the' International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation will provide a consensus on nuclear technologies free from the serious risk of nuclear-weapon proliferation. My Government supports the development of safeguardable nuclear power, including assured nuclear fuel supplies. The developing nations should, of course, participate in the design and management of the institutions which form the basis of an international nuclear energy regime.
150.	Priority attention must be given to the development of renewable energy resources. Many technologies already exist for harnessing solar, wind and geothermal power. All of us can benefit from these technologies, but a special effort should be made to meet the needs of the poorer countries.
151.	Two opportunities now exist for the United Nations to continue to play an important role. The United States supports the proposed United Nations conference on new and renewable sources of energy.  Such a conference could result in a more co-ordinated United Nations energy effort and clearer priorities. It could also provide up-to-date information on renewable energy technology, and examine the role of the private sector in energy development. UNDP might also expand its efforts to help nations assess their own renewable energy possibilities, finance the testing of new technologies and provide training and technical assistance for effective energy management.
152.	The United States is willing to contribute to a major global effort to develop new energy resources. We will intensify our assistance programmes in this area. We will increase domestic research, which can benefit all nations. And we will expand co-operative energy programmes from which we, too, stand to benefit.
153.	Thirdly, we must strive to conclude successfully the negotiations on the law of the sea. At stake is whether that vast expanse of the globe will be an arena of conflict or of co-operation. Considerable progress has been made on a number of issues in these negotiations. These achievements have been obscured, however, by continued stalemate over sea-bed mining. The basis for an equitable solution already exists and is widely accepted. It permits all sides to benefit fully from sea-bed mining, with- private firms as well as an international enterprise being allowed to mine on a competitive basis. A mutually acceptable solution is imperative, and it is, we believe, possible. Time is running out for reaching an agreed solution. Without it, sea-bed mining will inevitably take place, but in the absence of an international agreed framework. That would be less satisfactory than a widely supported international regime.
154.	Fourthly, and finally, there is the critical question of how best to harness technology and science for the benefit of mankind. We hope that the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, to be held next year in Vienna, will focus attention on how all countries can contribute their knowledge to global development. It will be particularly important to find ways for developing nations to enhance their capacity to generate, select and apply technology for their own development priorities. We will contribute to the work of the Conference, and we hope to benefit from it.
155.	Furthermore, to help mobilize the technical talents and knowledge of our nation on behalf of the development of others, we intend to establish during the coming year a new foundation for international technical co-operation.
156.	The ultimate purpose of all our policies is the enhancement of human dignity. The rights to food, to shelter, to a decent education, to adequate health—the' rights which lie at the heart of our approach to economic issues—are hollow without political and civil freedoms: freedom from torture and government mistreatment, freedom to worship, to travel and to speak without fear, freedom to participate in the affairs of one's Government. There is no incompatibility among economic, political and civil rights; no choice that must be made among them. They reinforce one another.
157.	We commemorate in this Assembly the thirtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Dag Hammarskjold described the Declaration as a living document. We have a continuing obligation to keep that document alive in our own nations. And as Members of the United Nations we must strengthen the international machinery that serves to promote the full range of human rights, including political and economic rights.
158.	We have made significant progress in the past year. Concern for human rights is more central to international discourse today than ever before. But more needs to be done. This Assembly should review the activities of the various United Nations human rights institutions. We must resolve in this Assembly to make torture alien to the experience of every nation and to conclude an international agreement to outlaw it. We need to ensure that we are doing all we can to end conditions which are tantamount to genocide. And we must ask what more each of us can do to ensure the vitality of the Universal Declaration, to provide amnesty to prisoners of conscience, to ensure due process for all and to advance social justice and equity for our people.
159.	In addition, the plight of one group of individuals, refugees, demands our special compassion. We urge all nations to increase their support for the vital humanitarian work of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
160.	The refugee problem is not confined to any single region. In Africa alone, some 2 million individuals are now outside their native lands. We must do more to offer them sustenance, security and a realistic hope of resettlement or return to their homelands.
161.	In South-East Asia hundreds of new refugees from Indo-China appear daily, some risking their lives to cross borders, others challenging the sea in every form of vessel. We urgently need greater efforts to provide them with sanctuary. We hope that the High Commissioner will consider convening an international conference in the very near future to seek humane solutions to the desperate plight of these refugees.
162.	We propose that consideration also be given at a later date to a general conference on the world-wide refugee problem.
163.	Let me now turn to international peace-keeping. Too often the anguish of the uprooted is grim testimony to our collective failure to achieve international peace. War and strife are the enemies of the fundamental rights I have discussed. Today my Government and many of those assembled here are actively pursuing the path of peace in troubled areas of the world.
164.	The accords achieved at Camp David  offer hope that at long last a turning-point has been reached in the Middle East. The agreements achieved between Egypt and Israel, with active American participation, constitute a framework for a comprehensive peace settlement. Much remains to be done in the ensuing stages of negotiations, but a major step has been taken in resolving the difficult issues that lie at the heart of 30 years of Arab-Israel hostility. As negotiations are pursued on the basis of the Camp David framework a dynamic process will be set in motion that can profoundly change attitudes on the issues that remain to be resolved. That process will significantly advance legitimate Arab objectives while protecting Israel's security. It is our hope that the Members of this body will lend their full support to the task of building a just and lasting peace upon this framework.
165.	In his address before Congress on 18 September  President Carter reviewed the main elements of the Camp David agreements. As the President said, our historic position on settlements in occupied territory has remained constant. As he further said, no peace agreement will be either just or secure if it does not 'resolve the problem of the Palestinians in the broadest sense. We believe that the Palestinian people must be assured that they and their descendants can live with dignity and freedom and have the opportunity for economic fulfilment and political expression. The Camp David accords state that the negotiated solution must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.
166.	The Camp David accords make a solid start towards achieving these goals for the Palestinians in real terms. In the West Bank and Gaza, the framework provides that Israeli occupation shall end and a self-governing authority shall be instituted. This can be achieved within a few months. Thus, for the first time the Palestinians have the prospect of governing themselves within the framework that has been agreed.
167.	The Camp David framework also gives the Palestinians a vital role in shaping their destiny by recognizing them as participants in all aspects of the negotiations that determine their future. The Palestinians will participate in the negotiations to set up their self-governing authority, in those to determine the final status of the West Bank and " Gaza, and in those leading to a Jordan-Israel peace treaty. Finally, the agreement on the final status of the West Bank
and Gaza will be submitted to a vote of representatives of the inhabitants for either ratification or rejection. These steps set in motion a political process of the utmost importance to all Palestinians.
168.	The Camp David accords concentrate on the means by which self-government can be established for the Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza, but there was also clear recognition by all three leaders at Camp David that the problem of the Palestinians living outside these areas must also be addressed. We recognize that this problem has political as well as humanitarian dimensions which must be resolved as an integral part of a durable peace settlement. When the Camp David accords call for the resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects, they acknowledge and embrace that central fact. As the political institutions of self-government take shape, West Bank and Gaza through negotiations among parties, the relationship between those institutions and the Palestinians living outside the area should be defined, including the question of admission of Palestinian refugees to the West Bank and Gaza.
169.	The framework provides for the establishment of a committee to decide on the modalities of admission to the West Bank and Gaza of persons displaced in the 1967 war. For the first time the parties to the conflict, Egypt and Israel, have agreed to work with each other and with other interested parties to establish agreed procedures for a prompt, just and permanent resolution of the refugee problem.
170.	As President Carter stated in his address to Congress, the United States is irrevocably committed to bringing about a satisfactory solution to the problem of the Palestinian refugees. We will play an active role in the resolution of this problem. A solution must reflect the relevant United Nations resolutions relating to the refugees. We urge the international community to support Egypt and Israel in establishing procedures urgently to address this issue in all its aspects. And the international community should contribute to a programme to promote economic development in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as to assist those refugees residing elsewhere.
171. We are determined to achieve a fair and just
settlement of the Middle East question in all its parts, and
we hope the Palestinian people will seize this historic
opportunity. It is our hope that the people of the Middle
East will agree that it is imperative to begin the negotiating
process now and not to stand still until every last issue is
resolved. We urge the other interested parties to join the
negotiations without delay.
172. As the Middle East peace process moves forward, it is
vital to maintain the effectiveness of the United Nations
peace-keeping role there. It is critical that the mandates of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Forces in the Golan
Heights [UNDOF] and Sinai [UNEF] be renewed this fall.
Those Forces have thus far helped all sides avoid renewed
hostilities; they must now remain to help achieve a stable
peace.
173. Let me briefly review several other regional disputes
of major importance. 
174. In Lebanon, the fighting and tragic loss of life
continue. UNIFIL in southern Lebanon has done much to
stabilize the situation in that part of the country, and we
call on all to support this effort to help reassert Lebanese
authority. Elsewhere in Lebanon confrontation and tensions
continue at a high pitch. President Carter made clear
in his address to the joint session of Congress following the
Camp David summit meetings, and again yesterday, his
determination to spare no effort to assist in finding a
solution to the Lebanese tragedy. As the President said
yesterday, it is time for us to take joint action to call a
conference of those who are involved and to try to reach
some solution. It may involve a new charter for Lebanon.
175. In Namibia the world community faces a fundamental
challenge. I will be commenting on this more
fully this afternoon in the Security Council. Let me
simply say now that "the United States is determined to see
Namibia achieve independence in accordance with the
contact group proposal and Security Council resolution
431 (1978). We call upon South Africa to co-operate fully
with the United Nations so that this critical opportunity for
a peaceful settlement will not be lost.
176. In Rhodesia, time may be running out for the
possibilities of diplomacy. But we will continue to work
with the United Kingdom Government, the Governments in
the region and the parties to seek a negotiated solution, We
condemn the murder of innocent civilians as a matter of
both conscience and reason. The prospects for peace in
Rhodesia will diminish if violence increases.
177. On Cyprus, an opportunity now exists to help the
two communities narrow their differences and achieve a
just and lasting solution to this long-standing problem. The
United Nations has done a commendable job of nurturing
an atmosphere which should now make possible productive
intercommunal negotiations. To grasp this opportunity, we
would welcome and. actively support a renewed effort by
Secretary-General Waldheim to help the parties reach
agreement on a sovereign, bicommunal, non-aligned federal
Republic of Cyprus which would meet the concerns of the
people of Cyprus.
178. In this Hemisphere, we must respond to the agony of
those caught up in the violence and bloodshed of
Nicaragua. We and several countries in Latin America have
offered to assist in the mediation of Nicaragua's internal
crisis. It is our hope and expectation that all parties
concerned will accept these offers and 'agree to a fair
mediation process in which all can have confidence. Only a
democratic solution in Nicaragua-not repression or
.violence-can lead to an enduring stability and to true
peace.
179. As we work together to find peaceful resolutions to
the most dangerous regional disputes, we must also seek in
this Assembly to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping
capability.

180. And while this Organization works to limit violence
among nations, we must not lose sight of the havoc
wreaked by those who perpetrate terrorist acts on innocent
persons. No sin(;k' nation, acting alone, can deal adequately
with this serious problem. Collective action is essential.



181.	We are beginning to make some progress. Last year the General Assembly adopted a significant resolution on aircraft hijacking resolution 32/8. The Joint Statement on International Terrorism adopted on 17 July 1978 at the Bonn Economic Summit Conference  produced a much needed agreement on the harbouring of hijackers. We strongly urge all nations to subscribe to this Statement.
182.	The pursuit of peace and security must go beyond resolving conflicts and preventing violence. The security of all is enhanced if nations limit the weapons of war through mutually negotiated arms control agreements.
183.	We are engaged with the Soviet Union and other nations in a broad range of arms control negotiations.
184.	The conclusion of a strategic arms limitation agreement with the Soviet Union is a fundamental goal of the United States. We hope that we may conclude an agreement as a result of the second series of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks before the end of this year.
185.	The United States hopes that early progress can be made in concluding a comprehensive agreement to end the testing of nuclear weapons.
186.	Increased efforts are critically needed to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It is important to prepare fully for the 1980 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; to continue to make progress in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation; and to recognize one of the important achievements of the tenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament: the decision by several nuclear Powers to pledge, under specific circumstances, to refrain from use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States. We suggest that the Security Council take note of these pledges.
187.	The United States will also work to ensure compliance with the call in the Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action of the special session on disarmament [see resolution S-10/2] for restraint in the transfer of conventional arms. We are actively discussing with the Soviet Union how our two nations might encourage restraint in consistency with the legitimate right to self-defence and international obligations. We are encouraged by the new initiatives already being taken to promote restraint on a regional basis in Latin America and we stand ready to support similar efforts by countries in other regions.
188.	In conclusion, let me emphasize that on all the issues I have addressed today what we share is greater than how we differ. We share the same small planet. We share human aspirations—for better lives, for greater opportunity, for freedom and security. And because we share a common destiny, we are compelled to resolve our differences.
189.	If we focus on these common interests, we can begin to find the common ground for global progress. We can, as Jean Monnet said, "put our problems on one side of the table and all of us on the other".
190.	The measure of our progress will not be whether we achieve all our goals in this generation, for that will surely not be possible. It is whether we can now summon the will to move forward together so that our children may benefit from our efforts and our vision.











