195.	Allow me, first of all, to extend my congratulations to you on your election as President of the thirty-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly. I sincerely wish that, under your presidency, the current session may achieve positive results.
196.	Allow me also to express, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, our warm welcome to the delegation of Saint Lucia on its admission to membership in the United Nations, believing that it will play its part in international affairs and in the work of the United Nations.
197.	The current session is the last session of the General Assembly in the 1970s. We are about to enter the 1980s. Looking back on the past and forward into the future, we feel encouraged and are also aware of our grave responsibility.
198.	The past 10 years were no ordinary years. The growth and further strengthening of the third world marked a significant change in the international situation over the period. An additional number of oppressed nations won national independence after waging protracted struggles. The people of the newly emerging States firmly oppose foreign aggression and interference and defend their national independence and state sovereignty. They not only want complete political independence, but are determined to lift themselves from economic dependency and backward-ness. They have worked hard to develop the national economy and build up their countries and have achieved marked successes in this regard. Acting in concert and strengthening their co-operation, they are striving tirelessly for the establishment of a new international economic order. They have waged an extensive struggle for world peace against the ever more intensified arms race between the big Powers and against the imperialist and hegemonist policies of war and aggression and have made important contributions. Strengthening their unity and persevering in struggle, the third-world countries have played an ever greater role in international affairs. They have become a decisive force on the world political scene, and the outlook of the United Nations has undergone a tremendous change. It will be impossible for one or two big Powers to manipulate the destiny of the world as they wish.
199.	Along with the awakening of the people of the third-world countries and the growth of their forces, Western Europe, Japan and other developed countries, faced with the hegemonist threat of aggression and expansion, have heightened their vigilance and strengthened their unity and defence capabilities to safeguard their state sovereignty and security. They, too, are exerting a positive influence in maintaining world peace and security and promoting a favourable development of the international situation.
200.	But we must not lose sight of the disquieting aspect of the developing situation. In the past decade, the ever fiercer rivalry between the two super-Powers has caused continued turbulence in the international situation. Particularly overbearing is the late-coming super-Power, whose inclination to aggression and adventure is visibly growing. Waving the slogans "disarmament" and "detente", it is engaged in frenzied arms expansion unprecedented in scale and speed. It is seeking to achieve an overwhelming superiority in nuclear as well as conventional arms and in every sphere, land, sea and air. Relying on its fast growing military strength, it is pushing a global "offensive strategy". More and more frequently it is using proxies and organizing mercenaries to launch unscrupulous armed invasions and military coups in other countries. With a view to encircling Europe, controlling strategic routes, seizing strategic resources and speeding up its expansion and strategic deployment for global hegemony, it has increasingly directed the spearheads of its aggression to Africa, the Middle East, the Gulf area and South-East Asia. Facts prove that the late-coming super-Power is the main source of threat to world peace and security and is the most dangerous source of a new world war. In the face of this harsh reality, more and more people are talking about "the more turbulent 1980s" and the possibility of a new world war. Such talk is not groundless,
201.	Now, this very super-Power which is pushing its policy of hegemonism everywhere has the effrontery to propose at this rostrum an item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of hegemonism in international relations". Obviously, this is the habitual clumsy tactics of a thief crying, "Stop thief!" and of gaining fame by demagogic means. Its aim is to pursue hegemonism even more unscrupulously under the guise of opposing hegemonism. However, the term "hegemonism" has its precise meaning that brooks no wilful interpretation. In the world today, who is practising hegemonism and who is against it is an objective fact known to everyone. No subtle rhetoric can alter it.
202.	We are optimists with regard to the future of mankind. The 1980s pose a new challenge, but also promise new hopes. We believe that ultimately the people are masters of their own destiny. Historical experience tells us that, while it is necessary to face up to reality, it is more important to change the reality. The harsh facts tell us that hegemonism means aggression and war. Peace is not secured by waiting or begging; it can only be secured through struggle and defended by action. Opposing hegemonism and defending world peace are two sides of the same coin. We believe that the just cause of world peace will continue to be victorious so long as all the peace-loving countries and peoples unite and, through hard struggle and solid work, persevere in opposing hegemonism and frustrating its strategic moves. The future of mankind and the world is bright.
203.	The broadly-based non-aligned movement is an important force in the contemporary international arena. At the Sixth Conference of the Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which concluded not long ago, the divisive and disruptive schemes were frustrated, and the basic principles of the non-aligned movement and the unity of the movement upheld thanks to the joint efforts of the great majority of the member countries and after acute and complex struggles. This is a significant achievement scored by the non-aligned movement along a road beset with difficulties. In recent years, the super-Power that claims to be the "natural ally" of the non-aligned movement has used and collaborated with its agents in an attempt to bring the movement into the orbit of its own global strategy. But their line of action is most unpopular, and their clumsy performance only serves to reveal their true colours more clearly to the non-aligned countries.
204.	China has always highly appreciated the independent, sovereign and non-bloc principles of the non- aligned movement and supported its just position of opposing imperialism, colonialism and foreign domination and hegemonism of all forms. The Chinese Government and people sincerely hope that the non-aligned countries will unite and co-operate and eliminate outside interference so that their movement will play a greater role in the struggle of all nations to safeguard sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and develop national economies and cultures, and in the struggle for the establishment of a new international economic order and for world peace.
205.	Indo-China is now one of the centres of world tension that attracts the close attention of the international community and causes it grave anxiety.
206.	As is well known, the crux of the Indo-Chinese situation lies in the brutal aggression imposed on Kampuchea. Towards the end of last year, Viet Nam brazenly mounted an armed invasion against Democratic Kampuchea, a sovereign State, occupied large tracts of its territory and set up a puppet regime there, plunging Kampuchea into unheard-of calamities. This naked aggression by Viet Nam is not only an act against the Vietnamese people's desire for recuperation, rehabilitation and peaceful construction after the war but also a gross violation of Kampuchea's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and a direct threat to the peace and security of the South-East Asian countries. It tramples underfoot the United Nations Charter and fundamental principles of international law. Earlier this year the United Nations Security Council held urgent meetings to discuss this grave situation." At the meetings, the overwhelming majority of the member States strongly condemned Viet
Nam's act of aggression and demanded an immediate withdrawal of foreign forces from Kampuchea. It was only because of the veto arbitrarily used by one permanent member that the Security Council failed to adopt resolutions and take effective action. Now the best part of the year has passed, but instead of stopping its aggression against Kampuchea, Viet Nam is sending more troops there and stepping up its deployment in preparation for a new massive dry-season offensive to wipe out the patriotic Kampuchean armed forces at one blow and then threaten the whole of South-East Asia, The disaster that today befalls the people of Kampuchea may befall those of other countries tomorrow. How can such practice of power politics be allowed to go unchecked in this contemporary age? We are pleased to note that the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, summing up experience and readjusting its policies, is uniting extensive patriotic forces under the banner of the patriotic and democratic front of great national union and fighting heroically to drive all the Vietnamese aggressors from Kampuchean territory. Historical experience has repeatedly proved and will continue to prove that no foreign aggression and oppression can vanquish a whole nation and that the just cause of a nation against alien domination is invincible,
207.	It should be pointed out here that the so-called Heng Samrin regime is nothing but a puppet propped up by the Vietnamese aggressors at bayonet point. Playing the jackal to the tiger, that regime has helped the Vietnamese aggressors to suppress the Kampuchean people in cold blood. Naturally, such a puppet regime is spurned by the Kampuchean people, opposed by the Governments and peoples of the South-East Asian countries and condemned by world opinion. On the other hand, the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, which has been holding high the banner of national independence and persistently fighting a national war of self-defence, is the sole legal representative of the Kampuchean people. Democratic Kampuchea is a State Member of the United Nations. To support and safeguard the legitimate rights of Democratic Kampuchea fully accords with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. It is the solemn and bounden duty of each of us Member States to uphold the purposes and principles of the United Nations. The recent decision taken by the General Assembly on accepting the credentials of the representatives of Democratic Kampuchea is a manifestation of the just position of the international community against foreign armed aggression and another indication that the aggression committed against Democratic Kampuchea by Viet Nam with the backing of its behind-the- scenes boss is most unpopular.
208.	While carrying on aggression and expansion abroad, Viet Nam has practised a policy of genocide at home and created the world-shocking tragedy of Indo- Chinese refugees. Over the past year or more, as a result of the massive persecution and expulsion by the Vietnamese authorities, nearly a million innocent people were forced to leave their homes and drift from place to place. Countless refugees were drowned in the sea or perished in the wilderness. Their tragic plight and serious case were something rarely seen since the Second World War. Such actions on the part of Viet Nam not only violate the basic humanitarian principle but have created tremendous economic burdens and grave social problems for the South-East Asian region and affected the tranquillity and stability of the countries there. At the international meeting on the question of Indo-Chinese refugees last July, Viet Nam, under the pressure of world opinion, orally undertook to control the exodus of refugees, but in fact continues to persecute and export them. We hold that the key to a solution of the Indo-Chinese refugee problem lies in a complete change by Viet Nam of its reactionary policy of cruel persecution and export of refugees. If the problem is not tackled at its source, this human tragedy will continue.
219. There is a deep-rooted cause for the deterioration of the Indo-Chinese situation to its present state. It is the result of the aggressive and expansionist policies pursued by the big and small hegemonists. As is well now, under President Ho Chi Minh's leadership, the Vietnamese people fought heroically over long years to win national liberation and defend national independence and so won praise and admiration from the people of all countries. But after the passing of President Ho Chi Minh, the Vietnamese authorities betrayed his political line step by step and feverishly pushed a policy of expansion. With Soviet backing, they committed armed invasion and military occupation of weaker neighbours in an attempt to realize their dream of regional hegemony by establishing an "Indo-Chinese Federation" totally under their thumb. Exploiting the Vietnamese authorities' ambition for expansion, the Soviet Union has used Viet Nam and Indo-China as its "strategic base" in South-East Asia and, through the instrumentality of Viet Nam, has sought to control the region and then establish an "Asian collective security system" so as to link up its strategic deployment in the Pacific with that in the Indian Ocean. People have come to realize more and more clearly that Vietnamese invasion and domination of its neighbours are by no means a local issue but an important component of Soviet attempts to establish an "Asian collective security system" in furtherance of its strategy of seeking world hegemony.
220.	It is also well known that in the course of the Vietnamese people's struggle for independence and liberation, the Chinese Government and people, sharing their weal and their woe, firmly stood on their side and gave them all-out support. The two peoples forged a deep revolutionary friendship in their long-term common struggles. But now China is regarded by the Vietnamese authorities as an enemy simply because it does not approve of their present policies of aggression and expansion. They carried out frenzied hostile anti-China activities and even committed incessant armed provocations and made intrusions into China's border areas, so that the Chinese side was compelled to make a counter-attack in self-defence. This just action of ours punctured the aggressive arrogance of the expansionists; it was also in the interest of safeguarding the peace and security of South-East Asia and the whole world.
221.	The three Indo-Chinese States are China's neighbours. The Chinese Government and people have consistently supported the people of these countries in their just struggle to win or safeguard national independence and build up their countries. The Chinese Government and people cannot but feel grave concern over the deterioration of the Indo-Chinese situation. We hold that the United Nations has an unshirkable responsibility to take effective measures, first to make Viet Nam withdraw forthwith all its troops from Kampuchea, stop its aggression and military occupation in Kampuchea and then to solve the other related questions. At the suggestion of the five countries members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, the United Nations General Assembly is going to consider the Kampuchean situation at the current session. We firmly support the just demand of the Association and all other justice-upholding countries for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops from Kampuchean territory, for this is the key to a solution of the Indo- Chinese question. The Indo-Chinese question must be solved by the Indo-Chinese peoples themselves on the basis of respect for their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and free from all foreign interference.
222. The peaceful reunification of Korea has an important bearing on peace in east Asia and the Pacific region. The Chinese Government and people firmly support the Korean people's sacred cause of independent and peaceful reunification of their country and are firmly opposed to acts aiming at creating "two Koreas" and perpetuating the division of Korea. The resolution on promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session should be implemented in earnest. The United States should withdraw all its troops and armaments from, and stop its military aid to, South Korea. The "United Nations Command" must be disbanded. These steps will help to maintain peace on the Korean peninsula and achieve the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. In our view, the proposal of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on holding Korea-United States talks and replacing the armistice by a peace agreement is reasonable and should meet with a positive response. As for the discussion of the reunification of Korea through a North-South dialogue, it is purely the Korean people's own business which brooks no foreign interference. We support the three principles and the five-point programme President Kim II Sung put forward for solving the Korean question, and we support dialogue between the North and South and hope that this dialogue will yield positive results.
223.	The people of the world are now watching the Middle East situation with anxiety. The developments in the Middle East since the thirty-third session of the United Nations General Assembly show that the crux of the Middle East question still lies in the struggle between the super-Powers for oil resources and strategic areas and the expansionist policy of Israel. One super-Power sticks to its position of partiality to Israel. The other has used all opportunities to carry out infiltration and expansion, split Arab unity and undermine the stability and peace of the Middle East. The Israeli authorities remain adamant in obstructing and opposing an over-all settlement of the Middle East question. They have kept making armed attacks on southern Lebanon and have subjected the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to new war threats and provocations. There is a long way to go towards an over-all and just settlement of the Middle East question.
224.	Of late, more and more countries and world opinion have come to agree that, in order to have stability and peace in the Middle East, it is essential to respect the Arab national interests and the Palestinian people's national rights. Such is the truth and the general trend. It should be pointed out that this growing tendency is the result of the just struggle which the Palestinian and other Arab peoples have persistently carried out over long years. The ultimate realization of the national aspiration and objectives of the Arab people mainly depends on the solid unity and sustained struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. However, the United Nations should also play its due role in promoting a settlement of the Middle East question.
225.	Here, we would like to reiterate that the Chinese Government and people will unswervingly support the just struggle of the Arab and Palestinian peoples. We strongly condemn the expansion and rivalry of the super-Powers in the Middle East and are firmly opposed to the sinister super-Power attempt to sow discord among the Arab countries and Israel's peremptory attitude of obstructing an over-all settlement of the Middle East question. Occupied Arab territories must be recovered and the Palestinian people's national rights, including their right to their homeland and to establish their own State, must be realized. We sincerely hope that all parties of the Arab world will show mutual understanding, rebuild their unity and work together to speed up their victory.
226.	The people of the African countries are increasingly demanding a speedy end to the racist rule and apartheid in southern Africa. In the past year, with the support of the people of Africa and the world at large, the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania have made new progress in their struggle for liberation and have dealt increasingly heavy blows to the racist forces of South Africa and Rhodesia. In their last-ditch struggle, these racist forces are intensifying their Fascist military repression at home while launching armed attacks against neighbouring countries. They have kept playing political tricks in an attempt to maintain their racist rule in disguised forms and preserve their vested interests.
227.	In recent years, various proposals and suggestions for a negotiated settlement of the independence of Zimbabwe and Namibia have been put forward internationally. Many African States have made great efforts towards this end, and their efforts have won sympathy and support from the international community. But so far these negotiations have not made substantive progress because of the intransigence of the racist forces. Facts fully show that the racist regime of South Africa and the racist forces of Rhodesia are the fundamental obstacles to a settlement of the questions of Zimbabwe and Namibia, which is long overdue. All countries which uphold justice should exert effective pressure on the racists and give energetic support to the liberation struggle of the people in southern Africa. An early end to the racist rule in Zimbabwe and Namibia and the attainment of independence based on a genuine majority rule will help to stabilize the situation in southern Africa, exclude external meddling and interference and push forward the struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa. The Chinese Government and people will, as always, firmly support the just struggles of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania. The current international situation is very favourable to the liberation struggle in southern Africa Although there may be difficulties and twists and turns on their way to progress, the people in southern Africa persisting in unity and struggle, guarding against external interference and sabotage, and supported by African and all other countries and peoples which uphold justice, will certainly foil the heinous acts of the racist forces of South Africa and Rhodesia and win complete liberation for the whole African continent.
228.	We are pleased to note that, since the tenth special session of the General Assembly, which was held on disarmament last year, the role of the United Nations and of the small and medium-sized countries have been strengthened in the struggle for genuine disarmament. This year, in the United Nations framework, there were held the first session of the Disarmament Commission, the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean and a series of other meetings, at which relevant resolutions were adopted. The convening of these meetings reflected the strong dissatisfaction of the peace-loving countries with the super-Powers' arms expansion and war preparations. It also shows that the control of the disarmament machinery by a few countries is being broken up. This undoubtedly is of positive significance. Chinese delegations took an active part in these meetings and put forward documents, including the Chinese proposal on the elements of a comprehensive disarmament programme.  We have always held that all countries, whether big or small, strong or weak, and whether with or without nuclear weapons, are entitled to take part in the consideration and settlement of disarmament issues on a completely equal footing. It is no longer permissible for anybody to use the United Nations as a platform to sing the praises of certain bilateral negotiations or make the disarmament machinery a ploy at his disposal.
229.	Nuclear disarmament is a matter of great concern to everyone. We have always held that the complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear weapons are the fundamental way to nuclear disarmament and the elimination of the threat of a nuclear war. Pending this, all the nuclear countries should undertake not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries and nuclear-weapon-free zones. As for the way to apply concrete measures of nuclear disarmament, an important principle must be followed, as was rightly pointed out by the representatives of many countries: namely, the two super-Powers with the largest nuclear arsenals should be the first to reduce their nuclear armament.
230.	When substantial progress has been made in this regard, the other nuclear countries shall join them in reducing nuclear armaments according to reasonable ratios until finally nuclear arms are totally destroyed. We consider this principle to be fair and reasonable. However, those who cling to their nuclear superiority and are bent on seeking nuclear over-lordship are obdurately opposed to this principle. They are fervently advocating the idea of all nuclear countries "simultaneously" reducing their armaments by the same quantity and quality. This is obviously a demagogic trick. Now that the super-Powers enjoy a tremendous nuclear superiority and are in a position to fight a nuclear war at 
any time with the huge number of nuclear weapons at their disposal, would any nuclear disarmament plan make our world safer if it does not change this state of affairs? It is obvious that only a genuine nuclear disarmament will contribute to international security, and a genuine nuclear disarmament must begin with the substantial reduction of the nuclear arsenals of the superpowers. The second SALT Treaty signed by the Soviet Union and the United States neither calls for a significant numerical reduction of the strategic arms nor provides for a substantive qualitative limitation. No wonder that people have pointedly commented that the treaty has nothing in common with genuine disarmament. We hope that the Soviet Union and the United States will take practical measures to carry out genuine nuclear disarmament, as called for by many other countries.
231.	The reduction of conventional arms is another matter calling for attention. In view of the growing danger of a massive conventional war, we hold that conventional disarmament and nuclear disarmament should be given equal importance, and that the two should be carried out in conjunction.
232.	This is the last year of the United Nations Dis-armament Decade. Regrettably the objective of the Dis-armament Decade, on which many countries placed their hopes, has not been attained; on the contrary, this past decade has been one of massive arms expansion by the super-Powers. What is the reason? As rightly put by the representatives of some countries, the crucial reason is that the super-Powers have no sincere desire for disarmament. This shows that we still face arduous and complicated tasks in the field of disarmament.
233.	So far as China is concerned, we are always for genuine disarmament. We firmly support all reasonable proposals conducive to genuine disarmament and are prepared to make unremitting efforts for its realization.
234.	The steady deterioration of the international economic situation is one of the important factors making for international turbulence. Some developed countries, especially the super-Powers, have used various means to shift the consequences of their economic crises and difficulties on to the developing countries so that the latter face worsening trading terms, mounting foreign debts and great difficulties in their economic development. The energy problem is an increasing concern of most countries. Many developing countries have pointed out that the root-cause of all evils of the present international economy lies in the existing inequitable and irrational international economic order. Therefore, they strongly demand a fundamental re-structuring of the international economic system. This demand is entirely just, being in the interest of the overwhelming majority of the people of the world.
235.	Five years ago, thanks to the efforts of the developing countries, the sixth special session of the General Assembly adopted the Declaration and Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order which constitutes a basic document guiding economic negotiations and dialogues. Five years have passed, but how much progress has been made in these negotiations and dialogues? Very limited progress. They are mostly at an impasse. The reasons are clear to all. The most important reason is that the two superpowers have set up obstacles of all kinds. The obstacles have multiplied especially since the beginning of this year. At the fifth session of UNCTAD and other international economic forums, many reasonable proposals made by the developing countries on changing the outdated international economic relations have thus been stalled. This unreasonable state of affairs cannot be allowed to continue. The developing countries have come to realize more and more that, in order to achieve progress in the negotiations for the establishment of a new international economic order, they must strengthen their unity, uphold principles, persevere in struggle and energetically promote mutual economic assistance and co-operation. The Arusha Programme for Collective Self-Reliance and Framework for Negotiations,  adopted at the ministerial meeting of the Group of 77 held last February, and the economic documents adopted at the recent Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries provide clear guidelines for promoting the economic co-operation among the developing countries and strengthening their negotiating positions with the developed countries, and they give expression to the common will and desire of the third-world countries. Thanks to the efforts of the developing countries, the recent United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development registered some preliminary results. We believe that the united struggle of the third-world countries will secure continuous progress for the just cause of establishment of a new international economic order.
236.	In order to bring about effective solutions to international economic problems, the recognition of the developing countries' full rights and true equality in decision-making in international economic affairs is essential. The correct way to settle pressing economic problems is for the developed countries and the developing countries to sit together for all-round consultation, break the present impasse, explore and adopt effective measures to narrow down the gap between the rich and poor countries and establish a new international economic relationship that is equitable, rational and based on equality and mutual benefit.
237.	Having realized the importance of a constructive dialogue with the third-world countries, a number of developed countries have in their bilateral or multilateral relations adopted positive measures, such as increasing their economic and scientific technical aid and supporting the establishment of an Integrated Programme for Commodities and its Common Fund. These measures are welcome. It is in the interest of the developed countries themselves to strengthen their cooperation with third-world countries on the basis of respect for independence and sovereignty and genuine equality. Moreover, this will help advance the common cause of world peace and stability. We hope that more developed countries will understand the situation and favourably respond to the demands of the developing countries.
238.	The Chinese Government sincerely hopes that the special session of the General Assembly scheduled to be held in 1980 at the suggestion of developing countries will make an important contribution in helping the economic development of the developing countries, establishing a new international economic order and formulating a new international strategy for development. The Chinese Government will work together with the other developing countries to that end.
239.	This year witnesses the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. These days the Chinese people are warmly celebrating this festival of historic significance.
240.	The birth of New China terminated once and for all the age of imperialist enslavement and oppression of the Chinese people and ushered in a new era in the history of China. By making arduous efforts in the 30 years since then, the Chinese people have achieved great successes in all fields of national construction and aid a good foundation for future development. Our cause has enjoyed the sympathy and support of many friendly countries and the people of the world. On behalf of the Government and people of the People's Republic of China, I would like to take this opportunity to express to them our heartfelt thanks.
241.	China today is vastly different from what it used to be in the old days. However, China is still a developing country, and our industry, agriculture, science and technology are not yet developed. With a view to bringing about a complete change to this state of affairs, we are determined to turn China into a modern socialist country by the end of the century in accordance with the behests of Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou Enlai. As from this year, the focus of our work throughout China has been shifted to socialist modernization. The task before us is beyond doubt an arduous one. But we are confident that, relying on the joint efforts of the entire people, we will be able to fulfil our historical mission successfully.
242.	In international affairs, China has consistently pursued a foreign policy of peace, which is China's fundamental policy in its relations with other countries. The Chinese people are engaged in gigantic socialist construction. China is a country with a large population and a vast territory. To turn China into an advanced, modern and powerful socialist country calls for the hard struggle of several generations. We are thus required to secure a lasting peaceful international environment China has in the past 30 years made unremitting efforts to oppose the imperialist and hegemonist policies of aggression and war and to win or safeguard world peace. In the present turbulent world situation, in which the danger of war continues to grow, China will as always, work together with all other peace-loving countries and peoples of the world to oppose hegemonism and safeguard world peace.
243.	The just struggle of the people of all countries support each other and advance the cause of progress of mankind as a whole. The Chinese Government and people adhere to the principle of internationalism, support all the oppressed nations and peoples in their struggle against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism and for liberation and social progress. We have done so in the past and will continue to do so in the future. We will always stand together with the people of all countries. A modernized China will certainly contribute to the preservation of world peace, to the furtherance of friendship and co-operation among all peoples and to the advancement of the cause of human progress.
244.	The People's Republic of China first sent its delegation to take part in the activities of the United Nations in the early 1970s. In the past eight years the Chinese delegation has worked together with the delegations of other Members to enable the United Nations to play its due role in maintaining world peace, supporting various countries in their endeavour to win or safeguard national independence, State sovereignty and territorial integrity, establishing a new international economic order and promoting international co-operation. With the advent of the 1980s, the Chinese delegation sincerely hopes that the United Nations will give full expression to the common will of the people of all countries, faithfully apply the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and play a more effective and active role in international affairs. China is prepared to work to this end together with the other countries which love peace and uphold justice.
﻿First of all, I should like, on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf, to extend to you, Sir, warmest congratulations on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly. With you as President, this important task falls to an experienced diplomat who, during his many years of service at New York, has rightly won everyone's respect. You can be sure of the full support of my delegation in carrying out the important tasks ahead of you.
76.	I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, whose untiring efforts on behalf of the world Organization we greatly respect.
77.	Crisis of economic growth and development, crisis in the Middle East, in southern Africa and in Indo-China—these are the subjects dominating international politics and especially politics within the United Nations. In his report, Secretary-General Waldheim speaks of "deep-seated feelings of anxiety" 
78.	In such times it is more important than ever to look beyond the day and to reflect on the fundamental current of history. That fundamental current was switched to a new course 200 years ago by the proclamation of civil liberties and by the Industrial Revolution. Up to that time oppression and poverty seemed to be the unalterable lot of the great majority of people. But then there opened up a future which gave all men the hope of one day living free from bondage and free from want. Ever since then the world—despite all crises and setbacks, despite terrible wars and inhuman crimes—has been pursuing that goal.
79.	The trend towards freedom has gathered momentum dramatically in our age: human rights became a universal idea; peoples living under colonial rule asserted their right to self-determination and achieved independence; the process of industrialization extended to the nations of the third world ; and in spite of the population explosion the per capita income of those countries grew 3.4 per cent annually in the 1960s.
80.	But people in many parts of the world are still suffering from hunger; there is still oppression; the problems of economic and social development are still unresolved; and world peace is still not secure. Indeed, today we must face new challenges: growth and development have slowed down, but the armaments spiral is spinning faster; the independence which the third world has only just achieved is threatened by new hegemonic aspirations; and violations of even the most elementary human rights show the great distance that still has to be covered before respect for the dignity of man becomes the day-to-day practice of all nations.
81.	Will mankind continue along the road to peace, to freedom from want and oppression, or will it not? The decision lies in our hands.
82.	The limits to progress that we have come up against are not insurmountable ones dictated by nature. They are social and political limits which we have imposed upon ourselves, because we still try to master the challenges of our time with the attitudes and methods of the past. A fundamental change in our way of thinking is more urgent than ever. This also holds true for international politics. Peace is no longer the exclusive concern of the big Powers, and economic stability is no longer a task for individual States alone.
83.	Safeguarding peace today requires the participation of all countries. The individual country can achieve growth only if the others achieve growth also. This new reality of global interdependence demands of us a different approach, a different kind of action.
84.	The power of fact forces nations onto the road of world-wide co-operation on the basis of equal rights. Multilateral diplomacy and international organizations are moving into the foreground. Their focal-point is the United Nations.
85.	This Organization has played an indispensable role in the peaceful process of decolonization, in defusing conflicts and in accelerating development. It has thrust the issue of mankind's future into our field of vision and opened up avenues for new dimensions in international co-operation. Its task is still to overcome the disparities in the world by means of co-operation and the reconciliation of interests.
86.	Those who want the world to achieve further progress must increase the efficiency of the United Nations. Because of new and wider-ranging activities its methods of work need to be streamlined. The mushrooming of institutions will have to be stopped.
87.	But for the United Nations to be able to fulfil its global responsibilities it will also be necessary to keep the principle of universality intact. The exclusion of Member States would affect the United Nations in its essence and deprive it of its ability to foster world-wide co-operation.
88.	Active and responsible participation in the work of the United Nations is a major element of the foreign policy of the Federal Republic of Germany. We uphold the principles of the Charter; they point the way to a future for mankind free from want and bondage.
89.	Progress requires peace. The policy of my country is a policy for peace, and the basis of that policy is our membership in the European Community and in the North Atlantic Alliance.
90.	The Irish Foreign Minister has set out the foreign policy positions of the nine States members of the European Community 
91.	Essential to the safeguarding of world peace is the consolidation of peace between East and West. East and West have different concepts and values and, consequently, different political objectives. We cannot erase this fundamental difference, but moderation must prevail. We must find ways and means of developing the co-operation necessary in this interdependent world, notwithstanding the contrasting systems.
92.	However, peace cannot be safeguarded unless there is a balance of forces. That balance is the basis of detente. The Federal Republic of Germany has from the very beginning been one of the main contributors to detente. We shall continue to make this contribution, together with our partners in the North Atlantic Alliance and in the European Community. To us, a policy of detente is a long-range policy; it is not just a fair- weather phase. This makes it predictable for all. No one has cause to doubt the unambiguity of our policy.
93.	We are constantly developing our relations with the Soviet Union and the other States signatories of the Warsaw Treaty. We are equally active in the multilateral process of detente in Europe, based on the Final Act of Helsinki.  All signatories of the Final Act should prove the sincerity of their will for detente by consistently honouring the commitments they entered into at Helsinki.
94.	Of special significance for detente is the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, since the border between East and West divides Germany. No nation can have a greater interest in detente than the German nation. Our aim is the continuous development of cooperation with the German Democratic Republic.
95.	We want to increase the possibilities for Germans on both sides to come to one another. Detente must be perceivable and tangible to the people in exercising their rights and in their daily lives. The German nation is divided against its will. But history has not spoken the last word yet. It remains the declared aim of our policy to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people can regain their unity in free self- determination.
96.	The switches for historical development have been thrown: for the realization of the right of self- determination and for peacefully bridging divisions, not deepening and perpetuating them.
97.	The symbol of detente in Europe is the city which in the years of the cold war was so often the scene of perilous tensions which affected the whole world: Berlin. The 1971 Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin has been a decisive feature in reducing those tensions. Its strict observance and full application remain the first essential for the progress of detente.
98.	Detente is indivisible. It must also prove itself in the East's and the West's relations with the nations of the third world. The East-West conflict must be kept out of the third world. The right of the developing countries to determine their future in their own way must be respected.
99.	The Federal Republic of Germany is opposed to any form of hegemony—whether it be military, political, economic or ideological. We do not want to force our form of government or social order on anyone. Rather, we want a world order in which all nations choose their way of life in free self-determination. A policy of partnership based on equal rights is the policy for the future.
100.	The movement of the non-aligned countries is of great importance to them in asserting their independence and their right of self-determination and hence in securing global stability. That movement will, however, be able to fulfil its task only if, rather than looking back, it recognizes the dangers which threaten independence and non-alignment today.
101. In his speech at the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana early this month, President Nyerere of the United Republic of Tanzania said:
' 'The non-aligned movement must remain itself—a group of countries which are proudly independent, which stand for justice and equality between men and between nations, and which refuse to ally themselves with any power bloc or major world Power."
If the movement of non-aligned countries adheres to that principle it will remain a powerful force for peace, stability and progress in the world. Anyone who wants to make that movement the so-called natural ally of the socialist camp is trying to lead it into a new dependence, to paralyse it and ultimately to deprive it of the basis for its actions.
102.	Respect for the right of self-determination of nations also means respect for their cultural identity, respect for the right of every nation to go its own way. We agree with the nations of the third world that do not see modernization as the blind adoption of foreign models but as the expression of their own character in the conditions of our time.
103.	Mankind needs diversity of cultures if its creative energies are not to peter out. We break a lance for the free exchange of ideas and information based on mutual respect and tolerance. We must promote this exchange and at the same time develop the ability of the third world to play an equal part in it.
104.	To be able to safeguard peace one has to settle conflicts by negotiation and the fair reconciliation of interests. I wish to single out the three conflicts which feature prominently in the General Assembly debates: those in the Middle East, southern Africa and IndoChina.
105.	In spite of all the efforts that have been made, peace has still not been achieved in the Middle East. The treaty between Egypt and Israel  has aroused hopes of a comprehensive peace settlement after 30 years of seemingly insurmountable hostility; but we know that there is still a hard road ahead and that many serious obstacles have to be cleared away before Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) can be implemented comprehensively and globally.
106.	The tragic situation in Lebanon also remains a source of great concern. The efforts by the constitutional authorities in Lebanon to preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their country deserve the support of us all.
107.	The Middle East is a region which has always been closely linked with Europe in many fields. Peace in that region is our peace, and vice versa. Together with our partners in the European Community, we have on several occasions, especially in the statement by the European Council on 29 June 1977, set out the principles for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The Irish Foreign Minister explained and reaffirmed those principles on behalf of the nine countries the day before yesterday.
108.	The nations of the world are becoming increasingly aware that without the inclusion of the Palestinian people in a comprehensive settlement there will be no lasting peace in the region.
109.	In the view of the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries, like the other States in the region, is unassailable. The recognition of this right, as well as of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, by all concerned is necessary for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace settlement. We called for the realization of the right of self-determination for the Palestinian people as early as 1974 during the debate on the question of Palestine in this forum.
110.	In southern Africa, only the removal of the remnants of colonialism and apartheid can bring peace to Namibia, Zimbabwe and the Republic of South Africa.
111.	In Namibia and Zimbabwe, a new approach is being made to the problem of ensuring a peaceful transition to independence. We are actively involved in the Namibia initiative of the five Western States.
112.	We welcome the new British initiatives to find a solution to the Zimbabwe problem with the agreement of all concerned; and we hope that the efforts of all participants in the London negotiations will at long last give the people of Zimbabwe the peace they long for.
113.	These efforts should not be disrupted by any side. The sooner the Republic of South Africa decides to take the necessary steps for the total elimination of all racial barriers the sooner will it be possible to enable people of all colours to live together in peace.
114.	The situation in lndo-China is a threat to peace and stability in South East Asia; it can become a threat to world peace.
115.	In Cambodia, peace can be restored only on the basis of that country's independence. That nation, which has undergone such a terrible test, needs a Government which expresses its will and which is recognized by all countries in the region. Neither the murderous Pol Pot regime nor the Heng Samrin regime installed by foreign forces meets this requirement. But the starving people of Cambodia cannot wait until a political solution has been found. They need help at once. The parties to the conflict must make it possible for that help to reach the people in all parts of Cambodia. No more time should be lost, since it is literally a question of a nation's survival.
116.	The misery of the refugees from Viet Nam poses yet another humanitarian challenge. Hundreds of thousands of desperate people have left their homeland. "Boat people" has become a new, horrifying phrase in the international vocabulary. The Federal Republic of Germany is doing all it can to help the Vietnamese refugees. Although we are a densely populated country, we are offering many of them a new home. We also support the programmes introduced by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for the benefit of the refugees in South-East Asia. But, here again, it is necessary—over and above the humanitarian aid—to get to the root of the problem. The freedom to leave one's own country is a human right; but it is equally a human right to be allowed to stay in one's native country.
117.	Starvation and distress still prevail in many parts of the globe, but the nations of the world are expending resources in excess of $400 billion a year for military purposes. The community of nations is called upon to make every effort to stop the armament spiral. The arms build-up is a threat to peace, it hampers development and it impairs the ability to provide development aid.
118.	The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the fact that, with the resolutions adopted at the tenth special session of the General Assembly in 1978, the United Nations has intensified its efforts to achieve disarmament. In a world in which hegemonic aspirations remain unchecked, every country must inevitably be at pains to maintain its security. The Western Alliance is resolved to do so, but it is doing no more than is necessary for the defence of its members. The Federal Republic of Germany is not a nuclear-weapon State, nor does it want to be. Nobody should underestimate the security interests of others.
119.	It is therefore essential for the safeguarding of world peace that nations should seek security, not in military supremacy, but in balance. Supremacy creates insecurity. Together with our partners in the Western defence alliance, we want to achieve such a balance, a balance at a lower level of armaments. That is the object of the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions in Europe. Their purpose is to establish an approximate parity of ground forces on both sides in central Europe.
120.	The participants in the negotiations in Vienna should now consider what agreements will be possible in the foreseeable future on the basis of reliable data. The agreement reached as a result of the second round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] likewise derives from the concept of parity. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes that agreement and hopes that it will soon enter into force. It is a major contribution to stability. It is, moreover, an important prerequisite for progress in other areas of arms control and disarmament. It is also of major significance for the progress of detente.
121.	In the context of the third round of SALT, there will also have to be negotiations on strategic medium- range ballistic missiles in Europe. Arms control and disarmament presuppose mutual trust. In Europe, the Final Act of Helsinki envisages confidence-building measures. One of the main tasks of the follow-up conference to be held in Madrid in 1980 must be to consolidate and further develop such measures. This is another reason why the Federal Republic of Germany considers that that conference should take place at the political level.
122.	We support the initiative of France for a conference on disarmament throughout Europe, which in the initial phase would concentrate on the conclusion of agreements to strengthen confidence.
123.	Confidence-building measures could also make for greater stability in other regions and make it easier to predict military and political conduct. We have, therefore, together with other countries, submitted a working paper entitled "Elements of a comprehensive programme of disarmament," which is designed to generate incentives for such measures. We hope that this session of the General Assembly will achieve further progress on the basis of that resolution.
124.	This year three major conferences have taken place in the context of the North-South dialogue: the fifth session of UNCTAD, the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, and the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development . These conferences have brought progress and opened up new areas for the continuing negotiations.
125.	It is, however, evident that the two sides have so far not really taken full advantage of the opportunity afforded by the North-South dialogue. The developing countries have proposed a global dialogue in the United Nations.
126.	We shall do everything in our power to ensure that this dialogue is structured in such a way that concrete results can be achieved within the foreseeable future.
127.	All concerned must negotiate in a new spirit and at long last recognize that in the North-South dialogue it is not a case of one side gaining and the other losing.
128.	Our common aim is to make accelerated progress in the developing countries and stable growth in the industrial countries possible again. But to achieve this, the industrial and the developing countries will jointly have to define which policy each side should pursue in order to reach this goal.
129.	A key issue is energy. The United States Secretary of State has rightly emphasized this. The challenge confronting us all is how to lead the world smoothly from the age of oil into an era of renewable sources of energy. This can only be achieved through the closest possible co-operation in a spirit of common responsibility. The Federal Republic of Germany, therefore, supports the idea of a world-wide, long-term energy dialogue.
130.	The oil-importing developing countries, whose oil requirements grow much more rapidly than those of the industrial countries, have the biggest problems. They must devote all their efforts to the development of their own sources of energy. The Federal Republic of Germany will increase its assistance to that end. We attach great importance to the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy scheduled for 1981.
131.	In order to accelerate development, the exports of the developing countries must be increased. The industrial countries will therefore have to resist the pressure of protectionist forces and keep their markets open for increasing exports, especially of manufactures, from the developing countries. This also applies to the Communist industrial countries. Up to now these countries have absorbed less than 3 percent of the exports of the third world, while the industrial democracies account for nearly 75 per cent.
132.	The Federal Republic of Germany advocates better access to markets. It is committed to the aim of restructuring the traditional patterns of trade within which the developing countries primarily supply commodities and the industrial countries supply manufactures,
133.	Accelerated development requires an increase in the transfer of capital. In the case of developing countries with low incomes, it will above all be necessary to increase official aid. The Federal Republic of Germany will in the three years ahead increase the growth rate of its aid twice as fast as that of the national budget.
134.	The main concern of middle-income developing countries is the transfer of private capital. These countries already meet well over two thirds of their external financial requirements from private sources. Direct private investment features prominently in private capital transfers. In order to promote such investment, two conditions will have to be fulfilled: the developing countries must have the assurance that such investment will dovetail organically with their development and that it will not be associated with any attempts to gain political influence. The investors, on the other hand, need legal security.
135.	Of major significance is the need to secure a fair balance of interests in the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea which will permit us to exploit the great economic possibilities of the oceans for development and growth. This concerns the utilization of two thirds of the earth's surface. A settlement giving fair consideration to all interests is above all necessary for sea-bed mining. It must give all States and enterprises access to the raw material deposits on the ocean floor and, at the same time, establish legal security without which the necessary long-term and large- scale investment will not be possible.
136.	However essential it may be that the industrial and the developing countries establish on their joint responsibility the global economic conditions for faster development and stable growth, we must all remain aware that this does not in any way diminish the importance of national economic and development policies. The industrial countries must bring inflation under control. They must conserve energy. They must economize on all raw materials and prevent waste. And they must master the structural change ensuing from the world economy and technological progress. All this requires painful adjustment processes, and we are aware of that.
137.	Adjustments will also have to be made by the countries of the third world. New development strategies are necessary so that the masses of the poor can be brought into the development process. In the developing countries, too, it is necessary to prevent a division of the economy and society into a modern, prospering sector and a traditionally stagnating sector. It is a question of creating development strategies designed to achieve growth not merely through capital-intensive investment, but also, and to a far greater extent than hitherto, by mobilizing human labour. The task is to give the millions of underemployed and unemployed the ability and the chance to use their energies for productive employment and self-fulfilment.
138.	Such a strategy requires in most developing countries the development of an efficient agriculture. A rapidly growing agriculture will in this process, owing to the demand for fertilizer, agricultural machinery and mass-produced consumer goods, become at the same time a driving force of industrialization.
139.	Instead of industrial enclaves there must be industrialization that forms an integral part of the economy of each of the developing countries concerned and at the same time helps those countries to improve their export capability on a broad basis.
140.	Only the development of agriculture can avert the threatening food crisis in the third-world countries and free them from the need to import food. This is the only way in which the unemployment problem can be kept within tolerable limits. Finally, only a strategy that links growth and social justice can prevent development from slipping into social unrest and internal chaos.
141.	One acute problem is the alarming increase in the number of executions in the world, many of them with a political background. The death penalty should be limited and ultimately abolished, as it was in my own country over 30 years ago, after the bitter experience of history. The next session of the General Assembly should debate the death penalty as a matter of priority.
142.	Thirty years ago the General Assembly proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as the common standard of achievement for all nations. That standard, more than any other, indicates how distant our goal remains. Human rights have still not been realized world-wide—neither the civil and political rights nor the social, economic and cultural rights.
143.	In the United Nations we have created procedures and institutions with the help of which we can actively promote the realization of human rights. These procedures are still weak. None the less, combined with the moral pressure of world opinion, they have already induced many countries to bring about improvements.
144.	We must strengthen and develop the institutions of the United Nations for the protection of human rights. Although many misgivings are still expressed about the establishment of a United Nations court of human rights, I am convinced that in the long run it will be generally realized that such a court would be meant solely to safeguard human rights and would not be directed against any country.
145.	International terrorism is a challenge to us all. Only by joint action shall we be able to overcome it.
146.	Effective measures against the taking of hostages are among the indispensable instruments for the protection of human rights. It was this consideration that prompted me three years ago to propose to the Assembly a convention against the taking of hostages.  That proposal met with support from the General Assembly. We are now all gratified that the Ad Hoc Committee appointed to elaborate a convention has completed its draft. I hope that this session of the General Assembly will adopt it.
147.	The future of the world has its beginning in man's consciousness, a consciousness that is today imbued with belief in the inalienable rights of the individual and the right of nations to self-determination. The will of the individual and the will of nations to assert those rights are the prime movers of our time. It is not possible to halt them, not even by force. In this certainty, the aim must be to work with determination and by peaceful means for the world-wide assertion of human rights and the right of self-determination.
148.	All men must be enabled to live in peace, free from fear, free from hunger, and free from want.﻿The sole aim of our General Assembly is to serve peace, and yet session after session here we note the consequences of disaster. To us, as leaders, one year means a great deal of diplomatic activity. But for some peoples one year means a great deal of suffering. There are 1 million refugees and 250,000 victims of war, and some 15 of our Member States are embroiled in armed conflicts. 
86.	However, serious and distressing though these conflicts may be none of them has so far jeopardized the global peace that the world has known since 1945. It is an inadequate peace to be sure, but it is peace just the same. Without it, all efforts towards progress would be destroyed in the general calamity. This peace is not based on terror and immobility. Despite its shortcomings and its failures, our world has made more progress during the final third of this century than it did during the three preceding centuries. I shall take just three examples. The old nations of Europe have been able to forget their age-old conflicts and to join together in a process of reconciliation; that vast country China, which had so long been kept aside, has taken its rightful place once more in the community of nations; and, lastly, more than 100 States have become independent and are now able to make their voices heard in this forum, which has truly become a world forum.
87.	These examples prove mankind's ability to change. They are evidence of the fact that catastrophes are not inevitable as long as human will is exerted.
88.	The community of nations has been able to demonstrate its unanimity on one point, a negative point to be sure but one that will henceforth be a fact of history, I am referring to the avoidance of a world war for more than 30 years. Why not go even further now, and express that unanimity in a positive manner by uniting our efforts against the other threats to peace?
89.	Thirty years without a general war: we have shown that that is possible. Thirty, years to ensure the survival of humanity: that is the very concrete problem that faces us, because between now and the year 2000 there will be another 2 billion human beings to feed — 2 billion. In 1925, that was the entire world population.
90.	If a world divided into antagonistic blocs quarrels over limited resources instead of uniting to develop them, living in interdependence will pose a threat. Instead, the world should organize its interdependence into solidarity so as to enable it to achieve greater security and genuine organization, which are the three components of true peace.
91.	That is why I shall discuss these three points in turn: first, a world of greater solidarity, one that will succeed in settling for the benefit of everyone the two problems on which the future of each of our peoples depends—poverty and energy; secondly, a more secure world that will undertake disarmament; and, thirdly, a better organized and a more human world, in which, alongside an Organization such as ours, whose role can only grow, the new kinds of regional solidarity will become organized.
92.	Concerning a world of greater solidarity, without for one moment forgetting the moral duty that gives solidarity its full significance, I intend to show that solidarity is also essential for the survival of mankind, for in fact we shall survive only if we resolve two problems—poverty and energy. Poverty is the failure of progress and hence the failure of us all. Energy is the key to progress and therefore an imperative common to us all.
93.	It is difficult to describe the scourge of poverty without lapsing into abstract figures and the demagoguery of sentimental platitudes. And yet we have to acknowledge an obvious fact that our minds reject: poverty is not on the decline. Development has succeeded in keeping it in check, but not in reducing it. The poorest regions are becoming poorer still. A half billion souls are going hungry. At least a half billion can neither read nor write. More than 1 billion have access neither to drinkable water nor to basic medical care. Poverty has not relinquished its hold. It scoffs at the modern world. It is no longer the humble, silent poverty that once escorted mankind throughout its history and all over the globe. It has borrowed from the modern world its violence, its clamour and its great surges. The poverty of shanty towns, the poverty of homeless people, the poverty of frustration that is at least as great as hunger—that is the face of the world, and we must not avert our eyes from it.
94.	We must, on the contrary, confront this poverty, and together we must all declare war on it on several fronts. Concerning the food front, a major rural development effort at the national and international levels must take up where the 'green revolution'' of the 1960s left off so as to improve the growth rate of agricultural production, especially in low-income countries in Asia and Africa. In the field of unemployment, a massive drive to create productive jobs—550 million between now and the year 2000, according to the World Bank, is crucial to the battle against poverty. In the matter of financing, all countries have a stake in preventing the constraints of financing from halting the progress happily already under way towards world economic integration. Now, the debts of the developing countries have more than doubled since 1974 and at this point debt-servicing costs are increasing faster than the debts themselves. France will therefore support measures designed to augment the financing capacities of the IMF regarding balance-of-payments adjustments, in the hope that the action taken will be specifically directed to the needs of the most impoverished countries. France also advocates greater efforts on behalf of those countries in the area of public development aid. I should like to recall that France has cancelled the debts owed to it by some countries.
95.	All countries should contribute to this aid— which, by the way, does not exempt us from giving our help to other developing countries—in particular by opening their borders to manufactured products from the most deprived countries; by allowing them access to natural resources, especially those from the sea; and, lastly, by increasing the volume of multilateral aid. France for its part has decided to double its contribution to UNDP between now and 1981, with an increase of more than 50 percent this year.
96.	As to energy, the anguish of tomorrow's world will arise from the sudden changes which we now see threatening us: the population explosion and the scarcity of resources, which would jeopardize growth and therefore the increase needed in employment. There will be neither growth nor new jobs without more energy, even if the advancement of technology and organization were to make growth possible at a rate faster than that of the increase in energy needs.
97.	True, and we all know this full well, countries in the different categories do not have the same interests or make the same analyses of this energy problem. To solve it, let us begin by understanding one another and accepting the validity of our respective concerns. 
98.	The producer countries are legitimately concerned with preparing for their future development and therefore with securing the foundations of their future growth in a prosperous economic climate by managing carefully their non-renewable resources and maintaining the value of their assets.
99.	The industrialized countries, for whom oil is still a basic resource, want the volume and price of supplies to remain stable, so that they can guarantee the growth, which, whatever happens, is necessary to the world economic balance.
100.	The developing countries that do not produce oil, and especially the most impoverished ones, are in a paradoxical position: they feel the effects of tensions in the oil market more severely than others, even though the place they occupy in that market is small. Nevertheless, their economies are more seriously affected by increases in oil prices.
101.	We must, I affirm, understand each other and move closer to each other's positions. There is nothing impossible about the quest for coherence among the policies of the three categories of country. Only that quest can help us to pass from the interdependence to which we are subject, to an organized solidarity.
102.	Let me say unequivocally that it is up to the industrialized countries to take the initiative in instituting stricter policies, because it is they who are the largest consumers. The decisions taken in Tokyo last June were a major turning-point. I emphasize that they were based on an initiative of the European Economic Community, which thereby in the circumstances demonstrated its sense of economic responsibility at the world level. The pledges made there to set ceilings on oil imports are significant in two important ways.
103.	On the one hand, they would break the link be-tween the pursuit of economic growth by the industrialized countries and the growth of oil imports. Sustained but sober growth on the part of the industrialized countries will henceforth be fuelled by energy sources other than oil.
104.	On the other hand, these pledges indicate that the oil energy so indispensable to the developing countries will be available for their use.
105.	France, for its part, has committed itself to a policy of conservation of energy and development of new energy sources that will enable it, I assure you; to achieve the goals it has set itself.
106.	I am confident that the oil-producing countries recognize the importance of this major change. Once the industrialized countries actually set out on the path of controlling their energy imports, the producer countries will be able to take into consideration the effects which their decisions have on the world economy, as they manage their resources. Any breakdown in supply, any reassessment of the price levels reached to date, would have disastrous consequences for the world economy.
107.	But oil is not solely the concern of the oil- producing and industrialized countries. In the interests of solidarity, the new energy needs of the developing countries must be met. To that end, a world programme of investment is indispensable. France supports the World Bank's plans in that regard, but feels that they should be further expanded. France is already making a substantial effort to provide technical assistance in regard to oil.
108.	Finally, we must work together more closely to ensure that the decisions made by the different parties are consistent. The 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy will assuredly bring progress in an area as yet largely unexplored, but one that is of capital importance for the future.
109.	We must do more. In this regard, France has taken note with interest of the proposal made by the Group of 77 to start new, comprehensive talks within the framework of the United Nations.
110.	Concerning a world of greater solidarity, and, at the same time, a more secure world, let us not deceive ourselves. To reduce the poverty of the poorest and to overcome the energy crisis, a conceited effort is needed. This will not be readily agreed to and will not produce results except in a climate of security and trust. When suspicion, mistrust and fear reign, we immediately see hallowed self-interests placed first, before all other considerations. When armed conflicts break out, the work of several years is reduced to nothing in a few days.
111.	We shall build a world of greater solidarity only if we work together to make it more secure.
112.	 That is why France sets such great value on the progress of detente and has made it one of the major and permanent lines of its policy. It welcomes, in this respect, the favourable development of its relations with the Soviet Union and with the other socialist countries in Europe, especially Poland.
113.	In Europe, detente has not only made it possible to defuse the most visible causes of confrontation. It has paved the way for dialogue and co-operation. It has made, and is continuing to make, an essential contribution to world peace.
114.	I mention the progress of detente, not to encourage complacency and passiveness, but rather to urge new efforts to expand detente and make its effects felt more deeply. Detente has probably been a contributing factor in containing flash-points all over the world, although it has not yet succeeded in dousing them completely. It has certainly put a brake on the excessive Build-up of arms, although it has not stopped it altogether.
115.	It is time for us to attack these two problems. The results achieved give us the means; they therefore also show us our duty.
116.	A review of the situations of crisis and tension that persist in the world shows that these fall into two categories. Some situations are linked to the process of decolonization, of which they are an anachronistic survival. This is the case with Namibia and Rhodesia. Others result from military faits accomplis and should 
be neither endorsed by the peoples concerned nor recognized by the international community. I refer to the Middle East and to South-East Asia. However, in all these instances, the crisis situation can be attributed to the fact that deeply rooted realities are being ignored or misperceived; that needed changes—needed because they are natural and legitimate—are being opposed or blocked; and that in some quarters the mistaken conviction that 'might is right" still persists.
117.	In Namibia as in Rhodesia, the deep-seated reality is the legitimate aspiration of the peoples involved to accede to genuine and internationally recognized independence. In this respect, hopeful signs are beginning to emerge. It is up to us to encourage them. For this reason, France has welcomed the agreement reached at the Meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Lusaka in August and places its hopes in the success of the talks that have opened in London under the aegis of the United Kingdom Government. For this reason also, in the case of Namibia France is participating actively—together with four other States and in close liaison with the Secretary- General of our Organization—in the five-Power initiative  with a view to achieving a solution for that territory that is consistent with the principles of our Charter.
118.	Turning to the Middle East, I come to a conflict that is quite different. It is as old as our Organization. Thirty years have elapsed, and with them how many hopes have gone unfulfilled and how many paths have been explored in vain in an effort to find the key to peace.
119.	My country makes no claim here to define a new framework for negotiation or to devise, in the wake of so many others, some new procedural skill. That is not where the problem lies. There has been too much passion and too much suffering for it to be possible to hope to be able to build peace on ambiguities.
120.	Here again, what is needed is recognition of the realities instead of escape from them, tackling the problems instead of evading them.
121.	The realities in this case are: the right of the Arab States to recover their territorial integrity; the right of the Palestinian people to a homeland; and the right of all the States in the area, the Arab States as well as the State of Israel, to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries.
122.	These three realities form a whole. They cannot be dissociated without being forsworn; they are valid for all the parties concerned, including—as the nine countries members of the European Economic Com-munity have just stressed—the PLO.
123.	This presupposes that both sides at last make the effort to look the facts in the face; these two great peoples, the people of Israel and the Palestinian people, will not be able to postpone indefinitely the moment when they recognize one another. It will be necessary to enlarge the dialogue, to cease insisting on exclusive rights; all the protagonists must agree to talk to each other. Certain indications lead us to hope that the time
is approaching. France is following the situation attentively and will make every effort to see these signs multiplied, because they point towards the only real path of peace.
124.	In speaking of peace in this area, I also have in mind Lebanon, which has so many ties to my own country. In recent months, Lebanon has been the object of attacks whose repetitive and excessive nature prompted the Security Council to convene. France condemns these attacks that strike at the unity and independence, as well as the territorial integrity, of Lebanon, They affect the Force sent by the United Nations to the southern part of the country; they put in jeopardy the very existence of one of our Organization's Member States.
125.	Lastly, South-East Asia and, more specifically, the situation in Cambodia. Last year, at this very rostrum my predecessor stressed the grave dangers of the situation. The events of the past 12 months have unfortunately confirmed our fears.
126.	The oppression and bloodshed of an inhuman regime have been superseded by the tragedy of a foreign invasion. The Indo-Chinese peninsula has once again been thrust into a state of war.
127.	My Government asked at the time, together with others, for the withdrawal of the forces to the international boundaries they had crossed; I note that the withdrawal has not been general.
128.	France cannot acquiesce in Cambodia's becoming a prize in and an arena for a confrontation that dwarfs it and that is in fact utterly alien to it. Cambodia has the right, like any other State, to see its independence and integrity respected. Its people, whose very existence is threatened even as I speak, has the right to live and to determine its destiny as a sovereign nation in peace and friendship with all its neighbours by acquiring a Government representative of the different political tendencies in the country. The exercise of its rights is indispensable to the reconstruction of this ravaged country and to the safeguarding of peace in the region. It is not compatible with the presence of a foreign army on its soil.
129.	Flash-points ignite violence in the world, but it is the incredible build-up of arms that could at any moment transform a local explosion into one of cataclysmic proportions. If we want our world to be more secure, it is not enough to defuse the causes of violence. We still have to control the inordinate quantity of instruments of violence; in other words, we must aim for genuine disarmament.
130.	All of us here know how arduous the task is, and we are familiar with the consistent way in which technological progress and the complicated mesh of mistrust can thwart the aspirations of peoples and the intentions of Governments.
131.	France for its part is too old a nation to imagine that disarmament is easy. But it believes too much in the future of humanity to think disarmament is impossible. Rejecting illusion, which is misleading, and resignation, which leads to despair, France is convinced that concrete progress can be made, providing that these three conditions are fulfilled: clarity and realism in objectives; continuity in action; imagination in initiatives.
132.	The President of the French Republic sought to meet the first of these conditions when he came here last year to set forth the main lines of the new approach France is proposing. 
133.	First, there is the right of each State to security. This right is the corollary, in disarmament terms, of what is, in the context of detente, the right of each State in sovereignty to decide on its internal options and its international alliances.
134.	Secondly, there is the idea that disarmament is first and foremost a universal problem: no State, no group of States, may arrogate to itself the right to determine the rules unilaterally and for all. The entire international community must share in the implementation, benefits and controls of disarmament.
135.	Finally, there is the need to bear in mind what I will call the "geography of security". The regional level would in fact be the easiest level at which to make concrete progress in this area.
136.	Once these principles have been accepted, they still must be put into practice, and this is where continuity of action enters the picture.
137.	Since the tenth special session was held in the spring of 1978, some progress has been made. We must not, however, relax our efforts.
138.	The new Committee on Disarmament, which together with others we helped to establish, has begun its work. The results of the first session show that broader and more equitable participation aid the progress of the discussion where bilateral debates might lead the talks to become bogged down. At this point we should take care not to disappoint the expectations that have been expressed. France for its part will work actively in the Committee in the hope of reaching concrete results at the next session, particularly in the area of chemical weapons.
139.	The United States and the Soviet Union have signed the second SALT agreement.  France is well aware of the importance of the step that has recently been taken. It considers the agreement to be balanced as a whole and hopes that it will enter into force soon. The fact remains that even with this agreement we are still only at the preface to true disarmament. The level of nuclear weapons held by the two signatory Powers is not only high now, it is to go still higher in the next few years. The future negotiations, for which the second round of SALT has paved the way, will, I hope, bring this level down very substantially. As for France, it would take appropriate action on the basis of such reductions only if there were a change in the extent of the disparity persisting between those two arsenals and its own arsenal, which France keeps at its disposal to ensure the security and credibility of its deterrent.
140.	In Europe, finally, France has proposed the convening of a conference on disarmament. By linking confidence-building measures and effective disarmament, by making a distinction between arms that serve deterrence and security and those that might fuel threats and intimidation, by defining a cohesive and significant geographical framework, its proposal aims to take into account the specific facts of Europe's situation. The positive reactions that have been forthcoming from various quarters have strengthened our conviction that this approach corresponds both to a real need and to a real possibility, thus encouraging us to proceed.
141.	In a field as difficult as that of disarmament, determination needs the help of imagination.
142.	With a view to stimulating reflection and imagination, we proposed the founding of an international disarmament institute. At the tenth special session, we also advocated that the most modern technology be made available to the international community by proposing the establishment of an international satellite monitoring agency. In both cases, we would be mobilizing science and scientists for the cause of disarmament.
143.	To this same end I should like to announce today that France is proposing to organize an international symposium in Paris on the theme 'Science for disarmament' This symposium, which could serve as a kind of preface to the work of the institute, would seek to involve the scientific community more closely with disarmament by demanding an intellectual and moral contribution from it.
144.	A world of greater solidarity, a more secure world, but also a more organized world is what we seek.
145.	The world we live in, if we reflect upon it, has two essential characteristics: diversity and disparity. There is diversity in political regimes, philosophical and religious creeds and national traditions and cultures. The disparities lie in power, wealth and access to knowledge.
146.	Diversity brings people closer together because it encourages them to participate in dialogues and ex-changes. Disparities separate them, on the contrary, because they divide people and set them one against the other.
147.	How can we act to preserve the former and to eliminate the latter?
148.	Allow me, as a European, to draw upon my experience. Thirty years ago the nations of Europe were emerging from world conflict, drained and in ruins. Where they had once been among the most powerful and wealthy of nations, now they did not even have the resources needed to set themselves back on their feet.
149.	Thirty years have gone by. Now those same nations have regained their place in the world thanks to the aid they received, thanks to their own efforts, but thanks also to the close co-operation they forged among themselves. Without relinquishing their identities or compromising their independence, they have formed a Community which, by the very fact that it exists and that it has demonstrated its ability to act, today constitutes an essential element in international equilibrium.
150.	There may have been fear in some quarters that the Europe of six, and later nine, countries—and undoubtedly tomorrow of twelve—by organizing itself, would become inward-looking. The experience of what is now more than 20 years has shown the opposite: among groups of comparable size, the European Community is without a doubt the most open to the world. This applies equally to its trade, to its part in aid for development and to its contribution to solving major world problems. Nor is it an accident that detente, throughout the entire European continent, has advanced at the same pace as has the organization of Western Europe.
151.	By increasing their co-operation and strengthening their cohesion, the countries of Europe have not created a bloc. Quite the contrary; they have introduced a new type of regional grouping. Because this co-operation is founded on the natural affinities of history, geography, culture and human values, it protects diversity and helps to attenuate disparities.
152.	The case of Europe is significant, it seems to me, but it is not an isolated case and is becoming less and less unique. Everywhere we are witnessing the advance of regional solidarity. There is growing vitality at the level of continents and subcontinents in geographically oriented organizations such as the Organization of American States, the OAU, the Andean Group and the Association of South-East Asian Nations. The phenomenon is too widespread for it not to be a response to a universally felt need. In my opinion, it reflects an aspiration on the part of each of our nations to reconcile two fundamental requirements—the need to assert themselves without becoming isolated and the need to participate without becoming subservient.
153.	The pluralistic, multipolar world that this aspiration heralds will be different from the world of yesterday—profoundly so. The conviction of France is that it will be a better world. So long as there are only two camps, the gains of one will inevitably appear to be the losses of the other. The logic of their relationships is confrontation—the only possible compromise is the status quo, in other words, immobility. In contrast to this, the multiplication of poles allows for more flexibility in the general equilibrium. It encourages necessary changes and makes it easier to resolve local conflicts. The positive role played by the Organization of American States in the evolution of events in Nicaragua and the decisive assistance provided by the African States in achieving a peaceful solution of the problem of Chad are telling examples.
154.	The recent events in central Africa provide a new and clear illustration of this. It was the Africans themselves who, by the decisions made at the Kigali conference, substantiated and condemned the atrocities perpetrated. It was the former President of the Central African Republic, the Prime Minister in office and other leaders who took the initiative of liberating their country. France, which had suspended its aid as soon as the Committee of African Magistrates presented its conclusions, gave an affirmative response to the request made of it on the spot by the new authorities. Thus it was possible to eliminate a tyrannical rule without bloodshed.
155.	There need be no fear that the strengthening of these regional organizations is likely to infringe on either the individual identities of national sovereignties to which we are attached or the universal nature of the international community. Quite the opposite; it cannot fail to protect the one and to enrich the other.
156.	This can be seen quite clearly, even here within our Organization. The existence of regional groupings has never prevented us from examining the great questions of our time. Indeed, it has made such examination easier and more productive.
157.	It is indeed characteristic of regional organizations that there is no better way of affirming their identity than through dialogue and co-operation,
158.	It is in order to take into account this new dimension of today's world that France has renewed its interest in the Latin American continent and, on this subject, I should like to recall the two visits made by Mr. Giscard d'Estaing to Brazil and to Mexico respectively. It was with this same idea in mind, too, that the French Head of State put forward the concept of a "trialogue" between Europe, Africa and the Arab countries. By giving substance to this project, these three groups will not only underline the obvious complementaries that unite them; they will also place them at the service of progress and peace. They will help to construct the foundations of a more balanced, more open world, where the old temptations of hegemony will have made way for the call to solidarity.
159.	The world of greater solidarity, security and organization that France hopes to see and which it is working to bring into being will have meaning only if it serves mankind, its dignity and its rights.
160.	Owing to the universality of our Organization and to the legitimacy conferred upon it by the membership of almost all nations, it has in this respect a crucial role to play. Our Organization is the expression of the universal conscience and, at the same time, of the diversity of cultures. More than ever, the Charter is the indispensable reference that will allow us to live together better and to render more effective and more widespread the dignity of man that it proclaims and that is defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The dignity of man must be expressed through the equality of all. Together with the entire international community, we condemn regimes that are founded on racial discrimination, such as apartheid.
161.	The United Nations is a decisive safeguard for the peace of the world and for the dignity of the individual. It has shown this in a great many situations, whether by recalling the principles and spelling out the law or through its actions and calls for the assistance of States. In the tragedy of the South-East Asian refugees, for example, our Organization, by acting in accordance with its peaceful and humanitarian purpose, has fulfilled its unique role. France, as is well known, has given the Organization its full assistance. As a country of asylum and refuge, it has opened its doors wide to those who have been exiled and will continue to receive all those to whom it is able to offer a future commensurate with their hopes.
162.	The efforts of our Organization and of States to respond to urgent and desperate situations should not, however, make us forget the silent hope of millions of individuals imprisoned by poverty. No man, no leader, can ever rest easy so long as suffering, fear and contempt for the law reign on this earth. This is one battle that we should all wage together, regardless of our differences, for it is the battle for peace on earth.﻿This is the first time that I have had the honour of addressing the United Nations. But no one who has lived through the last 34 years can fail to have been conscious of the United Nations or to be aware of what it has achieved and of what it has yet to achieve.
219.	There were 51 founder Members of the United Nations. Now there are 152 Member States. Last week, we welcomed Saint Lucia, formerly a British Territory, as the one hundred and fifty-second Member. I congratulate the Government and people of Saint Lucia on their achievement of full independence. This near- tripling of the membership is largely due to the dissolution of the great colonial empires. The United Kingdom worked with, and not against, that trend. This month, we in my country have mourned the death of Lord Mountbatten, who was a pioneer of decolonization. Since last year's General Assembly, besides Saint Lucia, the Republic of Kiribati has achieved full nationhood. We look forward to Saint Vincent joining them on 27 October. It remains our policy to respect the wishes of the peoples of our few remaining dependent Territories. It is for them to determine their own future in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter. We shall therefore continue to give every support and encouragement to any of them who seek independence. When there are difficulties, we will do our best to overcome them. In particular, we want to bring Belize to secure independence as soon as possible.
220.	The dismantling of the British Empire has led us either to join or create two new institutions, the European Community, whose President spoke earlier on this afternoon—and whose remarks I warmly endorse—and the Commonwealth, an institution sometimes referred to as a talking shop. If you are looking for an example of how valuable a talking shop can be, you need go no further than the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries in Lusaka two months ago. Talk there led first to greater understanding between the countries concerned, and then to action to try to solve the problems of Rhodesia.
221.	During the last two weeks, the British Government has engaged in intensive negotiations on Rhodesia, and these negotiations are continuing. But I thought it right to come to New York to inform the General Assembly of the stage that we have now reached.
222.	I do not intend to go back over the history of the Rhodesian dispute, now some 14 years old, apportioning blame to this party or absolving that. I would like to emphasize at the outset one point: throughout the vicissitudes of the Rhodesian problem, Britain has never succumbed to the temptation to abandon its responsibilities towards that unhappy country, leaving majority and minority alike to endless war. The whole approach of the present British Government is indeed based on a determination to fulfil our responsibilities towards the people of Rhodesia.
223.	When my government came to power in May this year, we were confronted with a new situation, though there were also some depressingly familiar features. The reality of change for the better had been symbolized in the elections which had taken place in April of this year on the basis of the principle of "one man, one vote. “Those elections have had many critics, but the plain fact is that they have led to the emergence of a parliament and an administration, most of whose members belong to the majority community and which is led by a member of that community. This represented a substantial step forward towards the abandonment by the white community of its privileged position, and my Government was determined to build on that, so as to make a further effort to bring Rhodesia to legal independence in a context of wide international recognition and acceptance.
224.	But the Patriotic Front did not participate in the April elections, and the war continued. The constitution under which those elections took place was marred by certain deficiencies. But to decry and dismiss the elections would have been to discourage further change. There was a need for urgent and imaginative action to exploit the opportunity which had been created to achieve a settlement that would gain wide international acceptance and, we hoped, bring an end to the war. Past efforts to solve the Rhodesian dispute showed, however, that it was essential to proceed step by step to build a solid foundation for negotiations.
225.	We therefore immediately engaged in an extensive series of consultations with all the parties concerned in the conflict in order to identify the elements for a solution. We spoke to the leaders of the Commonwealth, of the front-line States, of the Patriotic Front, and of the Salisbury parties. We also remained in close touch with our other friends and allies and took account of their views. These consultations were invaluable, and formed a sound basis for our present approach to a settlement.
226.	From these consultations two main conclusions flowed. The first was a general recognition of the extent of the changes which had taken place in Rhodesia, despite the short-comings of the Salisbury constitution. The second was the unanimous conviction that there should now be a further attempt to involve all the parties to the conflict in an attempt to find a solution, and that any solution should emanate from Britain as the responsible Power.
227.	The next stage was the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries as Lusaka in August, and it was here that the foundation of our present approach to a solution was laid. In Lusaka our proposals for a settlement were discussed and endorsed by a very important cross-section of the world community, including three of the front-line States. I wish to pay a tribute to the Heads of Government present at Lusaka for the helpful and constructive attitude which they all displayed during our discussions on Rhodesia, and especially to the wise chairmanship of President Kaunda of Zambia, which made a huge contribution to the successful outcome. The essence of the Lusaka agreement on Rhodesia was the acceptance by the Commonwealth of the British Government's constitutional responsibility to grant legal independence to Rhodesia on the basis of genuine majority rule.
228.	In our negotiations with the Salisbury parties and the Patriotic Front, we have continued to be guided by the principles defined at Lusaka. Our first task has been to seek agreement on an independence constitution comparable with the constitutions on which we granted independence to other former British dependent territories. It would be idle to pretend that in the special historical circumstances of Rhodesia, such a task is proving easy. Compromise on both sides is essential. We have already secured from the Salisbury parties agreement in principle to British proposals on the constitution. This was a bold decision by Bishop Muzorewa's delegation.
229.	Significant progress on certain points has also been made in discussions with the leaders of the Patriotic Front. All parties must sustain their efforts to continue the momentum of the Conference if the gains so far made are not to be eroded. A heavy responsibility will lie on any who fail to respond to this opportunity to achieve for the people of Rhodesia a fair settlement which will bring international acceptance and an end to the war. Much difficult negotiation undoubtedly lies ahead before the foundations of an independent and democratic society," in which all the people of Rhodesia will be able to live in security and at peace with each other and with their neighbours, are laid. I do not underestimate the difficulties which remain to be overcome, but I dare to hope that the moment may not be too far away when the British Government and Parliament will be able to grant legal independence to Rhodesia on the basis of genuine majority rule. Many attempts to solve the Rhodesia problem have failed in the past. I hope that it may be our privilege before too long to welcome an independent Zimbabwe to this Assembly as a full member of the United Nations.
230.	Namibia is another Territory where we must try to find an internationally acceptable solution through free and fair elections and not through bloodshed. The five Western countries, in close consultation with the Secretary-General, are pressing on with the search for a solution which would open the way to the arrival of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group in Namibia. Discussions are now concentrated on the detailed arrangements, which will need to be carefully worked out with the parties concerned, for a demilitarized zone. The idea of such a zone was proposed by the late President Neto of Angola, whose death we all deeply mourn. Our aim is to achieve early and complete agreement so that a date can be fixed for a ceasefire and the beginning of the transition to independence. Given goodwill and flexibility on the part of all concerned, this goal should not be beyond our reach.
231.	Namibia and Zimbabwe-Rhodesia are the immediate issues in southern Africa. But in the longer term it is on South Africa that the stability of this troubled region will depend. We share the international community's distaste of apartheid. It is neither just nor workable. But will threats and isolation bring about the changes we all wish to see? We in the British Government doubt it. We believe that the better course is to accept that the Republic's plural society gives rise to unprecedented problems and to offer our help to the leaders of all races to work together to find just solutions. In this way we can all contribute towards peaceful change in South Africa. Otherwise the future promises only violence and misery for all the people of South Africa, whatever their race.
232.	In the Middle East, the British Government greatly welcomes what has so far been achieved through the process begun at Camp David. It is in the interests of all parties to explore fully the opening which was created there. We hope that these continuing negotiations will lead to transitional arrangements which will lighten the burden of occupation in the West Bank and Gaza and help to create a climate of confidence and co-operation in practical matters. But the ultimate goal must remain a comprehensive settlement, based on the effective application of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in all its parts. This involves the acceptance by all parties of Israel's right to live in peace with its neigh- ours within secure and recognized boundaries. And, equally, it requires the withdrawal of Israel from territories occupied in 1967.
233.	There is one area in which a broad international consensus has recognized that resolution 242 (1967) is incomplete—that is, in the handling of Palestinian rights. The resolution takes no account of the legitimate political rights of the Palestinians, which go well beyond their status as refugees. Nor does it take any account of the Palestinians ' belief that they are a separate people with a right to their homeland. This, I believe, is an area in which resolution 242 (1967) may be supplemented—not, I emphasize, replaced, amended or distorted, but supplemented—to meet this point.
234.	My Government believes that a settlement which does not command the broad assent of the Palestinian people cannot last. But if the Palestinians are to exercise the right to determine their own future as a people, this must be in the context of a negotiated peace settlement which guarantees Israel's right to a peaceful and permanent existence within secure borders. Only if both parties recognize the legitimate rights of each other will it be possible to achieve the durable peace which all the peoples of the Middle East so desperately need.
235.	In the meantime, it is our earnest hope that all parties will avoid doing or saying anything to make it harder to establish the minimum trust without which successful negotiations would be impossible. We call on the Israel Government to cease its policy of settlement in occupied territories. That Government's present policy prejudices the chance of progress in the autonomy talks and makes the achievement of a comprehensive settlement much more difficult. We deplore' its recent decision to allow Israeli citizens to buy land in the occupied territories. And moreover, while we understand the Israel Government's preoccupation with security, we urge it to refrain from its present policies in south Lebanon. These undermine the authority of the Lebanese Government and frustrate the efforts of UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate. In that context, I pay a tribute to the dedication and courage with which the officers and men of UNIFIL are carrying out their dangerous and difficult task.
236.	Another area of dangerous tensions is IndoChina, where suffering due to natural causes has been made worse by the regimes which took power in 1975. I refer first to the Vietnamese Government, which, as I said on 20 July at the Meeting on Refugees and Displaced Persons in South-East Asia, in Geneva, has driven so many people to flee its shores that the problem has become one of international concern. I was in Hong Kong in May. I saw there the misery of the people who had risked perilous journeys in unseaworthy craft to escape the tyranny in their own country. It is not an experience that I shall ever forget. Nor can I forget the tens of thousands of those unhappy people who were simply lost at sea. The Secretary-General chaired, with his customary skill, the Geneva Meeting, which my Prime Minister had suggested should be held. As a result, a start has been made to resettle the refugees who did not perish. Most of them came either to Hong Kong or to the ASEAN countries. My Government fully understands the problems which the refugee influx posed for those countries. But the problem is likely to remain until the Vietnamese Government stops bearing down harshly on elements of its population. Meanwhile, I hope that that Government will abide by the undertakings it gave in Geneva about future action.
237.	Yet the most serious problems in Indo-China are perhaps to be found in Cambodia. The years of suffering to which that unhappy country was subjected by the Pol Pot Government are well known. That regime s human rights record is among the worst of any country in the world. The then British Government was among the first to draw attention to it. Then the country was brutally invaded by the armed forces of one of its neighbours. Now it is prey to starvation while fighting continues with the occupying forces. Unless those on the spot allow large-scale relief operations to start soon, the people of Cambodia will face yet another catastrophe. Food must get to these people soon, and those who want to help should not be asked to pay a political price for being allowed to do so. I shall only say now that in the British Government's view the Cambodian people has the same right as any other to live in peace under a Government freely chosen by itself. Without a settlement in Cambodia, stability and peace in South-East Asia will not be possible.
238.	In Europe itself possible sources of tension remain. The maintenance of stable East-West relations remains a foremost priority for us and for our allies, most notably the United States. We welcome the signature by the United States and the Soviet Union earlier this year of a second Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and hope that it will soon be ratified. That agreement is an example of the kind of detailed and verifiable arms control arrangement that is needed; mere talk of a desire for peace and co-operation is not enough.
239.	Meanwhile, the scale of the military build-up of the countries signatories of the Warsaw Treaty is a matter of serious and legitimate concern to all other European countries. So far the Warsaw Pact has shown little willingness to allay these concerns in any practical way, so we on the Western side have no alternative but to respond. Otherwise, the balance on which detente depends will be lost. Nor can we accept that detente should be a principle applied in Europe but ignored in the rest of the world. Detente, if it is to work anywhere, must work everywhere. The British Government is ready to work for greater confidence, stability and real co-operation. But this must be a two-way process, with give and take coming from both sides. It is certainly in that spirit that we shall approach the review session of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to be held in Madrid next year.
240.	But work to reduce the threat of war must go wider than East-West relations. Above all we must avoid the spread of nuclear weapons, while at the same time permitting access to the benefits of peaceful nuclear energy. The 1968 Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons now has 111 parties. I much regret that it has not won universal adherence. I hope that further progress can be made before the Review Conference next August. If universal membership of the Treaty could be achieved, it would halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
241.	As members know, a comprehensive test-ban treaty is being negotiated between the United States, the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom. We still have difficult problems to overcome. But when the treaty is completed, it will, I hope, meet the objections of those who argue that the non-proliferation Treaty discriminates in favour of the nuclear-weapon States. The latter have also, of course, given the non-nuclear- weapon States various assurances that nuclear weapons will not be used against them.
242.	Progress is important, too, in the field of conventional arms control. For this reason my Government supports the work of the Committee on Disarmament. We shall continue to take the position that measures to curb the nuclear arms race must go hand in hand with measures to reduce conventional weapons.
243.	This year this Assembly's deliberations take place against the sombre background of tension in several different parts of the world. The economic background is grim too. The large and sudden increases in the price of oil this year have serious and damaging implications for the world economy. They will lead certainly to higher inflation and to balance-of-payments difficulties for very many countries. The oil-importing developing countries will be the hardest hit. But we are all affected.
244.	The world's reserves of oil are not limitless. We all need to do what we can to use them properly and to reduce our consumption of oil. The British Government stands by the recent decisions of the International Energy Agency, the European Community and the Tokyo Economic Summit. These should have an important impact on the oil market by reducing demand for oil and by encouraging the development of other sources of energy, new and renewable.
245.	But we cannot solve our problems by acting in isolation. In energy, almost more than anywhere else, the world is one world. There needs to be joint consideration of world energy problems and closer contacts between those who produce oil and those who import it, whether developed or developing countries. A number of proposals to this end have recently been made. We are certainly ready to consider all these proposals sympathetically in the hope that we can agree on the way ahead.
246.	Finally, I should like to say something very shortly about the North-South dialogue. At a time when both developed and developing countries are struggling to stave off the effects of recession, it is hardly surprising that progress should be slow. I have spoken of the dangers of rhetoric. In this field of international economic relations, the dangers of rhetoric are perhaps at their greatest. We must all guard against the creation of new bodies whose primary function is the exchange of rhetoric. The first step has to be a substantial improvement in the shape and state of the world economy. It is increased production, not increased words, which creates resources. And without increased production how can there be a transfer of resources from rich to poor, whether at home or overseas, through increased aid, trade and investment? So our first priority must be to bring about the right framework in which more resources can be produced.
247.	That is why my Government has taken steps to cut public expenditure right across the board. That is inevitable, if we are to put our economy in order and if we are to be able to help the less developed countries to achieve prosperity. We are no less concerned than others about the large proportion of the world's population that is unacceptably poor. Nor are we turning our backs on the North-South dialogue, despite its frustrations. On the contrary, we recognize that in an interdependent world Britain has a vital interest—both economic and moral—in bringing prosperity to the poorer nations. That is why we have made it abundantly plain that we are in favour of maintaining the open trading system and of increasing overseas investment. Indeed, to encourage the latter, my Government has introduced considerable relaxations in exchange control. Provided the climate is right, these relaxations should be of direct benefit to the developing countries. Increased trade and increased investment are contributions we can make now. In due course increased growth should make it possible to provide more aid. But there 
are no easy short-cuts. The road back to greater prosperity—for North and South—is unlikely to be either easy or short. It will be even harder if each country or grouping tries to make it separately.
248.	We are one world, bound to support each other if we are not to undergo greater hardships on our own. This is true of our search for prosperity and it is true of our search for peace and security. In both fields the United Nations provides an essential forum for discussion which can lead to useful action. The tasks of the 1980s are formidable and they face us all. We can overcome them, but only if we allow our common interests to bring us together and work out our solutions as one community.
﻿Mr. President, it is indeed an honour and a privilege to greet you on your unanimous election, because you bring to this high office not only your outstanding skills and rich experience, but also something of the idealism and high sense of morality that characterizes your country's role in international affairs.
25.	It is also no mere formality when I express our great appreciation for the leadership provided by Mr. Lievano of Colombia as President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. The zeal and ability he displayed in discharging his responsibilities has enhanced his reputation, as well as his country's prestige.
26.	In the exemplary dedication to duty and the practical wisdom of our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, we have an assurance that the challenging tasks ahead will be met with faith and fortitude, vision and constructive statesmanship.
27.	Our family of nations has grown as Saint Lucia, our youngest and newest Member, has joined us. We wish the people of Saint Lucia prosperity and assure them of our goodwill and co-operation in the responsibilities awaiting them.
28.	India comes to this Assembly with the strength of a tradition which is more than 4,000 years old, dating from when our Vedic ancestors had the insight to declare; "the soil is my mother; I am the son of the earth". This was the germ of the concept of "one world", the unity of which was to be ensured by peace. This is why "peace, peace and peace" has been my country's constant invocation.
29.	I stand here today conscious of this rich heritage and of its reflection in the continuing national consensus which prevails in the pursuit of international objectives. Independent India's policies and attitudes to international problems show a continuity and consistency of which we are proud.
30.	Since the time, 31 years ago, when India's first Foreign Minister and Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, declared in this Assembly that "India adhered completely to the principles and purposes of the Charter'’, there has been in our expressions of support of the United Nations and its Charter every year a repetitive rhythm which should not be mistaken for ritual or formality. The United Nations unmistakably symbolizes the best balance between the right to independence and the compulsion to work together. It rep-resents a warning that we can survive only in good- neighbourliness. If international, problems have been aggravated at times during the 34-year career of this Organization, this is due to the fact that in our national perspectives we have overlooked the fact that we form one world and not 152 worlds of various sizes. Despite all the lessons of history, we are still bogged down in short-term problems and are still overlooking the fact that our long-term destinies are intertwined and must be safeguarded.
31.	If we look back over the decade of the 1970s, which are now drawing to a close, we find repeated confirmation of the Tact that the world's political problems arise from the short-term perspectives of many of the powerful-nation States which virtually distort the long-term imperatives. If we still see recalcitrant imperialism, malevolent or defiant racism, persistent habits of intervention, manipulation, domination and even aggression, this is because there are forces trying to stem the tide of history. So many world-wide and regional problems are the result of the obdurate refusal to accept the logic of coexistence and co-operation.
32.	This Assembly is meeting again after one more year and it can be seen that the world has been changing fast. The past year has not been more tranquil or less dangerous. The world continues to hang precariously between war and peace, development and stagnation, domination and justice. Many of the old myths have died,-but not the belief in them. The time when the world order could be maintained through the strength of military establishments is over. While many still see military power as supreme, its political consequences often mean that it cannot be used. No doubt there is a fleeting intellectual realization that things have changed, but this has not kept pace with the formulation of foreign policy by important countries.
33.	The days of an imperial role are gone; neither is there any scope for imperial management. Even the management of crises can no longer be left to a few great Powers, although they have an important responsibility. Countries may differ in power, wealth and beliefs, but the world community cannot be managed now without the voluntary participation and equitable involvement of the largest possible number of countries.
34.	It is also clear that the leverage of the weaker countries is a factor to be reckoned with in the emerging international order. Military power may have remained concentrated in a few hands, but popular power, if one may use that term, has become more widely dispersed. Recent events have again shown that, given will power and determination, even a small Power can hold a big Power at bay. The strength of the non-aligned movement is really the collective leverage exerted by the weaker countries on the global scene. This collective leverage, reflected in the demand for a new international economic order, is in essence a call for the democratization of world power.
35.	We are indeed in an era of increasing plurality. Just as the managerial revolution has replaced family management, the transformation of the world situation has brought about a diffusion of the power to shape and influence events. This requires a new awareness, a new approach and a new adjustment which would facilitate the evolution of a more just and equitable world order.
36.	May I underline in this context the growing revolutionary significance of a factor that has been emerging over the last two decades in the United Nations. The fact that well over 90 Members of the United Nations have joined the non-aligned movement has affected a quiet revolution in the functioning of the international organization. This constitutes a guarantee against the misuse of the United Nations or for that matter, of any intergovernmental organization.
37.	The fundamental problems of May arise from not accepting the natural and the inevitable. We have seen resistance and delay in the process of decolonization and the fulfilment of the will of all peoples for freedom and national emancipation. Even today, this important historical process is not complete. The war in VietNam arose from attempts to frustrate the national aspirations of the Vietnamese. We failed to recognize, and perhaps we still often deny in action if not in affirmation, the fact that each nation has the right to choose its own pattern or political system for social and economic fulfilment. Today, we see the vindication of the notion implicit in the first principles of the United Nations Charter: that differing ideological and socio-economic systems have to coexist. As an Indian, I cannot but recall that the principles of coexistence were first enunciated in the middle of the 1950s and enshrined ill the Declaration adopted by the African-Asian Conference, held at Bandung in 1955.
38.	Detente was enthusiastically acclaimed by some, much wished for by many. But in its realization we find that the effects of the cold-war years have been effaced neither in the functioning of this Organization nor in the various regions of the world. There is even a danger of detente’s becoming a facade behind which the role of the Organization stands reduced in the priorities of the great Powers and, paradoxically, regional wars and conflicts also flourish.
39.	Surely, if detente means the mere normalization of bilateral relations among the great Powers, then the vast majority of members of the international community will have little interest in it. Though normalization among great Powers is essential, an honest detente has to be global and universal and this indeed is our goal.
40.	It would also be wrong to assume that the process of even this limited detente is irreversible. The stalemate in the ratification of the treaty resulting from the second round of SALT negotiations, the deepening crisis in West Asia, the hardening of attitudes in relation to southern Africa, the polarized postures in Southeast Asia and the disturbing trend towards the formation of destabilizing political combinations are ominous portents.
41.	Consequently, reinforcing the fabric of peace must remain the primary concern in our discussions. Progress on disarmament in all its various aspects has to be seen as the touchstone of our commitment to peace. Lasting world peace can stand only on the foundation of effective disarmament.
42.	We must remind ourselves that the United Nations was established to save "succeeding generations from the scourge of war." For as long as nuclear stockpiles exist in the world, there is a definite threat of a nuclear holocaust. Nuclear war is possible through accident, miscalculation, misperception and impulsive or irrational behaviour under tension. The most urgent task facing humanity today is to delegitimize nuclear weapons, to dismantle the hierarchical international order that supports the present military system and to replace it by an alternative security system based on peaceful coexistence and the acceptance in practice of the equal sovereignty of all nations and of die right of each nation to choose its national and international policies.
43.	The tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, laid down a programme of action for nuclear disarmament. That programme consisted of steps for freezing the present nuclear arms race and for initiating reductions leading to the eventual elimination of all existing stockpiles of such weapons. It is a matter of deep regret that, despite the consensus behind that programme, there has been no progress towards its implementation. We are particularly concerned to note that the draft of the comprehensive test-ban treaty is not yet ready and the negotiations continue at a glacial pace. We strongly urge that the draft of the treaty be finalized without further delay.
44.	We welcome second SALT treaty. But it is only a beginning—though an important beginning, which must be formalized and implemented so that the world may move further towards real nuclear disarmament. At the same time we cannot but note with regret that that treaty does not incorporate any measure for the reduction of nuclear arsenals and that the growing and deadly sophistication of nuclear weaponry presents an ever greater danger to mankind.
45.	Much is being said, and rightly, about the problem of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 1 think it would be pertinent to remember that it was India that brought this issue to the attention of the United Nations when, in 1964, it specifically asked for the inclusion in the agenda of an item entitled "Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons".  Our approach was based on the premise, born of bitter historical experience, that both horizontal and vertical proliferation was integral parts of the problem which needed to be dealt with as a whole. The General Assembly accepted this concept and resolution 2028 (XX) stated that:
' 'The treaty should embody an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear and non-nuclear Powers".
46.	Unfortunately the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons concluded in 1968 deliberately sought to alter this concept. It addressed itself only to the aspect of horizontal proliferation, and if the Treaty has become an unworkable document, it is only because of this narrow and illogical approach. The protagonists have been trying to buttress their position by cartel- type arrangements and further discriminatory measures, such as the establishment of the so-called "London Club" of nuclear suppliers and the attempted imposition of full-scope safeguards, on the peaceful nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States, something that the nuclear-weapon States are themselves not prepared to accept.
47.	In a world where we now grapple with the task of evolving the methodology of a new international economic and political order based on justice and equity, it would be nothing short of anachronism for some Powers to play the role of barons and overlords in a system of nuclear feudalism. Such an attitude tends to make nonsense of national independence, equality of nations and the very concept of peaceful coexistence that is at the heart of the United Nations. 
48.	It may be recalled that during the special session on disarmament held last year, India took two significant initiatives—one seeking the non-use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances,  and the other calling for a suspension of nuclear-weapons testing pending a complete ban.8 We are gratified at the endorsement that the Assembly at its thirty-third session gave to those initiatives. We would urge the nuclear-weapon States on whom the primary responsibility lies to take meaningful steps in this direction.
49.	One further initiative I have in mind is the dissemination of public knowledge and through it the creation of enhanced awareness and popular will against the use of nuclear weapons. Efforts to build world public opinion would assist the Governments concerned to turn away from the path of nuclear competition in the direction of practical measures for avoiding nuclear war. The United Nations has achieved significant success in the past in helping to rouse the conscience of mankind on a number of humanitarian issues, through a variety of special observances. Would it not be appropriate that this vital question, on which depends the future and fate of man himself, should receive similar attention? It is only fitting that the second Disarmament Decade should begin next year with measures aimed at mobilizing world opinion for international co-operative action to consolidate world peace. The year 1980 could be the commencement year for laying the foundations for eliminating for ever the danger of nuclear war.
50.	If I have spoken at length on nuclear disarmament, it is because of the overwhelming fact that nuclear weapons, with their mind-boggling destructive capacity and their increasing degree of "overkill", constitute the greatest danger to mankind.
51.	The relationship between disarmament and development has been stressed by many earlier speakers, and I need not dwell upon it at any great length. The point has often been made that the total annual world military expenditure, now exceeding $400 billion, is equivalent to half the combined gross domestic product of all the third-world countries. It exceeds the global government expenditure on education and is more than twice the expenditure on public health services. In a world seriously afflicted by an energy crisis, by inflation, unemployment, mass poverty and so forth, it is surely criminal that our dwindling resources should be expended in this extravagant fashion for military purposes. In this, the International Year of the Child, is it not revolting that one Trident submarine costs as much as would be needed for the schooling of 16 million children in developing countries? What is the legacy we shall be leaving for our children if we continue in the present insane manner in the name of safeguarding security?
52.	Another problem that threatens civilized existence is the criminal combination of racist policies and colonial ambition that adds up to apartheid. A minority regime continues to violate openly and flagrantly the resolutions, decisions and sanctions of the United Nations and to subject the majority of the South African people to extreme forms of degradation, repression and torture. This situation is a reflection of the barrenness of our ritualistic reiteration of opposition to apartheid without our being able to ensure effective and comprehensive action against it. We have to mobilize the entire world community, without exception, if the opposition to this outrage is to be credible and effective. We should like to reaffirm our continued support for the measures to implement mandatory economic sanctions against South Africa. We also reiterate strongly our opposition to the economic and military collaboration—including nuclear collaboration—between certain Western countries and other States with South Africa.
53.	In Namibia, the action of the General Assembly and the Security Council over the last decade and beyond constitutes a history of lost opportunities. This continuing inefficacy casts serious doubts on the prospects for success of the United Nations plan for Namibia.  SWAPO, for its part, has displayed a consistent willingness to accept United Nations-supervised elections for the transition to majority rule and independence in Namibia. As long as South Africa continues its illegal presence inside Namibia, a just and peaceful change-over would be well-nigh impossible. My delegation fully supports the adoption by the Security Council of concrete measures to compel South Africa to end its illegal occupation of Namibia.
54.	In Zimbabwe, the liberation struggle continues at great cost in human suffering and ominous portents of escalation. The Rhodesia Constitutional Conference currently considering the problem of the transfer of power to the majority oscillates between hope and des-pair. We had welcomed the Lusaka agreement and had cautioned that its implementation should be a matter of time- bound urgency. We hope that a constitution acceptable to the Patriotic Front will be evolved in the Conference.
55.	In West Asia, developments in relations between certain States should not obscure consideration of the deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab territories in southern Lebanon.
56.	India believes that nothing but a comprehensive solution of the problem will bring about peace in the area. Central to this settlement is the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their own homeland; the total and unconditional Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories, including the Holy City of Jerusalem; and, finally, the right of all States in the region, including Arab Palestine, to live within secure borders. Full and equal participation of the PLO in any peace negotiations is a sine qua non for a final settlement. The growing threat to international peace and security resulting from Israeli policies and partial solutions can no longer be ignored, The continued Israeli acts of aggression in Lebanon also bear testimony to the Israelis' belligerent intentions.
57.	It is also painful to note that Cyprus continues to suffer foreign occupation of a sizeable part of its territory. We welcome the 10-point agreement reached in May 1979 and we urge the parties concerned to recognize each other's legitimate rights and interests and to display a spirit of mutual accommodation. Let us hope that the talks will lead to a just and peaceful resolution of the problems between the two communities, within the framework of the unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and non-alignment of Cyprus.
58.	The South Asian region, earlier plagued by war and dissension, is now freer from tensions. We have been able to respond to each other's interests and concerns in a spirit of accommodation. My country feels a sense of satisfaction at the resolution of some intractable problems. The improved environment provides scope for greater contacts and co-operation which will benefit the countries of the region. We rejoice that at last the entire subcontinent is now committed to the principles and policies of non-alignment and of peaceful coexistence. All this should augur well for peace and stability in the region. If, however, I advert to Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India, it is because there was reference to it by the foreign affairs adviser to the President of Pakistan in his statement to this Assembly on 1 October. We have repeatedly made it clear that United Nations resolutions have ceased to be relevant and the Simla Agreement holds the field. So the issue has to be bilaterally settled in accordance with the Simla Agreement.
59.	We are happy that in the region of South-East Asia, economic co-operation and efforts to establish a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality on the initiative of the Association of South-East Asian Nations have been making progress in spite of the many pressures operating in the area.
60.	We had thought that the retreat of foreign troops from Viet Nam over four years ago would usher in a new era of peace and co-operation in Indo-China and in the whole region of South-East Asia. That expectation was, unfortunately, short-lived. Foreign intervention and foreign involvement in Indo-China continued in new forms distorting the entire situation in that strategic area. Distrust and suspicion are rife in the region, as is the apprehension that great Powers may become involved. In consequence, the countries of Indo-China have not been allowed to settle down in peace to the reconstruction and development of their economies.
61.	The Sino-Viet Nam border remains tense, and there is no peace in Kampuchea as yet. We ardently hope that the tension between China and Viet Nam will not be allowed to escalate, and we believe that boundary questions and other problems between two great neighbouring Asian countries can and ought to be resolved through peaceful and friendly negotiations.
62. 	The brave people of Kampuchea, with whom we in India have age-old cultural ties, have been subjected to untold misery and deprivation. The present situation demands statesmanship from all parties, so that peace, stability, mutual confidence and co-operation may be restored, and so that respect for the personality and independence of every State can be strictly observed.
63.	There have been some indications that at least the humanitarian problems could be mitigated through goodwill and a constructive approach. We should like to congratulate the Secretary-General for the success of the United Nations-sponsored Geneva conference on the Indo-China refugees.  It is gratifying to note that since that conference the exodus of refugees has dropped to a trickle.
64.	The spectre of famine, however, looms large over Kampuchea. We welcome the recent understanding for extending international emergency relief and assistance. India would be ready to make its modest contribution in this regard.
65.	India is firmly committed to the creation of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean, as envisaged in the Declaration of the General Assembly. The increase, over the years, in great-Power military presence in the Indian Ocean and the further strengthening of military bases, such as Diego Garcia, are a matter of serious concern. On the most important issues pertaining to the implementation of the Declaration, the majority of the littoral and hinterland States were able to adopt a common position at the meeting held in New York in July this year.
66.	We invite the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean with a view to convening a conference on the Indian Ocean.
67.	It was a disappointment for us when the negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States for the reduction of their military presence in the Indian Ocean were abruptly suspended in March 1978. We welcome the agreement reached at the Vienna summit to resume the dialogue and urge early and meaningful negotiations.
68.	In the field of human rights, it is immensely important to realize that, in the ultimate analysis, individual human rights must rest on the foundation of collective human rights. National liberation creates the framework for the latter, and only after achieving it can one think of ensuring human rights for individuals. The stability of newly gained freedom is essential for ensuring socio-economic change and for the widening and deepening of the ambit of human rights. These need to be properly institutionalized, for only thus will there be a safeguard against their possible abuse, suppression or total eclipse.
69.	The present world economic order continues to follow the rule that to him who hath even more shall be given. The two United Nations Development Decades, one of the 1960s and the other of the 1970s, and a series of protracted negotiations, have proved sterile exercises, belying the hopes that had been raised that inequity between nations need not be an inexorable law and that, for reasons as much economic as ethical, the rich should assist the poor.
70.	We are now on the threshold of the third United Nations Development Decade, covering the 1980s, and of the special session of the United Nations which will be held next year. Despite the bleakness of past experience, we must not miss this opportunity to impart a momentum to the negotiations for establishing a new economic order. Among the vital requirements of such an order, is an international trading system that would be more responsive to the needs of developing countries. Multilateral trade negotiations portend nothing more than disappointment for the developing countries. Protectionism by advanced countries grows unabated and has assumed new forms. The fifth session of UNCTAD concluded in Manila without coming to grips with the issues that relate to the structure of the present economic order. The special session must therefore address itself squarely to the task of dealing with basic structural issues if it is to have any meaning. The current imbalance; the dependence and external vulnerability of the developing countries; the urgent need to make a perceptible dent in the worst aspects of mass poverty—these are a few of the issues that the developed countries need to look at from a fresh perspective. Without giving up existing commitments, they will have to conceive new forms of resource transfers, which can ensure that responsibility is shared and which are capable of leading us to greater common prosperity. Even though the main thrust towards development should come from the developing countries themselves, the developed world in its own enlightened self-interest must realize that its prosperity is best ensured if the world at large can meet its basic minimum requirements, thus forming a large and growing market for developed countries.
71.	The disparity in the dissemination of scientific knowledge and technological know-how in the world is one of the basic causes for the widening gap between the developed and developing nations. The United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, recently concluded at Vienna, was successful in focusing attention on this question and in evolving an agreed plan of action at the international level.  We hope that the new Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development will be able to promote agreement on adequate and sustained measures for the transfer of technology to the developing countries.
72.	The developing countries expect to, and indeed must, participate fully in the world decision-making processes. Having abandoned, with the earlier decades, the framework that was formulated for appraising performance and ensuring joint responsibility of both the North and the South, we have yet to agree on a draft of the preamble of a new international development strategy. We run the risk of going to the special session marking the commencement of the third development decade without an agreed strategy, jeopardizing the outcome of the Decade itself.
73.	Similar mechanisms to promote international accountability are required in specific areas of multilateral economic functioning particularly within UNCTAD and UNIDO. One of the principal tasks at the forthcoming Third General Conference of UNIDO to be held in New Delhi in 1980 will be to equip the agency with an effective mechanism to examine and monitor the implications of the Lima target of 25 per cent of the world's manufacturing output as the share of developing countries.
74.	Finally , the developing countries must not forget the imperatives of collective self-reliance as a major component of the new international development strategy. In fact, it could well provide the special session in 1980 its principal theme. When meshed together, the unutilized complementarities and the surplus resources of developing countries give the developing countries enhanced bargaining power with the developed world,
75.	India has, at the recent Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which met in Havana, taken a number of initiatives in fostering collective self-reliance. We have, with Bangladesh, proposed the establishment of a food security system for developing countries. Though a developing country which has had to feed an immense population, we in India today are in a position to make a modest contribution to any agreed international system of food security that may be evolved. It is time that the world, and especially the advanced nations, realized that food security is even more important than military security in maintaining peace and stability in the world.
76.	Similarly, the Havana Conference approved the proposal to study the possibility of establishing a project development facility. We hope that the facility would become operational by the end of 1980. India, with extensive experience in technology relevant to developing countries, is willing to collaborate with others in setting up facilities for research and training in priority areas, geared specially to their needs. We would be glad to share our experience and welcome their participation.
77.	The policy guidelines on reinforcing mutual solidarity recently adopted in Havana are a welcome expression of the political will of the non-aligned and other developing countries to co-operate among themselves to meet their minimum needs and emergency requirements. The guidelines, which are not confined to oil, have wide implications of a long-term nature, since they cover all primary commodities and raw materials. It is our sincere hope that these policy guidelines will be expeditiously translated into concrete commitments.
78.	Another problem which has bedevilled the evolution of a just and equitable world economic order has been the energy problem. Half of India's total import bill, for instance, is now accounted for by oil imports and the latest round of price increases has further raised the burden by a crushing $1.4 billion per year. Even more critical has been the problem of securing minimum requirements of petroleum from the world market, where we have to compete with the affluent nations.
79.	I need hardly emphasize the enormous significance of energy in the context of developing economies, characterized as they are by limited substitution possibilities for priority uses such as transport, by the high capital intensity of alternative energy resources and by the problems inherent in reducing a level of consumption which is already at the bare and essential minimum. Clearly these countries are particularly vulnerable to the world oil situation. Is it not unconscionable that out of the total world consumption of 60 million barrels a day the United States, Europe, Japan and Canada should together consume 45 million? Or that in the year 2000 the per capita daily consumption of oil will be 62 barrels in North America, 32 for each European, 10 for those living in the oil-producing countries and only some 4 barrels for the rest.
80.	All the developing countries should have a right, indeed a special right, to secure a fair share in the world consumption of energy and other raw materials.
81.	In the ultimate analysis, the question involves the principle of equity. The core of the present resource crisis is the attempt by developed countries to pre-empt the bulk of the world's natural resources in order to maintain their current pattern of consumption and continue their existing life-styles. The disaster that profligate consumption is leading to calls for a change in fife-styles in developed countries. Such a change is also necessitated by the imbalance between material and spiritual growth that has prompted many in the West to turn to the philosophy of the Orient in their quest for inner peace and harmony. Echoing the present predicament of the mature industrial or post-industrial societies, T. S. Eliot spoke of " . . .the torment of desire unsatisfied and the greater torment of desire satisfied".
82.	The political, economic and social order in our world has to be refashioned not only with reference to ourselves but for the sake of the future of our children. Appropriately, the observance of the International Women's Year and the International Year of the Child has coincided with the efforts at promoting a new inter-national economic order. With the mother and the child at the core of our thoughts we obviously cannot concentrate on a political order based on power and exploitation and a development process which is myopic and inequitable. In fact, if the process is to begin with the child in the mother's womb, as it ought to, we have to work for the creation of a total environment which would ensure equality at birth to every child and provide for his development throughout the formative period. The symbolic significance of observing a particular year as dedicated to a particular cause can only find real meaning if the problem is considered in a larger perspective. Standing on the threshold of the 1980s, we shall have to begin the desired development process now.
83.	Is it not a pity that we assemble here year after year to do little more than patch up our petty quarrels and pay lip service to some lofty ideas and principles? It is time we ceased to concern ourselves merely with the past and the present and began to look to the future with the spirit of collective creativity which must be the hallmark of the United Nations system. The United Nations has to be not merely the engineer of truce but rather the architect of a new era—an era that could see the rise of the new man of the twenty-first century. To do this, we need to help the United Nations to extend the frontiers of its perception. The time to do so is now.﻿161.	Mr, President, please accept my congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly. We are confident that you will guide the work of the Assembly efficiently and fairly.
162.	I would also like to express our appreciation to the President of the last session of the General Assembly, Ambassador Lievano of Colombia.
163.	It is my pleasure to congratulate Saint Lucia on its independence and admission to the United Nations.
164.	As we reflect on the development of the United Nations throughout the past year, we find the spectacle far from encouraging. The fundamental obstacle to the Organization's work is the selectivity which has been forced upon it by an automatic majority of the membership, which is far from impartial and prefers expediency to principles. The United Nations specialized agencies have suffered badly from this. Organs like UNESCO, WHO, the ILO and others have been severely affected by heavy politicization which has influenced their functioning. Instead of dedicating themselves solely to their specific fields in the service of mankind, they have been reduced to forums of political one-sidedness.
165.	There must be a return to the United Nations Charter. Consultation and agreement should be restored to their primary place. In particular, the specialized agencies must abandon the dangerous path of politicization along which they have been dragged, so that they may devote themselves to the economic, social, humanitarian, scientific and technological tasks which they were set up to perform and which they perform so well when permitted to do so.
166.	There has been little improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Even though the number of exit visas for Soviet Jews has increased recently, the gap between the number of Jews applying for exit visas and those granted them is growing, while an even larger number of Soviet Jews have been denied the fundamental right to emigrate—a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Helsinki Declaration. Those Jews who do insist on their rights are subjected to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment and, in some cases, to arrest and imprisonment. We have taken note of the fact that seven Jewish prisoners were released a few months ago. However, we are particularly concerned by the harsh prison sentences imposed on other Jews whose only crime is their desire to re-join their families in Israel—Iosif Begun, Boris Kalendarov, Iosif Mendelevich, Ida Nudel, Anatoly Shcharansky, Simon Shnirman, Vladimir Slepak, Aleksandr Vilic and Amner Zavurov. The Soviet Union should release these and other prisoners of conscience and permit everyone who seeks to emigrate to Israel and join his people and his family to do so.
167.	We cannot be silent in the face of the rising incitement against the State of Israel and the Jewish people, its religion, culture and national movement, as manifested day by day in the official Soviet media. In this regard, it must be noted that the Soviet authorities still do not permit Jews to practise their religion and culture. We appeal to the Soviet Union to allow Jewish religion and culture to be practised and expressed freely, and to put an end to anti-Jewish propaganda.
168.	We also deeply regret that the Government of Syria continues to violate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international conventions by refusing to permit its Jewish citizens to leave and to be reunited with their relatives living in other lands. We appeal to the Syrian Government to change this policy.
169.	The past year witnessed a historic break-through in the Middle East. In March, Israel and Egypt signed the first ever Israel-Arab peace treaty. President El-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Begin of Israel concluded that Treaty after intense negotiations, which lasted a year and a half and which demanded great leadership and courage. Israel wishes to express its appreciation and gratitude to the United States of America and to its President, Mr. Jimmy Carter, personally for the vital role which they played in bringing about this historic achievement, which has created a new reality in our region.
170.	Let me recall here that Israel has throughout the first 30 years of its independence constantly extended its hand to its neighbours in the search for peace. This found expression on the very first day of the establishment of our State, in the Israel Declaration of Independence of 14 May 1948. Let me add specifically that as early as in the summer of 1967, very shortly after the six-day war, Israel had taken the initiative and offered to sign a treaty of peace with Egypt, declaring its readiness to withdraw from the Sinai and return it to Egyptian sovereignty in the context of a peace treaty. This Israeli proposal was rejected, and the answer given by Egypt at the time was: "No negotiation, no recognition and no peace with Israel: what was taken by force will be taken back by force." This year, however, has seen the beginning of a new era in the Middle East. After a generation of continued warfare, the realization of a dream begins.
171.	The Treaty of Peace, which, as stated in its preamble, is "an important step in the search for comprehensive peace in the area," has provided for a role in its implementation to be fulfilled by the United Nations. United Nations forces and observers were called upon to carry out functions in order to see that the peace treaty was fully implemented. Ironically and paradoxically, that initiative taken by some States Members of the United Nations in the cause of peace was rejected by the United Nations. The Security Council was exposed to the threat of a Soviet veto, and the mandate of UNEF was not renewed, so that the Security Council in effect disassociated itself from the first positive and major step in the great effort to relieve the Middle East from the dangers of war.
172.	Although our assumption and hope that the United Nations would assist in the implementation of the Treaty of Peace have been disappointed, we will proceed along the path of peace. The attitude of the United Nations will not damage the peace process; but it will, no doubt, lower the prestige and even the moral stature of the United Nations, one of whose basic principles and purposes is, as stated by the Charter, to "maintain international peace and security . . . and to bring about by peaceful means . . . settlement of international disputes. . . ''.
173.	As a result of the Treaty of Peace, the process of normalization in the relations between Egypt and Israel has already begun. We are confident that in the months ahead we shall make further progress in cementing new bonds of co-operation.
174.	The frequent visits and meetings of the leaders of both countries are also an expression of the common desire to promote understanding and closer personal relationships. The most recent—and most impressive—visit of President El-Sadat to Israel three weeks ago and the reception given him in the city of Haifa, where Jews and Arabs coexist in harmony and cooperation, indicated the deep feelings of all the population of Israel towards the era of peace and, we hope, left warm memories in the minds and hearts of our Egyptian guests.
175.	Over the past year the situation in Lebanon has become grave. The intervention of Syria has, in fact, plunged the northern part of that formerly prosperous country into a state of anarchy, and the Lebanese Government has become incapable of ruling and exercising its authority over all of its territory. The southern part of Lebanon has been, to a great extent, in the hands of the terrorist groups of the PLO, whose murderous activities have been a source of danger and harassment not only to Israel, but also to the Christian and Moslem Lebanese in that area.
176.	UNIFIL was established by Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978.
177.	Israel, having been compelled to act militarily against the PLO in southern Lebanon in a clear act of self-defence, agreed to withdraw its forces, provided that the new United Nations force would undertake to restore peace and security in the area and to assist the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective authority in the country.
178.	Unfortunately, the aim of restoring Lebanon's integrity has not been achieved, and the Lebanese Government is still incapable of exercising its sovereignty. PLO terrorist groups are still functioning all over Lebanon and, in quite a large number of cases, inside the area of United Nations units. In this region, which was free from any terrorist presence at the time of the Israeli withdrawal, there are now about 700 PLO terrorists, who are acting murderously through the lines of the United Nations Force against the people of Israel. The Force was supposed to act against this. The Secretary-General, in his initial report of 19 March 1978 spoke of the right of self-defence of the Force, including resistance by forceful means to attempts to prevent it from discharging its duties.
179.	In his report of 13 September 1978, the Secretary-General stated, among the guidelines and terms of reference of UNIFIL, that "uniformed or armed personnel and military equipment are not allowed to enter the UNIFIL area of operation"." However, there are too many cases in which the Force has in fact reconciled itself to the presence and activities of the terrorists in its own area. UNIFIL has not carried out its mandate and duties in this respect, despite the fact that its units have themselves suffered from terrorist activities and at least eight UNIFIL soldiers have been killed in these incidents. The presence and activities of the PLO terrorist groups in the region are in violation of the UNIFIL mandate, and it should be understood that Israel cannot be expected to sit back while terror is being unleashed against its population, no matter where in Lebanon these actions originate.
180- Once again it must be emphasized that terrorism could be virtually eliminated if certain countries ceased to provide arms, training and refuge to its practitioners. No cause can justify terrorism. The issue is, therefore, a fundamental one for the international community, and the struggle against terrorism should continue until terrorism has been brought to an end.
181.	The PLO, by its very nature and actions, is a terrorist organization. Its true character is reflected in its so-called' 'Covenant", which calls for the purging of the Zionist presence from Palestine. The same document denies the existence of the Jewish people and its unbroken historical ties with the land of Israel. It alleges that the establishment of the State of Israel is null and void and rejects outright any plans to settle the Middle East conflict by peaceful means.
182.	The PLO has not hesitated to try to translate its vicious doctrine into criminal deeds. It has conducted an unceasing campaign of terror aimed at the mass murder of innocent civilians in Israel. From June 1967 to date, over 640 people have been murdered and 3,300 others have been wounded in Israel by the PLO. It has also terrorized and intimidated Arabs prepared to negotiate peace with Israel, killing more than 350 Arabs and injuring almost 2,000 others.
183.	Given the PLO's character and aims, it was, in fact, recognized by the parties at Camp David that the PLO could not be a partner to the peace process. No country can or should be expected to negotiate with a party which denies its very existence, aims at its destruction, and uses terror against its civilian population. On the other hand, careful provision was made in the Camp David agreements to include Palestinian Arab residents of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District in the peace process.
184.	The Framework for Peace in the Middle East, Agreed at Camp David by the President of Egypt and the Prime Minister of Israel, and witnessed by the President of the United States of America, refers positively and constructively to Palestinian Arab rights, as well as to the rights and security interests of the other parties. It is based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which are the only agreed basis for peace negotiations in the Middle East. Any tampering with them can only gravely jeopardize the current peace process.
185.	This Framework agreement sees the solution of the question of the Palestinian Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District in terms of granting them full autonomy, for a transitional period of five years, before reaching an agreement on the final status of the area. For that reason, it was agreed to negotiate on a principle of self-government—exercised through an administrative council—for the Arab inhabitants of the areas in question.
186.	Moreover, in the preamble to this Framework, the signatories invited other parties to the Arab-Israel conflict to adhere to it as well. In the letter sent by the President of Egypt and the Prime Minister of Israel to President Carter on 26 March 1979—the date of the signing of the peace treaty—they invited the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to Join the negotiations.
187.	This Framework provides for negotiations on the transitional period of five years, and also for the subsequent negotiations on a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan, in which the location of the boundaries dividing the two countries will be agreed. The option of creating a third State between Israel and Jordan is, therefore, not considered in the Camp David agreements.
188.	Thus, the objective of the negotiations being held now, based on the Camp David Framework, is the provision of full autonomy for the inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza. The Israeli military government and its civilian administration will be withdrawn as soon as a self-governing authority has been freely elected by the inhabitants. This Framework also specifies measures that will be taken to assure the security of Israel and its neighbours.
189.	The only way to keep the process of peace going on is for us to adhere strictly to the Camp David agreements in their letter and spirit, and I should like to assure this Assembly that this is the policy of Israel.
190.	Before concluding, let me say a few words about Jerusalem, the eternal capital of Israel and of the Jewish people.
191.	Jerusalem has known many foreign rulers during the course of its long history, but none of them regarded it as their capital. Only the Jewish people has always maintained it as the sole centre of its national and spiritual life. For thousands of years, Jews have prayed daily for their return to Jerusalem and, for the past century and a half, Jerusalem has had a continuous and uninterrupted Jewish majority.
192.	Jerusalem cannot be divided again by barbed wire and there can be no return to the repeated shooting at our civilians and the barbaric desecration of the Jewish quarter of the City, the Holy Places and cemeteries, as happened before 1967, when the eastern part of Jerusalem was under the occupation of Jordan. It is relevant to recall that, in grave violation of the 1949 Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement; Jordan prevented Jews from having access to their Holy Places and cultural institutions and tried to eliminate systematically every trace of Jerusalem's Jewish past. By contrast, as a result of Israel's policy of free access to all Holy Places, millions of Moslem and Christian tourists and pilgrims—in addition to Jewish visitors—have come to Jerusalem since 1967, and have prayed and worshipped freely at its mosques and churches.
193.	Jerusalem is now a city of coexistence between Jews and Arabs. At the same time, the Government of Israel is and has always been conscious of the fact that Jerusalem is of deep concern also to other faiths, and that its religious and cultural sites are precious to Christians and Moslems, as well as to Jews. There should be completely free access to all the holy shrines by believers of all religions, without any exception, completely protected and guaranteed by the law of the country, and those holy shrines should be administered by the respective representatives of the religions concerned, without any interference.
194.	The choice before the United Nations is clear. This Organization, whose Charter enjoins it to support the cause of international peace and security, must not submit to the designs of those who reject peace. Let the United Nations give peace its full support. Let the Governments of Jordan, Syria and Lebanon and the representatives of the Palestinian Arabs residing in Judaea, Samaria and Gaza join the negotiations in order to achieve the noble goal of a real and durable comprehensive peace in our area.﻿As a member of the Commonwealth, New Zealand is pleased to welcome Saint Lucia to the United Nations and to offer its warmest congratulations to the representatives of Saint Lucia at this session of the General Assembly. We look forward to working with the delegation of Saint Lucia in furthering the purposes of this Organization.
248.	It is a pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, and other officers of the Assembly on your election. I should be grateful if you would convey my special greetings to Ambassador Salim, the President of this session. New Zealand values its special link with the United Republic of Tanzania. We work together in partnership, within the Commonwealth. We admire Tanzania's example of self-reliance in the struggle for social and economic progress. We admire the leadership Tanzania has given to the movement for self-determination not only in Africa but for all people. We New Zealanders value, in particular, the help Ambassador Salim, as Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, has given us as we have worked, loyally and consistently, to promote the principle of self-determination in the small island Territories of the South Pacific which have been associated with us.
249.	Ambassador Salim has had the opportunity of seeing how remote and isolated are the islands of the Pacific. New Zealand, too, is remote from the trouble- centres of the world. This geographical isolation, how-ever, has never cut us off from the impact of world events. This year we have followed with attention, and with concern, events in three areas of instability: the Middle East, southern Africa and South-East Asia. We have welcomed the political progress made in the Middle East, limited though that may have been. On the other hand, we have deplored the continued escalation of oil prices, for this has jeopardized efforts to establish a stable world economic order and damaged the economies of many countries. We have taken part, through the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries in Lusaka, in the efforts of the Commonwealth to break the impasse on Rhodesia. But our most direct concern, naturally enough, has been with the conflict that has taken place nearest to us. The calamitous events in Indo-China have caused us the gravest concern. There we have seen continued armed conflict. Vast numbers of people have been forced to move. Starvation and suffering are daily facts of life. Fighting goes on and may well spread. The already desperate food shortage threatens to get worse. The situation is little short of disastrous.
250.	My Government is deeply concerned by these developments. The conflict in Indo-China has polarized South-East Asia: a gulf of mistrust now divides the States of Indo-China and the members of ASEAN.
251.	New Zealand has close and friendly ties with the five countries that belong to ASEAN. We have welcomed the rapid progress they have made in developing their economies and improving the living standards of their peoples. It has been a remarkable achievement. ASEAN has emerged as a significant force in international affairs. It has been able to make a major contribution towards the stability of the But the longer the conflict continues, the greater the danger that the great Powers will once more involved and establish themselves in the area, the longer the fighting goes on in Kampuchea the more risk there is that it will spill over into Thailand. The conflict in Indo-China threatens to jeopardize not only the prosperity of the ASEAN countries but also their effectiveness as an influence for peace and stability in Southeast Asia.
252.	Two attempts have been made this year to resolve the conflict by force. Neither has succeeded, the conflict arises from deep-seated issues—ancient animosities, revived and stimulated by recent actions that have been aided and inflamed from outside IndoChina. Nationalism runs too high for any one party to impose its will on another by force. Peace will be restored only when the countries of the area—those in Indo-China and their neighbours, too—learn to respect one another's independence and territorial integrity, as they pledged to do when they joined the United Nations.
253.	There can be no justification for any government to send armed forces into another country against the will of its people. There is no justification for a government to drive out vast numbers of its own people to hazard their lives on the high seas. It has been abundantly demonstrated that government policies can stimulate, and can retard, the flow of refugees. If that desperate flow of people begins again, the world will know where the responsibility lies. If, however, it ends once and for all, the process of political negotiation can begin. If the withdrawal of forces can be brought about, the normalization of relations can be contemplated. The massive task of relief and rehabilitation for the suffering people of Indo-China can proceed without hindrance.
254.	New Zealand has always said that the most pressing need was to begin working towards a political settlement. That need is even more urgent today. Any settlement must be based on the fact that there are three separate countries in Indo-China, each with its own national tradition. These three countries must live closely together. In practice this means that there can be no peace until the independence of Kampuchea is assured and Kampuchea is prepared to co-operate with its neighbours.
255.	My Government accepts as logical the decision taken by the General Assembly on the question of Kampuchean credentials. That does not mean that we condone in any way the policies of the Pol Pot Government. That regime was tyrannical in the extreme. It was notorious for its cruelty and its utter disregard for the most basic human rights of its people. Nevertheless, it was the established Government of Kampuchea, and it was recognized by the international community. The same cannot be said of the regime headed by Heng Samrin. That regime was installed by foreign forces. It has failed to demonstrate its independence. The main aim of any political settlement must be to let the people of Kampuchea express themselves freely without the dominating presence of foreign troops. They must be able to decide their own future until those conditions exist my Government sees no justification for expelling the present representatives of Kampuchea or for accepting another delegation 
256.	Meanwhile, we face the practical problem of dealing with the human consequences of the continuing conflict. On one aspect of it the United Nations has already taken some effective action. The Meeting convened by the Secretary-General in Geneva in July succeeded in mobilizing greatly increased resources for the relief of refugees from Indo-China. My Government welcomed the Secretary-General's initiative. We are playing our part in the programme he has launched. We have also noted with satisfaction the decline in the flow of refugees since the Meeting. That showed that the Government of Viet Nam was accepting its responsibilities. We can hope, therefore, that there will be no resurgence of the tragedies we saw earlier this year.
257.	The most desperate human problem at this moment is in Kampuchea. Continual fighting, following the internal troubles of recent years, has uprooted a large part of the population. Food supplies have been severely disrupted. Before long, 10 per cent of the country's population may be starving. Famine would bring a new wave of desperate refugees who would flee to Thailand. The world must stop this disaster happening. Another great effort by the international community is essential. Food and medical supplies must be provided—and right away. New Zealand is ready to join in this new effort.
258.	We do not forget that in other regions there are also massive displacements of people. Some of these situations are of tragically long standing. Here, too, the search for negotiated solutions to the conflicts that have caused this human suffering must be a prime concern of this Assembly.
259.	In southern Africa there have been some promising developments. The most significant was the agreement reached by the Commonwealth Heads of Government at Lusaka last month. From this came the Rhodesia Constitutional Conference on Zimbabwe Rhodesia. My Prime Minister, to underline his support for the agreement reached at Lusaka, sent a message to all 24 delegates assembled in London for the conference. He said:
"The road to a peaceful settlement is now open to you. It is for you—each and all—to make your contribution to the final stage and to lead your country into independence, peace and stability. I do not minimise the difficulties that lie ahead of you. But I hope that you will keep in mind at all times that the fate of millions of your men, women and children, now and in the future, lies in your hands—and in your hands alone."
260.	New Zealand hopes that, through this Lusaka initiative, which underlines once more the value of the Commonwealth association, one area of southern Africa will at last reach peaceful and legal independence.
261.	My Government is also encouraged that the consultations which five Western Powers initiated, over two years ago, on Namibia have been resumed. A possibility now exists for the final, legal independence of the Namibian people.
262.	But if there are prospects for a peaceful solution to two of the problems of southern Africa, the third the intolerable system of apartheid, still exists unchecked in the Republic of South Africa. New Zealand joins with the rest of mankind in urging the Government of that unhappy country to move now to break down the barriers of apartheid— those barricades that deny the very essence of human rights and human dignity to the vast majority of its people. Apartheid nurtures the seeds of bitter and vicious conflict. If only for that reason— though it is only one of many—the Members of the United Nations cannot rest until the risk of this conflict has been eliminated.
263.	In his inaugural remarks the President called on this Assembly to pursue practical means, rather than to promote ever-increasing resolutions, in the search for solutions to the many problems which afflict the world today. Nowhere could his advice be better heeded than with respect to the situation in the Middle East. My Government sees as a significant advance the dramatic events of the past two years, which culminated in the Camp David agreements and the subsequent negotiations between Egypt and Israel. The current efforts of the leaders of these States must be given a chance to succeed. A critical dialogue has begun. The objective of the world community now should be to broaden that dialogue.
264.	My Government continues to believe that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) contains the essential element for a negotiated settlement. That resolution remains a central foundation, and it can be built on. It is now widely recognized that the search for a political solution in the Middle East must involve the participation of the Palestinian people. The rights of the Palestinians, including their right to self-determination and to establish an independent Palestinian State if they so desire, can no longer be ignored.
265.	The road to a negotiated, just and lasting solution in the Middle East will not be easy. It is critical therefore, that everyone concerned should eschew insensitive or provocative acts. We believe that the continued establishment of Israeli settlements in land occupied during the 1967 war is one such act. The recent outbreak of hostilities in southern Lebanon is another. My Government rejects the policy of pre-emptive strikes by Israel as strongly as it rejects any act which violates the territorial integrity of Israel. The road to peace is fragile. It should not be put at risk.
266.	The year 1979 could have been a watershed year for the international community in its continuing debate on global economic reform. The fifth session of UNC- TAD and the Tokyo round of the multilateral trade negotiations were major events which held great promise for a new break-through in North-South relations, but then ended inconclusively. The urgent task of this session of the Assembly will be to find a way of restoring momentum to the debate on the establishment of a New International Economic Order, for the international community faces pressing and dangerous economic problems. The economic "ripple-effects" of this year's sharp price rises in oil have become painfully obvious—to developed and developing countries alike. The outlook is for severe disruption to the process of global economic growth. Sluggish rates of economic growth will inhibit the continued development of enlarged "northern" markets for "southern" goods—and vice versa. Heavier foreign debt burdens for many countries seem inevitable. Inflation, unemployment, balance of payments disequilibrium and protectionism will feed upon global economic uncertainty. The pressing need to develop new energy sources will be set back financially—and therefore technically.
267.	No Government need imagine that it will be able to insulate its economy entirely from the effects of a spreading economic malaise. Developing countries— and all small economies, that rely on trade, including my own—will be especially vulnerable.
268.	In the face of these probabilities we can no longer afford the luxury of debating the possibility of new forms of global economic co-operation, structural adjustment and institutional reform. The time has come to put an end to the polemics and arid definitional disputes which have so far characterized the dialogue between North and South. Let us do so in the sure knowledge that if we do not master the forces of economic and social change, they will surely master us.
269.	New Zealand looks to this session of the General Assembly, and to the special session to be held in 1980, to bring a new sense of purpose to the unfinished task of formulating strategies for global economic management. We believe that the effectiveness of these strategies and the future well-being of the interdependent global economy will rest, to a very considerable degree, on the success of renewed efforts to find constructive solutions in two critical sectors—trade and energy.
270.	The explosion in world trade in the last quarter of a century has brought greater prosperity to many countries. We must ensure that this growth is maintained, based upon acknowledgement of the doctrine of comparative efficiency and a positive assault on the forces of protectionism. New Zealand cannot accept that there should be two sets of rules, one for the old industrial producers and another for the rest, that is, for the new industrial producers and for the agricultural producers. Agricultural protectionism is practised by almost all industrialized countries—to the disadvantage of their consumers and to the frustration of internationally efficient producers, such as New Zealand. That, we believe, is a denial of the responsibility of this generation to establish an efficient production base for feeding the next. This responsibility demands new approaches and positive adjustment policies based on the principles of free multilateral trade.
271.	We also have to learn to see energy issues in a new perspective. Experts predict that within the next 10 years the production capacity for our present oil- based energy system will have reached a ceiling. There will be further rises in the real price of oil and an absolute and increasing shortage in relation to total global import requirements. Therefore, there can be no argument: we must move to new energy systems. The challenge lies in how we manage the transitional period. The General Assembly has already risen to this challenge by deciding to convene in 1981 a United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy. New Zealand attaches the highest importance to this Conference. It intends to play its full part to ensure its success. While many important energy questions lie outside its purview, the Conference has the potential to make a significant contribution to identifying new energy systems that will benefit us all.
272.	In its short history this Organization has often taken the lead in promoting new goals for social justice, international peace and racial equality. Now it must define new standards for global economic co-operation. New Zealand sees this as an evolutionary process. Not all countries share this view. Yet, regardless of our individual prescriptions for the world's economic ills, I am sure we can all agree that this is the place, and now is the time, to give force to the concept of global economic interdependence which we have talked about for so long. What is needed now in the North-South dialogue is not resolutions, but resolution.
273.	We in New Zealand are conscious of the sense of disenchantment in the United Nations and in other international economic bodies with the use to which these existing mechanisms are put. We are ready to look with an open mind at proposals that may come forward for new mechanisms, or new methods of working, to help us find a way around the obstacles which at present inhibit our efforts to achieve a new order in international co-operation. The recent meeting of the Committee of the Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174 took an important initiative to this end. Such a proposal is an expression of faith in our collective capacity to control our economic destiny. We may from time to time lose faith in the machinery. We cannot afford to lose faith in the goals.
274.	Another major topic on the agenda of this Assembly is the problem of disarmament. There are some areas in the vast network of negotiations currently in progress where there is a clear and urgent need to bring the negotiations to a head and to reach new agreement.
275.	Foremost among these is the need to conclude a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. The Pacific was for many years an arena for the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. Underground tests are still being conducted in the South Pacific, and elsewhere, despite repeated calls for a halt by the overwhelming majority or the United Nations membership. Last year the General Assembly set a time-table for the conclusion of a treaty. To the regret of us all, that time-table has not been met. It was a reasonable time-table, given the very substantial agreement already apparent on the main provisions of such a treaty. The problems that still stand in the way of a treaty are described as technical. But as a contributor to the work of the ad hoc seismic group, formed to study some of the requirements of a system to monitor compliance with the treaty, we must frankly say that the problems in this area do not seem to us to justify further delay. The conclusion of a treaty is widely recognized as a key to preventing horizontal as well as vertical proliferation.
276.	We shall also support endeavours to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. We continue to attach primacy to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to universal adherence to it. Some States continue to stand aside. The balance of advantage under the Treaty appears to them to favour the nuclear-weapons States. They believe also that the nuclear-weapons States have not honoured the obligation they incurred under the Treaty to advance the control and limitation of their nuclear arsenals, and to facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Be that as it may, the pursuit of a nuclear option by any State not currently possessed of nuclear weapons must inevitably have the gravest implications for regional stability and global security. No nation will enhance its security by these means.
277.	How can the international community allay the fears that may lead a country to keep this nuclear option open? It can encourage and support efforts to accommodate differences within regions. At the global level more can be done. The nuclear-weapons States have been prepared to make unilateral declarations undertaking not to use or to threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapons States. Each has, however, qualified the statement in a different way. Without minimizing the difficulties in the way of reconciling these statements, New Zealand would support further exploration of the ground for bringing these assurances together so as to give them a collective and ultimately binding force.
278.	New Zealand has welcomed, as a major step in the limitation of nuclear arsenals, the signature of the second SALT Treaty by the United States and the USSR. Like others, we hope it will soon be ratified. We look forward, also, to further rounds of negotiations that will lead not only to reductions in nuclear armament but to corresponding limitations in the conventional field. It is on the success of these efforts, and on the growing confidence that should come from such successes, that progress in other areas will rest. It would be a tragic irony if the acceptance of restrictions in one area led to pressures for enhanced capacity in others. Peoples everywhere legitimately expect that the process of reducing armaments will be made irreversible and that resources currently spent on defence will be redirected to reduce suffering and to advance human welfare.
279.	Finally, my Government wishes to pay a tribute to this Organization for its leadership in the field of human rights. In the International Covenants we have a mechanism for the genuine advancement of human rights. Last year in the general debate the Prime Minister of New Zealand expressed our intention to ratify both Covenants. We have done this, and the New Zealand Human Rights Commission has among its tasks that of overseeing their implementation. As a consequence, there have been distinct advances in positive action programmes to enhance the position of minorities, where this is necessary and to introduce new procedures and practices that will help women take their place in the full range of national life. The International Year of the Child has been the occasion of spontaneous action throughout the community to take heed of the needs of children.
280.	We have taken pride in our domestic record in the field of human rights, but we are not complacent. As our multiracial society develops, new perceptions gleaned in part from the international oversight which we have accepted as a party to the Covenants, impel us to further efforts to improve our performance.
281.	New Zealand wishes this Assembly well in its indispensable endeavours.﻿Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to this most responsible position and to express the conviction that your activities will contribute to a fruitful session of the United Nations General Assembly.
93.	In the Soviet Union, as elsewhere, we learned with great sadness the news of the demise of the President of the People's Republic of Angola, Agostinho Neto. Our memories of that great political leader of Africa, that tireless fighter for peace and friendship among peoples, will for ever remain in the hearts of the Soviet people.
94.	The current session of the United Nations General Assembly is the last one to be held in the 1970s. This gives us certain grounds not only for considering the topical issues of today but also for summing up some of the political results of the decade which is about to close and for casting a glance at the past. For the problems of today, as indeed the future itself, are more clearly seen against the background of what the past has to tell us about what action was successful and what was not.
95.	It is worthwhile to recall the circumstances which brought about the founding of the United Nations. The war was still raging and the sword of just retribution had not yet fallen on those who instigated it when the leaders of the major nations of the anti-Fascist coalition undertook a task which today still retains its vital importance: the setting up of a reliable barrier against another world tragedy. That task was indeed enshrined in the United Nations Charter as the main goal of this Organization. The effectiveness of the United Nations in maintaining international peace has been and remains the main yardstick in judging all its activities.
96.	Has the United Nations lived up to its mandate? There can be no simple answer to that question. Yet it should be recognized that it has done a lot of good for consolidating peace and promoting international cooperation. It is also evident that the United Nations could have done more than it has.
97.	We are all aware that the manner in which the States Members of the United Nations act in international affairs cannot be reduced to one common denominator. Here the amplitude between different policy trends is great: some have not yet abandoned their claims to dominate the rest and even to hegemony in the world arena; others, naturally, cannot and will not reconcile themselves to this.
98.	Some countries make every effort to put an end to the arms race and demonstrate a serious and responsible approach to this task; others, on the contrary, hurl ever more funds into that race and inflate their military budgets,
99.	In short, the United Nations, as the broadest international organization, shows up in the boldest relief the characteristic features of the world with all its contradictions and collisions and, at the same time, the growing hopes of the peoples for a peaceful future.
100.	The Soviet Union has never abandoned the belief in the possibility of building a solid edifice of peace. Our people and their Government take this as their basic premise and that there is weighty reason for this has been confirmed by the decade of the 1970s.
101.	At the beginning of the current decade there was a new lease on life, so to speak, through a series of treaties which have brought international relations in Europe in line with the realities of its post-war development. The first Soviet-American agreements on the limitation of strategic arms and the basic principles of relations between the USSR and the United States of America were also concluded at that time.
102.	Special mention should also be made of the historic Conference of the top leaders of 35 nations at Helsinki, which sealed in a document the evolution of Europe towards stronger security and co-operation. In that period, long and serious negotiations at the second round of SALT resulted in the Soviet-American Treaty, whose entry into force, one can say, the whole world is looking forward to.
103.	Indeed, all of us can say that the 1970s will hold an important place in history. These years have seen the positive trend in international affairs which was named "detente" becoming a broad process. Detente—and the Soviet Union stood at its cradle— express the aspirations of our entire nation and, we are sure, those of all peoples of the world.
104.	The attitude towards detente is the best indicator of any country's political intentions. In recent years many a good word has been said about detente. But even very good words in favour of detente are not enough; they must be buttressed by deeds, by the policies of States.
105.	There are still people in the world today who frown when they hear the word "detente"; their faces wrinkle like that of a hungry cat tasting a cucumber in a kitchen-garden.
106.	Take, for instance, the questions of renouncing the spread of enmity and hatred among nations and the prohibition of war propaganda. This is, we may say, a minimum for any State adhering to the policy of detente and desirous of promoting a healthy political climate in the world.
107.	As far back as 1947 the General Assembly adopted a resolution against the propaganda for another war. Over 30 years have elapsed since then, but who would undertake to assert today that such propaganda has been stopped? In many States it has not even been outlawed.
108.	The Soviet Union did that long ago. The provision stating that "war propaganda is banned in the USSR" is a formal part of our Constitution, the fundamental law of our State.
109.	On more than one occasion we have emphasized the urgency of this matter. Indeed, before the guns of the aggressors who unleashed the Second World War began to thunder, war propaganda had been in full swing for many years. Incessant calls had been made for the map of Europe and of the world to be carved up to suit the aggressors' designs. The Soviet Union mentions this fact because the forces that seek to condition people to think in terms of war and the arms build-up are still active.
110.	It is becoming a tradition in some countries to play out scenarios of military conflicts. "Look," they say, "that is how things are going to develop." And estimates are made of the casualties and the number of cities to be swept away. Tens or even hundreds of millions of lives are written off in those callous calculations.
111.	The ancient Greeks, and not they alone, left us wise myths whose beauty lies in glorifying what is human in man. It is not to the credit of our contemporaries that other myths are invented today which are designed to stupefy man with pessimism and to make him despair of the triumph of reason. They depict war as totally unavoidable.
112.	There is no doubt as to the purposes for which these and other myths are invented and the policies which they are designed to serve.
113.	What a huge number of films, books, articles and speeches of politicians and "quasi-politicians", all shot through with falsity and deception, are produced to make people believe the fictitious stories about the source of a threat to peace.
114.	One example is the campaign launched with regard to Cuba, in the course of which all sorts of falsehoods are being piled up concerning the policies of Cuba and the Soviet Union. But the truth is that this propaganda is totally without foundation in reality, and is indeed based on falsehoods. The Soviet Union and Cuba have already stated as much. Our advice on this score is simple: the artificiality of this entire question must be honestly admitted and the matter closed.
115.	The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist community have never threatened anybody, nor are they doing so now. A society which is confident of its creative forces and abilities needs no war. It needs peace. These words have been inscribed on the banner of our foreign policy ever since the days of Lenin.
116.	The policy of peace and friendship among peoples, the policy of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems, has invariably been expressed in the decisions of the congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. This policy course will be followed unswervingly in the future- as well. 
117.	Naturally, the USSR and its Warsaw Treaty allies cannot fail to take into account the fact that some States are continuing their military preparations and stepping them up. In these circumstances the USSR and its allies are compelled to look after their security. At the same time our approach in this matter can be described as follows: "The defence potential of the Soviet Union", as L.I. Brezhnev has pointed out, ' 'must be at a level that would deter anyone from attempting to disrupt our peaceful life. A course aimed not at achieving superiority in weapons, but at reducing armaments and easing military confrontation—such is our policy."
118.	He who trusts this policy will never be deceived. The USSR and the socialist countries can always be relied upon in the struggle for peace, disarmament and detente and for the freedom and independence of peoples. Those countries have common ideals and are guided by common goals. Shoulder to shoulder, their peoples are working hard in the grandiose effort of construction.
119.	Indeed the whole world knows how many proposals, and what kind of proposals, have been submitted by the socialist States to other countries, first of all in the United Nations, with the aim of deepening the process of easing tensions in the world, of broadening peaceful co-operation among States, and of strengthening international security.
120.	The countries making up the socialist community co-ordinate their policies for the sake of universal peace, the security of their own peoples and the peoples of other countries. This was again confirmed with new vigour by the fruitful results of the latest series of meetings held by L.I. Brezhnev with top Party and State leaders of socialist countries which took place in the Crimea last summer.
121.	I feel that our opinion will not differ from that of most participants in this session if I say that a comparison of the United Nations Charter provisions with what is going on in the sphere of military activities in some countries reveals a glaring contradiction. Although those States affixed their signatures to the United Nations Charter and its peaceful purposes and principles, they are nevertheless doing everything to see that stockpiled mountains of weapons grow.
122.	In the meantime, the world has long since crossed the line beyond which the arms race has become sheer madness. We urge all States Members of the United Nations to counter this madness with common sense and the will to strengthen mutual trust. For its part, the USSR, together with other countries, will continue to work consistently to stop the arms race, to start dismantling the war machine part by part and to reduce the military arsenals of States down to general and complete disarmament.
123.	Here at the United Nations and at various forums where the disarmament problem is under discussion, there is certainly no dearth of proposals that are well considered and based on the principle of equality and equal security. There are proposals relating both to weapons of mass destruction and to conventional weapons. We are still seized with the question of the reduction of military budgets.
124.	There has been no small number of major initiatives directed towards a general improvement of the political climate in the world, including the proposal for a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations. In our view, not a single State that sincerely strives for peace and good relations with other countries could possibly object to such a treaty.
125.	There are also initiatives concerning various regions of the world. I should like to point, in particular, to the idea of the States bordering on the Indian Ocean that this ocean be turned into a zone of peace, an idea which is supported by the majority of the countries Members of the United Nations. The Soviet Union is certainly in favour of implementing this idea. It is actively working for an early resumption of the Soviet- American talks on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in the Indian Ocean, talks which were interrupted through no fault of ours. An appropriate agreement on that subject would undoubtedly give this idea a more tangible shape, and this would have a favourable impact on the entire international situation.
126.	Yet, on the whole, one has to note with concern that all or almost all proposals for ending the arms race and for disarmament as a rule encounter opposition on the part of a number of States. They frequently get bogged down in the quagmire of debate. And it takes tremendous efforts to bring them up to the stage of decision-making, though such decisions do not yet ensure real disarmament even in limited areas.
127.	A considerable period of time has already elapsed since the question was raised about reaching an agreement on ending the production of all types of nuclear weapons and the gradual reduction of their stockpiles until they have been completely liquidated. In our days there is no more burning problem than that of removing the threat of nuclear war. Every reasonable person understands this. And it cannot be effectively solved without stopping the assembly line producing an incessant flow of weapons of monstrous destructive power—nuclear warheads, bombs and shells.
128.	As we have repeatedly stated, the Soviet Union is prepared to discuss this fundamental problem together with other countries, and it is proposing that specific negotiations be initiated. All the nuclear Powers without exception are in duty bound to take part in them.
129.	It is sometimes said that ending the production of nuclear weapons and their liquidation are too difficult a task. But can this be a reason for not starting the search for ways and means to resolve the problem? We are sure that reaching an appropriate agreement is not beyond the realm of possibility if States, and first of all the nuclear States, adopt a responsible approach.
130.	The complex of questions relating to nuclear weapons includes the ensuring of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States and the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there are no such weapons at present.
131.	The General Assembly has already adopted resolutions of principle on these matters. It is now necessary to embody them in binding international agreements. 
132 In our view, further efforts should be made to strengthen the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The responsibility for this lies upon all States. We hope that the forthcoming Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will be crowned with positive results. This Conference will be held soon.
133.	Negotiations on a number of essential aspects of disarmament are already in progress, and on some they have been going on for a long time. I should like to single out a couple of questions whose solution could, in our view, be found in the not-too-distant future.
134.	Progress has been achieved in the negotiations between the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. We would expect that no complicating elements will be introduced in the negotiations by our partners. But, unfortunately, these complications are being introduced even today.
135.	In the course of Soviet-American consultations, basic elements of an agreement banning radiological weapons have been worked out. If work on the agreement is not impeded artificially, it can be speedily prepared for signature. This means that, following the can on bacteriological weapons, one more type of weapon of mass destruction will be prohibited.
136.	The file of constructive proposals on various aspects of the disarmament problem is impressive and proper use should be made of it. This offers broad opportunities for action by the United Nations, which, at its tenth special session, devoted to disarmament, adopted a programme which on the whole is a good one. A United Nations resolution should not merely remain on paper. For the time being, however, it is but a paper, though a well-written one.
137.	The signing of the Soviet-American Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms is convincing proof that, given goodwill and readiness to take into account each other's legitimate interests, it is possible to achieve agreements on the most difficult questions. The Treaty builds a bridge to the further limitation and reduction of strategic weapons. It also contains great potential for exerting a positive influence on other negotiations on the limitations of the arms race and on disarmament.
138.	It can be stated without exaggeration that a major step has been taken for the USSR, the United States of America and the entire world. It is quite understandable, therefore, that, one after another, the representatives of States speaking from this rostrum speak out in favour of that Treaty.
139.	The strengthening of universal peace is inseparable from ensuring security in Europe. The situation on the European continent is not merely a part of the general picture of the world situation: today, as in the past, it has a profound impact on the course of international developments.
140.	Since the historic moment when it raised the banner of a new social system, our country has been pursuing a consistent course towards creating conditions of reliable peace in Europe. Everything we have accomplished in the name of that goal is an open book, and we are proud of its every page.
141.	Of course, we are far from underestimating the contributions made by other States. We give their due to the countries that took part in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which was crowned by the adoption of the Final Act. That document provides guidelines for further efforts to deepen the process of detente in Europe.
142.	Today the basis for the peaceful co-operation of States on the European continent is more solid than it was yesterday. Favourable changes have taken place in relations between socialist and capitalist countries in Europe.
143.	Soviet-French co-operation is on the rise. There is a considerable degree of mutual understanding and agreement on major issues of European and world politics, and accordingly there is a possibility for the further development of fruitful co-operation.
144.	The development of our relations with the Federal Republic of Germany has been following a positive trend. Both sides appreciate the mutual advantages of what has been achieved, recognizing that a good deal could yet be accomplished in the future. I should like to express the hope that there will be no move on the part of the Federal Republic of Germany that would reduce such possibilities for the future or that would run counter to the peaceful line in Europe and to the easing of international tensions.
145.	We are interested in the consistent development of Soviet-British relations. We are hopeful that there is a desire for this in the United Kingdom, too.
146.	We have good relations with Italy. The assets accumulated in these relations must be multiplied.
147.	I should like to note the genuine and traditional good-neighbourly relations between the USSR and Finland. We appreciate all the good achievements that have been made in our relations with other Scandinavian countries.
148.	A positive shift is taking place in our relations with Spain.
149.	The development of our ties with the rest of Western Europe is also a source of satisfaction.
150.	On the whole, both in the field of bilateral relations with States having a different social system and in other fields, the Soviet Union is following the course charted by the Helsinki Conference.
151.	The roots that political detente has taken on European soil cannot, however, be viable unless practical measures are taken in the field of military detente. In this regard, great prospects have been opened up by the proposals contained in the Declaration of the Political Advisory Committee of the Warsaw Treaty Organization adopted last November, and in the May communique of the Committee of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of that Organization.
152.	First of all, I wish to refer to the initiative concerning the conclusion between the European States participants in the Helsinki Conference of a treaty on the non-first use of either nuclear or conventional weapons against each other, the intent of which is self- evident.
153.	Unfortunately, our Western partners have not yet shown themselves ready to engage in talks on this problem. Nevertheless, we expect that a sober approach and a sense of responsibility will prompt them to react positively to our proposal.
154.	The socialist countries are still waiting for a response to yet another important initiative of theirs— concerning the convening, at a political level and with the participation of all European countries as well as the United States and Canada, of a conference on strengthening confidence among States, easing military confrontation and the subsequent thinning out of armed forces and armaments in Europe, and their reduction. Each of those countries could make its own contribution to the work of that conference.
155.	In the opinion of the Soviet Union, substantial work is needed on a bilateral as well as a multilateral basis to ensure the success of both the conference on military detente on the European continent and the Madrid meeting to be held next year of representatives of the States participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. Far from competing with each other, those two forums are complementary.
156.	As for the Madrid meeting, it should focus its attention on truly urgent issues of detente in Europe. No narrow selfish interests should be allowed to prevent this.
157.	Now a few words about the Vienna talks, the subject of which, as will be recalled, is the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. This is not a problem of significance to Europe alone. Our country invariably adopts constructive positions at those talks and puts forward initiatives which also take into account the legitimate interests of the Western partners. Only strict observance of the principle of undiminished security of either party would bring the Vienna talks to the road leading to agreement, and the sooner that happens the better.
158.	The review of problems relating to Europe would be incomplete if no reference were made to attempts undertaken from time to time by some countries to test the durability of the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin.  This is contrary to the long-term interests which provided the basis for that agreement and which must serve as guidance for all States, particularly the parties to it.
159.	The root-cause of the complexities and contradictions of the international situation at the present day lies to no small extent in the fact that the existing sources of tensions and conflicts between States do not disappear and that now and then new ones keep springing up.
160.	There is more than one such source in Asia. It was only six months ago that aggression was committed against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Practically the whole world branded the aggressors as such, but have appropriate conclusions been drawn from that event by all those who should have drawn them?
161.	This issue cannot be drowned in the artificially whipped up propaganda campaign concerning Indo- Chinese refugees, a campaign whose sharp edge is directed against Viet Nam. No, that edge should be turned in another direction, which is well known.
162.	It is also no secret who imposed and nurtured the bloodthirsty murderous regime of Pol Pot. Today that regime in Kampuchea has been done away with and there will be no return to the past. The legitimate representatives of the Kampuchean people must be given the opportunity to take the seat belonging to Kampuchea in the United Nations.
163.	The policy of some States that are intensifying their interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan is short-sighted—there is no other term for it. That country, which has chosen the road of progressive democratic transformation, comes out in favour of good relations with its neighbours and pursues an independent foreign policy, a policy of non-alignment. The Soviet Union, which has long-standing ties of friendship and good neighbourliness with Afghanistan, con-siders that this inadmissible interference must be stopped.
164.	With respect to such Middle East States as Turkey and Iran, not only have we common borders but we also maintain relations of traditional co-operation with them. We take a positive attitude to the steps which those and other Asian countries take to protect and strengthen their sovereignty, and we are willing to develop relations with them.
165.	We in the Soviet Union are satisfied with the friendly nature of relations between the USSR and India, that great Asian country with its consistently peaceful policy. The Soviet-Indian relationship is a major factor for stability and peace on the Asian continent.
166.	We wish to maintain, naturally on the basis of reciprocity, normal good relations with all States, whether in south or south-east Asia or in the Far East. This applies to Japan, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and other countries of those regions.
167.	Like all peace-loving peoples, the Soviet people are gravely concerned over the state of affairs in the Middle East—one of the "hottest" spots on earth, where now there emanates a serious threat to peace.
168.	The Middle East problem, if divested of what is immaterial, boils down to the following: either the con-sequences of the aggression against the Arab States and peoples are eliminated or the invaders will be rewarded by being allowed to appropriate lands that belong to others. A just settlement and the establishment of lasting peace in the Middle East require that Israel should end its occupation of all the Arab lands it seized in 1967; that the legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including the right to establish their own State, be safeguarded; and that the right of all States in the Middle East, including Israel, to independent existence under conditions of peace be effectively guaranteed.
169.	The separate deal between Egypt and Israel resolves nothing. It is nothing but a means designed to lull the vigilance of peoples. It is a way of piling up on a still greater scale explosive material capable of producing a new conflagration in the Middle East. Moreover, added to the tense political atmosphere in this and the adjacent areas, is the heavy smell of oil.
170.	It is high time that all States represented in the United Nations realized how vast is the tragedy of the Arab people of Palestine. What is the worth of declarations in defence of humanism and human rights— whether for refugees or not—if before the eyes of the entire world the inalienable rights of an entire people, driven from its land and deprived of a livelihood, are grossly trampled upon?
171.	The Soviet policy with respect to the Middle East problem is one of principle. We are in favour of a comprehensive and just settlement, of the establishment of durable peace in the Middle East, a region not far from our borders. The Soviet Union sides firmly with Arab peoples, who resolutely reject deals at the expense of their legitimate interests.
172.	By adopting in 1960 the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples—one of the most significant acts of the United Nations—the world community acknowledged the indisputable fact that the hour of colonialism had struck. Since then an overwhelming majority of peoples have cast off the yoke of colonialism. But humanity's conscience continues to revolt against the fact that the shackles of colonialism and racism have not yet been completely broken. And it is above all of southern Africa that we should be talking here.
173.	For many years now the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia have been waging a selfless struggle for their freedom and independence. The Soviet Union is entirely on the side of their noble cause. We have raised and shall continue to raise our voice in their support, and we shall co-operate with those States, especially African States, which adhere to the positions of justice, of upholding the inalienable rights of those peoples. All kinds of combinations, no matter how superficially clever, which are aimed at preserving the domination of racists and colonialists with the help of hastily formed puppet regimes should be resolutely rejected.
174.	Is it possible to achieve a political settlement in southern Africa? Yes, it is possible and there are ways leading to it. But so far the racists and their stooges have replied with bullets to proposals that a choice be made in favour of a just and peaceful solution.
175.	The session of the General Assembly of the United Nations will be right if it clearly states its resolute support for the liberation struggle of the peoples of southern Africa and condemns attempts to drown this struggle in blood as a crime against humanity. It is a direct duty of the United Nations to make those who ignore the decisions of the United Nations on southern Africa respect them.
176.	The Soviet people are well aware of the contribution of the peoples of Latin America to the struggle for peace and national liberation. This contribution will be all the greater the more the stand of Latin American States in defending their independence is resolute and the less their policies are influenced from the outside. In this connexion, we note with satisfaction the growing authority of Latin America in international relations.
177.	In its approach to all continents, to all countries of the world, the Soviet Union does not apply different yardsticks when it comes to the sovereignty of States, the freedom of peoples and genuine human rights. One cannot hold aloft the Charter of the United Nations in one situation and hide it under the table in another. The provisions and principles of the Charter must be applied equally to any State and any people.
178.	The Soviet Union has repeatedly stressed, notably in the United Nations, the significance of the non-aligned movement and its peaceful orientation. We are confident that the non-aligned States will continue to make use of their entire political weight in the interests of peace, disarmament and detente. This confidence of ours is supported by the successful results of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which recently ended in Havana. This was an important forum and a major international event.
179.	What is needed in the first place to resolve any important international problem of a political, economic or other nature is an atmosphere of peace. And whether peace will be more durable or less stable depends to an important extent on the state of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. That conclusion is objective and indisputable.
180.	The leadership of the Soviet Union makes no secret of its desire to have normal and, what is more, friendly relations with the United States. This only requires the observance of principles which have become well-established in international relations; and they are recorded, in particular, in the well-known Soviet-American documents—that is, the principles of peaceful coexistence between States and of non-interference in the affairs of others. We shall not allow anybody to meddle in our internal affairs. Concern for Soviet-American relations is a matter for both sides. It is only on this basis that the relations between the USSR and the United States can develop successfully.
181.	Our position was stated with exhaustive clarity and precision by L. I. Brezhnev in Vienna, in particular, in the course of his meeting with the President of the United States, Mr. Jimmy Carter. The meeting showed that, given the wish on both sides, the USSR and the United States are able to find mutually acceptable solutions and to co-operate in the interests of international detente and peace,
182.	L. I. Brezhnev has stated:
"There is no country or people in the world, in fact, with which the Soviet Union would not like to have good relations; there is no topical international problem to the solution of which the Soviet Union would not be willing to contribute; there is no source of danger of war in the removal of which by peaceful means the Soviet Union would not be interested." 
183.	In the succession of post-war developments, along with positive events there were also dangerous ones which gravely threatened the foundations of peace. A closer look at these developments would easily reveal that the evolution of the international situation largely depends upon the States which have the most powerful levers to influence it.
184.	When those levers are activated to attain objectives contrary to, or even openly defying, the United Nations Charter, conflict situations and international crises arise. The instigators of such events usually seek to whitewash themselves and, in that, they do not hesitate to pin all kinds of labels on others. That is a procedure that is, unfortunately, sometimes followed.
185.	One such tactic consists in juggling with the term "hegemonism", which in recent years has been increasingly used in international political practice. Although of recent origin, the term "hegemonism" denotes a phenomenon that is far from new. On the contrary, it has been known, so to speak, from time immemorial. It means striving for world domination, for domination over other countries and peoples.
186.	The Soviet attitude towards hegemonism and domination is clear. Since its very first days, the Soviet State has resolutely objected to anyone's being a hegemonist with others submitting to his will, and to any States' holding a position of domination over others.
187.	Twenty million human lives were sacrificed by our people to defeat Hitler's designs for world domination and to bury hegemonism in its Fascist attire. This figure alone is indicative of our score with hegemonism.
188.	Hegemonism is a direct antipode to the equality of States and peoples, an antipode to the ideal which the October Revolution proclaimed for the whole world and which the United Nations, as prescribed by its Charter, should promote in every possible way in international relations. Its manifestation in our day constitutes a serious obstacle to the process of detente to which there is not and cannot be any reasonable alternative.
189.	The time has come for all States Members of the United Nations to take an unambiguous position with regard to hegemonism—to condemn it and to block any claims to hegemony in world affairs. Its inadmissibility should be raised to the level of a principle that must be rigorously observed.
190.	Guided by all this, the Soviet Union is proposing the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of an important item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of hegemonism in international relations" and is submitting an appropriate draft resolution to be considered at the session.
191.	The purport of this draft resolution is that no States or groups of States should claim, under any circumstances or for any motives whatsoever, hegemony in regard to other States or groups of States.
192.	We are convinced that all those who approach the conduct of international affairs on the basis of equality and in the interests of detente and peace cannot oppose the adoption of such a draft resolution. It is to be hoped that the General Assembly will consider the draft with a high sense of responsibility.
193.	Following the General Assembly, the United Nations Security Council, with the five nuclear Powers as its , permanent members, could also express itself against hegemonism. It would be a good idea subsequently to couch the renunciation by States of a policy of hegemonism in all its manifestations in terms of a broad international agreement and to conclude such an agreement or treaty.
194.	In conducting its policy, our country scrupulously complies with the principles of the United Nations Charter and invariably pursues its purposes. We never lose sight of the fundamental basis of the activities of the world Organization, that is, concentration of its efforts in ensuring that the peoples can live in conditions of peace. The Soviet Union has consistently come out in favour of strengthening the United Nations, of no one's being allowed to erode it.
195.	The peoples will assess the results of the current session, like those of previous sessions, of the General Assembly primarily in terms of what it will have achieved to make people feel more secure. Hence, great responsibility rests with all States Members of the United Nations and with their representatives assembled in this hall.
196.	Everything positive that we can achieve today will help us in the 1980s to consolidate and to develop the successes of the 1970s. That in turn will largely determine the thoughts and feelings, the memories of the past and the faith in the future that mankind will take with it into the next millennium.
197.	We wish, and we shall do all in our power to ensure, that the work of the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly may culminate in the adoption of resolutions that will be commended by the peoples of the world.
﻿We meet in this General Assembly on the threshold of a new decade. It will be a time of complex challenge, a period in which, more than ever, co-operative endeavours among nations are a matter not only of idealism but also of direct self-interest.
39.	The decade now drawing to a close has been characterized by rapid, far-reaching and fundamental change. Awesome technological developments are all about us. The assertion of national independence has reshaped the political geography of our planet. Within nations we see an accelerating rise in individual economic, political and social expectations. The unrelenting hostility of the cold war has given way to a more complex relationship between East and West, with elements of both competition and co-operation. The simple notion of a bipolar world has become obsolete. Increasingly there is a profusion of different systems and allegiances and a diffusion of political and military power. The world economic order is also undergoing inexorable transformations. Many nations formerly among the disadvantaged are now achieving global economic power. Economic interdependence has become a daily reality for the citizens of every nation.
40.	These sweeping changes have for the most part worked in constructive directions, changing lives for the better and opening new possibilities for collective effort and creative diplomacy.
41.	But while these developments demonstrate that progress is possible, they by no means demonstrate that it is inevitable. I say this for two reasons.
42.	First, in a number of areas the pace of current progress is dwarfed by the scope of coming challenges. The next decade will decide whether we have the collective wisdom and the common will to surmount a series of imposing and interrelated problems which must be dealt with in a comprehensive manner.
43.	The need to develop new forms of energy will pose a continuing challenge. We have entered the difficult transition from a petroleum economy to one based on other forms of energy.
44.	Even without this added burden, we face an imposing task in providing for the basic needs of people and in narrowing the combustible disparity between wealth and despair. The food shortage facing developing countries, for example, was 12 million tons in 1975. It could be 70 to 85 million tons by 1990, unless productivity rises sharply.
45.	We must strike a decent balance between the burgeoning demands of more people for a better life and the inescapable reality of a fragile environment.
46.	Such prospects carry the seeds of future discord. As these seeds ripen, and the growth and spread of weapons continue, regional conflicts become all the more dangerous in their toll of lives and resources and in the heightened risk of wider confrontation.
47.	And despite our emergence from the days of unrelenting hostility, the East-West relationship can deteriorate dangerously whenever one side fails to respect the security interests of the other.
48.	Our ability to meet these tests depends on a second issue: will we confront such challenges together, and benefit together? Or will we let adversity divide us, and thus conquer?
49.	I must be frank and say that I am not sure what the answer will be.
50.	There are some reasons for encouragement. In recent years the nations here represented have found it easier, in many different forums, to talk with each other rather than at each other. East and West have entered into the broadest arms control agenda in history. The Soviet Union and the United States have negotiated significant limitations on strategic arms in a treaty that now awaits ratification. North and South have made progress on financial, trade and commodity issues—far more progress than has been acknowledged. Agreement has been reached on a sharp increase in the resources of IMF. Lending by the multilateral development banks has increased. Expanded trade opportunities have been opened by the recently concluded trade negotiations. We have moved ahead on other matters, such as international debt and a common fund for commodities. We should recognize such progress and build on it. We have taken steps as well towards the resolution of some deeply embedded regional disputes.
51.	But I am concerned that there are also factors at work which could reverse this co-operative trend. The severity of the problems we face could drive nations to the pursuit of their own separate advantage at the expense of international co-operation. In times of economic trouble, even relatively prosperous countries find it more difficult to look beyond their internal concerns to meet international needs. Indeed, it is a vivid lesson of history that hardship can breed short-sighted insularity. It can arouse instincts for self-preservation at the expense of others. In such times, the voices of economic nationalism will be raised in all our countries. We must resist them. We must resist, as well, the voices of international confrontation. In a number of international negotiations, political as well as economic, we have worked our way through to the toughest issues involved. We must not react now in frustration, and unleash a spiral of rhetoric which could deepen rather than resolve our divisions.
52.	The challenges of the 1980s can be met—if each of us here represented meets the responsibilities which we share.
53.	Our first responsibility is to persist in the search for peace, to reduce both the danger and the destructiveness of war. The future of two regions—the Middle East and southern Africa—depends on specific decisions that will be made in the coming months.
54.	We believe that the 26 March Treaty between Egypt and Israel has reduced the dangers inherent in the Arab-Israeli conflict and has laid the foundation for a settlement that can be both durable and just.
55.	But the dramatic achievement of peace between Israel and Egypt and the successful implementation of the first phases of the Treaty of peace have not obscured the necessity of moving toward peace between Israel and its other neighbours. Indeed it remains the resolute view of my Government that further progress towards an over-all peace is essential.
56.	We know that an ultimate settlement must address the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The Palestinian question must be resolved in all of its aspects.
57.	As the peace process continues to unfold, it is our deepest desire that representatives of the Palestinian people and the Governments of Jordan and Syria should join in this great quest. 
58.	This is consistent with—indeed it underscores— our unshakable commitment to Israel's security and well-being, now and in the future.
59.	None of the parties involved in this difficult negotiation has any illusions that resolving the Palestinian issue will be easy. But the United States is convinced that progress will be made towards that goal.
60.	Preserving the integrity of Lebanon is also critical to peace in the Middle East. There has been a cease-fire in southern Lebanon, the fragility of which is underscored by the events of today. We need not only a temporary cease-fire, but a broader truce. We will be working towards such a goal in our discussions with other interested Governments here at this Assembly. Lebanon has suffered all too much.
61.	The desire for peace is shared by all the peoples of the Middle East. We recognize that there are disagreements about how best to reach that common goal. We believe the course on which we are embarked is the right one, indeed the only one that has shown practical results. We call on all who genuinely seek peace to join in this endeavour.
62.	A step towards peace has been taken as well on the Rhodesian conflict. The parties are now engaged in negotiation towards a solution that could combine true majority rule with essential minority rights. The United Kingdom Government, the Commonwealth nations, and the parties themselves deserve great credit for this new step. The deepening agony of war could be ended by agreement on a fair constitution and new elections, as called for in the final communique issued by the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August
63.	We have made substantial progress in Namibia. But obstacles remain. The contact group is working with the parties concerned to find ways to resolve the few outstanding issues. We do not underestimate the difficulties, but neither should any of us underestimate the opportunities that a settlement would bring for all of southern Africa.
64.	In most negotiations, we can best make progress by stages. A knot can never be untied from the inside. We must begin with the parts that we can grasp, and work our way through to the end of the problem.
65.	History will judge us severely if we let our opportunities for peace slip away. As negotiations proceed, the issues we address become progressively more difficult. But we must not let future fears or ambitions undermine the progress that has been made.
66.	As we work on these and other conflicts; let us also squarely face the fact that our planet is plagued by those who make war on innocents, as we saw just weeks ago in the tragic death of Lord Mountbatten. We must have greater international co-operation to combat the barbarous practices of the terrorist. The United States strongly supports the basic elements of the draft convention against the taking of hostages, the conclusion of this treaty will contribute to a growing consensus that terrorism will not be tolerated, regardless of the political cause its perpetrators claim to pursue.
67.	Finally, the requirement of peace carries with it an international responsibility to limit the spread and accumulation of arms. A particular obligation falls to the largest nuclear Powers—the United States and the Soviet Union—to contain the competition in strategic weapons. The treaty concluded after the second round of SALT can be a major step towards the fulfilment of that obligation.
68.	The goal of strategic stability will be further served if the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States are able to agree on a comprehensive ban, on nuclear tests. As the nuclear super-Powers seek the path towards mutual restraint, all nations must also recognize the direct threat to their security from the spread of nuclear weapons. Developments in recent years can bring new impetus to the non-proliferation effort—including progress in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation—which can help us to find safer ways to develop nuclear energy for humanity; the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards; the substantial increase in the number of parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the entry into force of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), which now finally appears within grasp; and the pledge by a number of nuclear Powers, under specific circumstances, to refrain from the use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States.
69.	But there have also been serious setbacks- further demonstrations of intent to acquire nuclear weapons, in disregard of the inherent dangers for regional and international security. The Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be held next year, will be a critical time for taking stock—and for redoubling our efforts to make progress on this urgent international priority.
70.	Beyond the search for peace, a second responsibility that we share is to be sensitive to the international consequences of our national economic decisions, and to resist the temptation to solve our economic problems at the expense of others.
71.	The imprudence of economic nationalism has been harshly demonstrated in the past. The world depression a half-century ago was spread, deepened and prolonged by a wave of protectionism. That memory has spurred us towards a new multilateral trade agreement intended to open markets and keep them open, even in a time of economic strain.
72.	Today, let me address one of those issues which most clearly reflects the direct connection between national decisions and global consequences. That issue is energy. In almost no area is the need for common action more apparent or more urgent. It is an issue which now threatens to divide us, economically and politically. In a future of greater scarcity, these divisions could weaken the fabric of international comity which this organisation embodies.
73.	All nations will suffer if all nations do not act responsibly in their consumption, of energy, in its pricing and in its production. Despite a difficult prognosis for our energy future, I believe the basis may exist for progress. 
74.	Until the 1970s modern industrial economies operated on two basic assumptions, which also governed relations between oil importers and exporters. These two assumptions were that oil is cheap, and that supplies are unlimited. Now all nations realize that these assumptions no longer hold.
75.	The commitments made by the major industrial countries at the Tokyo Economic Summit demonstrate this clearly. My Government is taking ambitious action to address the energy problem and is making efforts to exceed these commitments. President Carter has committed the United States not to import more than 8.2 million barrels of oil a day in 1979, and never to exceed the peak level of our imports reached in 1977. Total United States energy research and development this year is $3.2 billion. We are investing $528 million this year—and $600 million next year—in the development and use of solar energy. We are significantly expanding our development of synthetic fuels, to take advantage of the abundant coal and oil shale in our country.
76.	Much of this new energy technology will have application in other countries as well. We will seek to make it available to others under mutually satisfactory conditions. For we recognize that by helping others resolve their energy problems, we help resolve our own.
77.	Let me indicate some of the ways in which we are prepared to work with others to meet our common energy needs.
78.	We have joined other industrial nations in agreeing to establish a provisional international technology group which will recommend ways to broaden international participation in the commercial development of alternative fuels.
79.	I pledged last year that the United States would do more to mobilize its technical talents on behalf of the development of others. I am pleased to report that next month we will establish an Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation. This Institute will work for the goals set by the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development. It will help the people of developing nations to benefit from our technologies. The Institute's Policy Council will include experts from developing nations. Energy development will be among its highest priorities.
80.	We will participate actively in preparations for the 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy.
81.	At the recent Tokyo Economic Summit, the World Bank was invited to take the lead in coordinating our assistance to developing nations in the field of energy. We suggest that the World Bank bring together a group of experts to review the question of energy research, development and training in detail. Specifically, that group could evaluate the work of existing energy research and training centres, both national and international, in developing countries. In addition, it could recommend how current institutions could be strengthened and whether new multilateral ones should be created. We are supporting the expansion of the World Bank's programme for the exploration and development of mineral fuels. The Bank is also considering whether local programmes of development finance are adequate to support the rapid application of solar, small hydroelectric and other renewable energy technologies in developing nations.
82.	The Inter-American Development Bank has proposed creation of a facility to provide political risk insurance and loan guarantees for private investment in energy and minerals projects in its region. This could be an effective means of stimulating energy development there. We are willing to pursue with the Bank its initiative and work with other countries to develop an acceptable proposal.
83.	As the industrial countries make serious efforts to restrict oil demand, and to help the developing countries meet their energy challenges, the question increasingly becomes whether the oil-producing nations are prepared to stabilize prices, and, to the extent it is within their control, ensure adequate supplies. A failure to do so will continue to have harsh consequences for the world economy, especially the poorer nations.
84.	We understand the natural desire of oil-exporting nations to husband this valuable resource for future generations. And we accept the fact that oil prices must reflect not only the strength of demand, but also the long-term scarcity of supply—so long as scarcity is never contrived to manipulate price,
85.	But oil producers must understand that there is a limit to what the economies of the oil-consuming nations, and the global economy, can sustain.
86.	We must all proceed with a responsible recognition that our national energy decisions will have profound global effects—and will return either to haunt or to help their makers.
87.	A third common responsibility is an intensified commitment to help improve the lives of our fellow human beings—to provide the necessities of life, to afford the chance to progress, to assure a voice in decisions which will determine their future.
88.	We have made progress in the field of human rights, but we must do more. In the past year, some nations have taken steps to restore legal protections and democratic institutions. And we have seen the inauguration of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the forceful call of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] for the creation of regional human rights institutions on the continent of Africa, and the activation of UNESCO's human rights procedures. The growing concern for human rights is undeniable. Yet the sad truth is that, even as we sit here today, men and women face torture, death and oppression for daring to exercise rights set forth in the Charter of this body three decades ago. Our joint challenge is to advance the aspirations of all peoples for human dignity.
89.	Our commitment must be to economic as well as political and social rights—for all are indispensable to human dignity. Improvements in economic well-being, opportunities for participation in the political process, and a growing sense of both economic and political equity can do much to defuse the grievances which can lead to national convulsions and international tensions.
90.	To meet this commitment to a better life for all peoples, we must each strive to move the North-South dialogue beyond grand themes and on to specific cases—to priority areas in which practical development goals can be met. Let me discuss in this connexion our efforts towards a goal we should adopt as a matter of simple humanity—that by the end of this century no person on this bountiful earth should have to go hungry.
91.	Last year, I noted that we must not be lulled by good weather and plentiful harvests into losing our sense of urgency. Since then, poor harvests in a number of countries have substantially increased the international demand for food. This situation underscores the need to accumulate adequate stocks to support world food security. I assure Members that the United States will do all it can to prevent a global food crisis. The American harvest this year will be of record size. We have removed all restrictions on wheat production for next year. We have established farmer-owned grain reserves which, through the accumulation and release of stocks, have helped stabilize supplies.
92.	An international wheat agreement still eludes our grasp. We should not abandon this goal. But we should move immediately to complete negotiations for a new food aid convention. The World Food Council has urged an agreement by mid-1980. We support that recommendation. In the meantime, we are already implementing the higher food aid pledge the convention would entail.
93.	At the same time, major emphasis must be placed on improving global food production. Over half of American direct development aid is now devoted to agriculture. We will continue working to improve the yields of major food crops, to preserve croplands and to expand research on ways to increase the production of traditional and new crops, especially those grown by poor farmers.
94.	These efforts have received effective support from the International Agricultural Research Centres. We support proposals to double the resources contributed to those centres and intend to increase our contribution. We hope additional countries will become contributors.
95.	We must be aware; however, that in the long run these efforts could be vitiated if the world's population growth is not slowed. Half the couples of child-bearing age still do not have adequate access to family planning services. We must strive to make family planning services—along with other elements of basic health care, adequate food supplies and clean water— available to all as rapidly as we can.
96.	And in the short run, we must be prepared to meet emergency needs wherever famine afflicts humanity or refugees seek haven—in Africa, in Latin America, in South-East Asia or elsewhere.
97.	The proposal made by Vice-President Mondaleat the Geneva Meeting for a refugee resettlement fund reflects our belief that the international community should deal on a global basis with a global and grave refugee crisis. We urge broad participation in this fund.
98.	Vigorous and large-scale international action is required to bring relief to the starving in Kampuchea, now facing one of the great human tragedies of modern times. Tens of thousands of sick and hungry Khmer are already pressing on Thailand's border. Hundreds of thousands may soon follow them. Even more widespread famine and disease are in prospect, especially in view of recent reports of intensified fighting. To avert unthinkable catastrophe» an international programme of humanitarian relief must be established in Kampuchea as soon as possible. International organizations must be able to bring a co-ordinated, massive and adequately monitored programme of emergency relief to all needy Khmer. We would endorse such an effort.
99.	The food crisis in Kampuchea promises both to multiply the flow of refugees and to take a terrible toil among those who cannot escape. The flood of refugees from Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea already has brought great suffering to hundreds of thousands of innocent people, as well as imposed heavy burdens on countries of first asylum.
100.	The international community has begun to respond. But humanitarian steps are not enough. The community of nations must make a more active effort to restore peace to the region and to resolve by non- military means the problems that developments in Indo-China have carried in their wake. They pose a threat to the stability of the region as a whole.
101.	I believe we can meet the challenges before us. But let us not misjudge their magnitude.
102.	Resolution of regional disputes and placing new limits on the instruments of war will require new acts of national and international will. The 1980s could portend a prolonged energy crisis. It could be a decade of widespread famine. Unless the swelling deficits of developing countries can be managed, many of their economies may stagnate and some could be threatened with collapse. Global problems like these require global solutions.
103.	This Assembly will decide whether to launch a new round of negotiations on economic co-operation for development. Let me state today that the United States would participate, in the Committee of the Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, in consultations to decide on the most effective way of conducting such negotiations.
104.	If new global negotiations are to succeed, the participants must be realistic about each other's political and economic capabilities. We must assign priority to those issues on which concrete results are possible, and we should avoid duplicating the work of existing institutions. In this way, the negotiations could help build a global consensus for action.
105.	Many of the issues I have addressed are already prominent on the agenda of the United Nations. The need for co-operation in addressing them requires that we continue to strengthen this institution. Financial, procedural and management reforms are urgently necessary. As a first step, we urge that the Secretary-General's recommendations, now adopted by this Assembly, be fully implemented.
106.	The urgency of the requirements I have described calls for something more on the part of all Members of the United Nations.
107.	The distinctions between North and South, like those between East and West, reflect differing interests. They have a role in defining the issues and in clarifying our choices. But we must commit ourselves to finding areas where our interests converge.
108.	Each of us has our special values to be nurtured, our particular goals to be served, and I do not suggest it can or should be otherwise. The United States believes in a world of diversity.
109.	But let us resolve—here, at this Assembly — to find in our common needs and common humanity a renewed dedication to the search for common ground.
﻿195.	Allow me, first of all, to extend my congratulations to you on your election as President of the thirty-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly. I sincerely wish that, under your presidency, the current session may achieve positive results.
196.	Allow me also to express, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, our warm welcome to the delegation of Saint Lucia on its admission to membership in the United Nations, believing that it will play its part in international affairs and in the work of the United Nations.
197.	The current session is the last session of the General Assembly in the 1970s. We are about to enter the 1980s. Looking back on the past and forward into the future, we feel encouraged and are also aware of our grave responsibility.
198.	The past 10 years were no ordinary years. The growth and further strengthening of the third world marked a significant change in the international situation over the period. An additional number of oppressed nations won national independence after waging protracted struggles. The people of the newly emerging States firmly oppose foreign aggression and interference and defend their national independence and state sovereignty. They not only want complete political independence, but are determined to lift themselves from economic dependency and backward-ness. They have worked hard to develop the national economy and build up their countries and have achieved marked successes in this regard. Acting in concert and strengthening their co-operation, they are striving tirelessly for the establishment of a new international economic order. They have waged an extensive struggle for world peace against the ever more intensified arms race between the big Powers and against the imperialist and hegemonist policies of war and aggression and have made important contributions. Strengthening their unity and persevering in struggle, the third-world countries have played an ever greater role in international affairs. They have become a decisive force on the world political scene, and the outlook of the United Nations has undergone a tremendous change. It will be impossible for one or two big Powers to manipulate the destiny of the world as they wish.
199.	Along with the awakening of the people of the third-world countries and the growth of their forces, Western Europe, Japan and other developed countries, faced with the hegemonist threat of aggression and expansion, have heightened their vigilance and strengthened their unity and defence capabilities to safeguard their state sovereignty and security. They, too, are exerting a positive influence in maintaining world peace and security and promoting a favourable development of the international situation.
200.	But we must not lose sight of the disquieting aspect of the developing situation. In the past decade, the ever fiercer rivalry between the two super-Powers has caused continued turbulence in the international situation. Particularly overbearing is the late-coming super-Power, whose inclination to aggression and adventure is visibly growing. Waving the slogans "disarmament" and "detente", it is engaged in frenzied arms expansion unprecedented in scale and speed. It is seeking to achieve an overwhelming superiority in nuclear as well as conventional arms and in every sphere, land, sea and air. Relying on its fast growing military strength, it is pushing a global "offensive strategy". More and more frequently it is using proxies and organizing mercenaries to launch unscrupulous armed invasions and military coups in other countries. With a view to encircling Europe, controlling strategic routes, seizing strategic resources and speeding up its expansion and strategic deployment for global hegemony, it has increasingly directed the spearheads of its aggression to Africa, the Middle East, the Gulf area and South-East Asia. Facts prove that the late-coming super-Power is the main source of threat to world peace and security and is the most dangerous source of a new world war. In the face of this harsh reality, more and more people are talking about "the more turbulent 1980s" and the possibility of a new world war. Such talk is not groundless,
201.	Now, this very super-Power which is pushing its policy of hegemonism everywhere has the effrontery to propose at this rostrum an item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of hegemonism in international relations". Obviously, this is the habitual clumsy tactics of a thief crying, "Stop thief!" and of gaining fame by demagogic means. Its aim is to pursue hegemonism even more unscrupulously under the guise of opposing hegemonism. However, the term "hegemonism" has its precise meaning that brooks no wilful interpretation. In the world today, who is practising hegemonism and who is against it is an objective fact known to everyone. No subtle rhetoric can alter it.
202.	We are optimists with regard to the future of mankind. The 1980s pose a new challenge, but also promise new hopes. We believe that ultimately the people are masters of their own destiny. Historical experience tells us that, while it is necessary to face up to reality, it is more important to change the reality. The harsh facts tell us that hegemonism means aggression and war. Peace is not secured by waiting or begging; it can only be secured through struggle and defended by action. Opposing hegemonism and defending world peace are two sides of the same coin. We believe that the just cause of world peace will continue to be victorious so long as all the peace-loving countries and peoples unite and, through hard struggle and solid work, persevere in opposing hegemonism and frustrating its strategic moves. The future of mankind and the world is bright.
203.	The broadly-based non-aligned movement is an important force in the contemporary international arena. At the Sixth Conference of the Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which concluded not long ago, the divisive and disruptive schemes were frustrated, and the basic principles of the non-aligned movement and the unity of the movement upheld thanks to the joint efforts of the great majority of the member countries and after acute and complex struggles. This is a significant achievement scored by the non-aligned movement along a road beset with difficulties. In recent years, the super-Power that claims to be the "natural ally" of the non-aligned movement has used and collaborated with its agents in an attempt to bring the movement into the orbit of its own global strategy. But their line of action is most unpopular, and their clumsy performance only serves to reveal their true colours more clearly to the non-aligned countries.
204.	China has always highly appreciated the independent, sovereign and non-bloc principles of the non- aligned movement and supported its just position of opposing imperialism, colonialism and foreign domination and hegemonism of all forms. The Chinese Government and people sincerely hope that the non-aligned countries will unite and co-operate and eliminate outside interference so that their movement will play a greater role in the struggle of all nations to safeguard sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and develop national economies and cultures, and in the struggle for the establishment of a new international economic order and for world peace.
205.	Indo-China is now one of the centres of world tension that attracts the close attention of the international community and causes it grave anxiety.
206.	As is well known, the crux of the Indo-Chinese situation lies in the brutal aggression imposed on Kampuchea. Towards the end of last year, Viet Nam brazenly mounted an armed invasion against Democratic Kampuchea, a sovereign State, occupied large tracts of its territory and set up a puppet regime there, plunging Kampuchea into unheard-of calamities. This naked aggression by Viet Nam is not only an act against the Vietnamese people's desire for recuperation, rehabilitation and peaceful construction after the war but also a gross violation of Kampuchea's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and a direct threat to the peace and security of the South-East Asian countries. It tramples underfoot the United Nations Charter and fundamental principles of international law. Earlier this year the United Nations Security Council held urgent meetings to discuss this grave situation." At the meetings, the overwhelming majority of the member States strongly condemned Viet
Nam's act of aggression and demanded an immediate withdrawal of foreign forces from Kampuchea. It was only because of the veto arbitrarily used by one permanent member that the Security Council failed to adopt resolutions and take effective action. Now the best part of the year has passed, but instead of stopping its aggression against Kampuchea, Viet Nam is sending more troops there and stepping up its deployment in preparation for a new massive dry-season offensive to wipe out the patriotic Kampuchean armed forces at one blow and then threaten the whole of South-East Asia, The disaster that today befalls the people of Kampuchea may befall those of other countries tomorrow. How can such practice of power politics be allowed to go unchecked in this contemporary age? We are pleased to note that the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, summing up experience and readjusting its policies, is uniting extensive patriotic forces under the banner of the patriotic and democratic front of great national union and fighting heroically to drive all the Vietnamese aggressors from Kampuchean territory. Historical experience has repeatedly proved and will continue to prove that no foreign aggression and oppression can vanquish a whole nation and that the just cause of a nation against alien domination is invincible,
207.	It should be pointed out here that the so-called Heng Samrin regime is nothing but a puppet propped up by the Vietnamese aggressors at bayonet point. Playing the jackal to the tiger, that regime has helped the Vietnamese aggressors to suppress the Kampuchean people in cold blood. Naturally, such a puppet regime is spurned by the Kampuchean people, opposed by the Governments and peoples of the South-East Asian countries and condemned by world opinion. On the other hand, the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, which has been holding high the banner of national independence and persistently fighting a national war of self-defence, is the sole legal representative of the Kampuchean people. Democratic Kampuchea is a State Member of the United Nations. To support and safeguard the legitimate rights of Democratic Kampuchea fully accords with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. It is the solemn and bounden duty of each of us Member States to uphold the purposes and principles of the United Nations. The recent decision taken by the General Assembly on accepting the credentials of the representatives of Democratic Kampuchea is a manifestation of the just position of the international community against foreign armed aggression and another indication that the aggression committed against Democratic Kampuchea by Viet Nam with the backing of its behind-the- scenes boss is most unpopular.
208.	While carrying on aggression and expansion abroad, Viet Nam has practised a policy of genocide at home and created the world-shocking tragedy of Indo- Chinese refugees. Over the past year or more, as a result of the massive persecution and expulsion by the Vietnamese authorities, nearly a million innocent people were forced to leave their homes and drift from place to place. Countless refugees were drowned in the sea or perished in the wilderness. Their tragic plight and serious case were something rarely seen since the Second World War. Such actions on the part of Viet Nam not only violate the basic humanitarian principle but have created tremendous economic burdens and grave social problems for the South-East Asian region and affected the tranquillity and stability of the countries there. At the international meeting on the question of Indo-Chinese refugees last July, Viet Nam, under the pressure of world opinion, orally undertook to control the exodus of refugees, but in fact continues to persecute and export them. We hold that the key to a solution of the Indo-Chinese refugee problem lies in a complete change by Viet Nam of its reactionary policy of cruel persecution and export of refugees. If the problem is not tackled at its source, this human tragedy will continue.
219. There is a deep-rooted cause for the deterioration of the Indo-Chinese situation to its present state. It is the result of the aggressive and expansionist policies pursued by the big and small hegemonists. As is well now, under President Ho Chi Minh's leadership, the Vietnamese people fought heroically over long years to win national liberation and defend national independence and so won praise and admiration from the people of all countries. But after the passing of President Ho Chi Minh, the Vietnamese authorities betrayed his political line step by step and feverishly pushed a policy of expansion. With Soviet backing, they committed armed invasion and military occupation of weaker neighbours in an attempt to realize their dream of regional hegemony by establishing an "Indo-Chinese Federation" totally under their thumb. Exploiting the Vietnamese authorities' ambition for expansion, the Soviet Union has used Viet Nam and Indo-China as its "strategic base" in South-East Asia and, through the instrumentality of Viet Nam, has sought to control the region and then establish an "Asian collective security system" so as to link up its strategic deployment in the Pacific with that in the Indian Ocean. People have come to realize more and more clearly that Vietnamese invasion and domination of its neighbours are by no means a local issue but an important component of Soviet attempts to establish an "Asian collective security system" in furtherance of its strategy of seeking world hegemony.
220.	It is also well known that in the course of the Vietnamese people's struggle for independence and liberation, the Chinese Government and people, sharing their weal and their woe, firmly stood on their side and gave them all-out support. The two peoples forged a deep revolutionary friendship in their long-term common struggles. But now China is regarded by the Vietnamese authorities as an enemy simply because it does not approve of their present policies of aggression and expansion. They carried out frenzied hostile anti-China activities and even committed incessant armed provocations and made intrusions into China's border areas, so that the Chinese side was compelled to make a counter-attack in self-defence. This just action of ours punctured the aggressive arrogance of the expansionists; it was also in the interest of safeguarding the peace and security of South-East Asia and the whole world.
221.	The three Indo-Chinese States are China's neighbours. The Chinese Government and people have consistently supported the people of these countries in their just struggle to win or safeguard national independence and build up their countries. The Chinese Government and people cannot but feel grave concern over the deterioration of the Indo-Chinese situation. We hold that the United Nations has an unshirkable responsibility to take effective measures, first to make Viet Nam withdraw forthwith all its troops from Kampuchea, stop its aggression and military occupation in Kampuchea and then to solve the other related questions. At the suggestion of the five countries members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, the United Nations General Assembly is going to consider the Kampuchean situation at the current session. We firmly support the just demand of the Association and all other justice-upholding countries for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops from Kampuchean territory, for this is the key to a solution of the Indo- Chinese question. The Indo-Chinese question must be solved by the Indo-Chinese peoples themselves on the basis of respect for their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and free from all foreign interference.
222. The peaceful reunification of Korea has an important bearing on peace in east Asia and the Pacific region. The Chinese Government and people firmly support the Korean people's sacred cause of independent and peaceful reunification of their country and are firmly opposed to acts aiming at creating "two Koreas" and perpetuating the division of Korea. The resolution on promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session should be implemented in earnest. The United States should withdraw all its troops and armaments from, and stop its military aid to, South Korea. The "United Nations Command" must be disbanded. These steps will help to maintain peace on the Korean peninsula and achieve the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. In our view, the proposal of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on holding Korea-United States talks and replacing the armistice by a peace agreement is reasonable and should meet with a positive response. As for the discussion of the reunification of Korea through a North-South dialogue, it is purely the Korean people's own business which brooks no foreign interference. We support the three principles and the five-point programme President Kim II Sung put forward for solving the Korean question, and we support dialogue between the North and South and hope that this dialogue will yield positive results.
223.	The people of the world are now watching the Middle East situation with anxiety. The developments in the Middle East since the thirty-third session of the United Nations General Assembly show that the crux of the Middle East question still lies in the struggle between the super-Powers for oil resources and strategic areas and the expansionist policy of Israel. One super-Power sticks to its position of partiality to Israel. The other has used all opportunities to carry out infiltration and expansion, split Arab unity and undermine the stability and peace of the Middle East. The Israeli authorities remain adamant in obstructing and opposing an over-all settlement of the Middle East question. They have kept making armed attacks on southern Lebanon and have subjected the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to new war threats and provocations. There is a long way to go towards an over-all and just settlement of the Middle East question.
224.	Of late, more and more countries and world opinion have come to agree that, in order to have stability and peace in the Middle East, it is essential to respect the Arab national interests and the Palestinian people's national rights. Such is the truth and the general trend. It should be pointed out that this growing tendency is the result of the just struggle which the Palestinian and other Arab peoples have persistently carried out over long years. The ultimate realization of the national aspiration and objectives of the Arab people mainly depends on the solid unity and sustained struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. However, the United Nations should also play its due role in promoting a settlement of the Middle East question.
225.	Here, we would like to reiterate that the Chinese Government and people will unswervingly support the just struggle of the Arab and Palestinian peoples. We strongly condemn the expansion and rivalry of the super-Powers in the Middle East and are firmly opposed to the sinister super-Power attempt to sow discord among the Arab countries and Israel's peremptory attitude of obstructing an over-all settlement of the Middle East question. Occupied Arab territories must be recovered and the Palestinian people's national rights, including their right to their homeland and to establish their own State, must be realized. We sincerely hope that all parties of the Arab world will show mutual understanding, rebuild their unity and work together to speed up their victory.
226.	The people of the African countries are increasingly demanding a speedy end to the racist rule and apartheid in southern Africa. In the past year, with the support of the people of Africa and the world at large, the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania have made new progress in their struggle for liberation and have dealt increasingly heavy blows to the racist forces of South Africa and Rhodesia. In their last-ditch struggle, these racist forces are intensifying their Fascist military repression at home while launching armed attacks against neighbouring countries. They have kept playing political tricks in an attempt to maintain their racist rule in disguised forms and preserve their vested interests.
227.	In recent years, various proposals and suggestions for a negotiated settlement of the independence of Zimbabwe and Namibia have been put forward internationally. Many African States have made great efforts towards this end, and their efforts have won sympathy and support from the international community. But so far these negotiations have not made substantive progress because of the intransigence of the racist forces. Facts fully show that the racist regime of South Africa and the racist forces of Rhodesia are the fundamental obstacles to a settlement of the questions of Zimbabwe and Namibia, which is long overdue. All countries which uphold justice should exert effective pressure on the racists and give energetic support to the liberation struggle of the people in southern Africa. An early end to the racist rule in Zimbabwe and Namibia and the attainment of independence based on a genuine majority rule will help to stabilize the situation in southern Africa, exclude external meddling and interference and push forward the struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa. The Chinese Government and people will, as always, firmly support the just struggles of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania. The current international situation is very favourable to the liberation struggle in southern Africa Although there may be difficulties and twists and turns on their way to progress, the people in southern Africa persisting in unity and struggle, guarding against external interference and sabotage, and supported by African and all other countries and peoples which uphold justice, will certainly foil the heinous acts of the racist forces of South Africa and Rhodesia and win complete liberation for the whole African continent.
228.	We are pleased to note that, since the tenth special session of the General Assembly, which was held on disarmament last year, the role of the United Nations and of the small and medium-sized countries have been strengthened in the struggle for genuine disarmament. This year, in the United Nations framework, there were held the first session of the Disarmament Commission, the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean and a series of other meetings, at which relevant resolutions were adopted. The convening of these meetings reflected the strong dissatisfaction of the peace-loving countries with the super-Powers' arms expansion and war preparations. It also shows that the control of the disarmament machinery by a few countries is being broken up. This undoubtedly is of positive significance. Chinese delegations took an active part in these meetings and put forward documents, including the Chinese proposal on the elements of a comprehensive disarmament programme.  We have always held that all countries, whether big or small, strong or weak, and whether with or without nuclear weapons, are entitled to take part in the consideration and settlement of disarmament issues on a completely equal footing. It is no longer permissible for anybody to use the United Nations as a platform to sing the praises of certain bilateral negotiations or make the disarmament machinery a ploy at his disposal.
229.	Nuclear disarmament is a matter of great concern to everyone. We have always held that the complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear weapons are the fundamental way to nuclear disarmament and the elimination of the threat of a nuclear war. Pending this, all the nuclear countries should undertake not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries and nuclear-weapon-free zones. As for the way to apply concrete measures of nuclear disarmament, an important principle must be followed, as was rightly pointed out by the representatives of many countries: namely, the two super-Powers with the largest nuclear arsenals should be the first to reduce their nuclear armament.
230.	When substantial progress has been made in this regard, the other nuclear countries shall join them in reducing nuclear armaments according to reasonable ratios until finally nuclear arms are totally destroyed. We consider this principle to be fair and reasonable. However, those who cling to their nuclear superiority and are bent on seeking nuclear over-lordship are obdurately opposed to this principle. They are fervently advocating the idea of all nuclear countries "simultaneously" reducing their armaments by the same quantity and quality. This is obviously a demagogic trick. Now that the super-Powers enjoy a tremendous nuclear superiority and are in a position to fight a nuclear war at 
any time with the huge number of nuclear weapons at their disposal, would any nuclear disarmament plan make our world safer if it does not change this state of affairs? It is obvious that only a genuine nuclear disarmament will contribute to international security, and a genuine nuclear disarmament must begin with the substantial reduction of the nuclear arsenals of the superpowers. The second SALT Treaty signed by the Soviet Union and the United States neither calls for a significant numerical reduction of the strategic arms nor provides for a substantive qualitative limitation. No wonder that people have pointedly commented that the treaty has nothing in common with genuine disarmament. We hope that the Soviet Union and the United States will take practical measures to carry out genuine nuclear disarmament, as called for by many other countries.
231.	The reduction of conventional arms is another matter calling for attention. In view of the growing danger of a massive conventional war, we hold that conventional disarmament and nuclear disarmament should be given equal importance, and that the two should be carried out in conjunction.
232.	This is the last year of the United Nations Dis-armament Decade. Regrettably the objective of the Dis-armament Decade, on which many countries placed their hopes, has not been attained; on the contrary, this past decade has been one of massive arms expansion by the super-Powers. What is the reason? As rightly put by the representatives of some countries, the crucial reason is that the super-Powers have no sincere desire for disarmament. This shows that we still face arduous and complicated tasks in the field of disarmament.
233.	So far as China is concerned, we are always for genuine disarmament. We firmly support all reasonable proposals conducive to genuine disarmament and are prepared to make unremitting efforts for its realization.
234.	The steady deterioration of the international economic situation is one of the important factors making for international turbulence. Some developed countries, especially the super-Powers, have used various means to shift the consequences of their economic crises and difficulties on to the developing countries so that the latter face worsening trading terms, mounting foreign debts and great difficulties in their economic development. The energy problem is an increasing concern of most countries. Many developing countries have pointed out that the root-cause of all evils of the present international economy lies in the existing inequitable and irrational international economic order. Therefore, they strongly demand a fundamental re-structuring of the international economic system. This demand is entirely just, being in the interest of the overwhelming majority of the people of the world.
235.	Five years ago, thanks to the efforts of the developing countries, the sixth special session of the General Assembly adopted the Declaration and Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order which constitutes a basic document guiding economic negotiations and dialogues. Five years have passed, but how much progress has been made in these negotiations and dialogues? Very limited progress. They are mostly at an impasse. The reasons are clear to all. The most important reason is that the two superpowers have set up obstacles of all kinds. The obstacles have multiplied especially since the beginning of this year. At the fifth session of UNCTAD and other international economic forums, many reasonable proposals made by the developing countries on changing the outdated international economic relations have thus been stalled. This unreasonable state of affairs cannot be allowed to continue. The developing countries have come to realize more and more that, in order to achieve progress in the negotiations for the establishment of a new international economic order, they must strengthen their unity, uphold principles, persevere in struggle and energetically promote mutual economic assistance and co-operation. The Arusha Programme for Collective Self-Reliance and Framework for Negotiations,  adopted at the ministerial meeting of the Group of 77 held last February, and the economic documents adopted at the recent Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries provide clear guidelines for promoting the economic co-operation among the developing countries and strengthening their negotiating positions with the developed countries, and they give expression to the common will and desire of the third-world countries. Thanks to the efforts of the developing countries, the recent United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development registered some preliminary results. We believe that the united struggle of the third-world countries will secure continuous progress for the just cause of establishment of a new international economic order.
236.	In order to bring about effective solutions to international economic problems, the recognition of the developing countries' full rights and true equality in decision-making in international economic affairs is essential. The correct way to settle pressing economic problems is for the developed countries and the developing countries to sit together for all-round consultation, break the present impasse, explore and adopt effective measures to narrow down the gap between the rich and poor countries and establish a new international economic relationship that is equitable, rational and based on equality and mutual benefit.
237.	Having realized the importance of a constructive dialogue with the third-world countries, a number of developed countries have in their bilateral or multilateral relations adopted positive measures, such as increasing their economic and scientific technical aid and supporting the establishment of an Integrated Programme for Commodities and its Common Fund. These measures are welcome. It is in the interest of the developed countries themselves to strengthen their cooperation with third-world countries on the basis of respect for independence and sovereignty and genuine equality. Moreover, this will help advance the common cause of world peace and stability. We hope that more developed countries will understand the situation and favourably respond to the demands of the developing countries.
238.	The Chinese Government sincerely hopes that the special session of the General Assembly scheduled to be held in 1980 at the suggestion of developing countries will make an important contribution in helping the economic development of the developing countries, establishing a new international economic order and formulating a new international strategy for development. The Chinese Government will work together with the other developing countries to that end.
239.	This year witnesses the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. These days the Chinese people are warmly celebrating this festival of historic significance.
240.	The birth of New China terminated once and for all the age of imperialist enslavement and oppression of the Chinese people and ushered in a new era in the history of China. By making arduous efforts in the 30 years since then, the Chinese people have achieved great successes in all fields of national construction and aid a good foundation for future development. Our cause has enjoyed the sympathy and support of many friendly countries and the people of the world. On behalf of the Government and people of the People's Republic of China, I would like to take this opportunity to express to them our heartfelt thanks.
241.	China today is vastly different from what it used to be in the old days. However, China is still a developing country, and our industry, agriculture, science and technology are not yet developed. With a view to bringing about a complete change to this state of affairs, we are determined to turn China into a modern socialist country by the end of the century in accordance with the behests of Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou Enlai. As from this year, the focus of our work throughout China has been shifted to socialist modernization. The task before us is beyond doubt an arduous one. But we are confident that, relying on the joint efforts of the entire people, we will be able to fulfil our historical mission successfully.
242.	In international affairs, China has consistently pursued a foreign policy of peace, which is China's fundamental policy in its relations with other countries. The Chinese people are engaged in gigantic socialist construction. China is a country with a large population and a vast territory. To turn China into an advanced, modern and powerful socialist country calls for the hard struggle of several generations. We are thus required to secure a lasting peaceful international environment China has in the past 30 years made unremitting efforts to oppose the imperialist and hegemonist policies of aggression and war and to win or safeguard world peace. In the present turbulent world situation, in which the danger of war continues to grow, China will as always, work together with all other peace-loving countries and peoples of the world to oppose hegemonism and safeguard world peace.
243.	The just struggle of the people of all countries support each other and advance the cause of progress of mankind as a whole. The Chinese Government and people adhere to the principle of internationalism, support all the oppressed nations and peoples in their struggle against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism and for liberation and social progress. We have done so in the past and will continue to do so in the future. We will always stand together with the people of all countries. A modernized China will certainly contribute to the preservation of world peace, to the furtherance of friendship and co-operation among all peoples and to the advancement of the cause of human progress.
244.	The People's Republic of China first sent its delegation to take part in the activities of the United Nations in the early 1970s. In the past eight years the Chinese delegation has worked together with the delegations of other Members to enable the United Nations to play its due role in maintaining world peace, supporting various countries in their endeavour to win or safeguard national independence, State sovereignty and territorial integrity, establishing a new international economic order and promoting international co-operation. With the advent of the 1980s, the Chinese delegation sincerely hopes that the United Nations will give full expression to the common will of the people of all countries, faithfully apply the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and play a more effective and active role in international affairs. China is prepared to work to this end together with the other countries which love peace and uphold justice.
﻿First of all, I should like, on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf, to extend to you, Sir, warmest congratulations on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly. With you as President, this important task falls to an experienced diplomat who, during his many years of service at New York, has rightly won everyone's respect. You can be sure of the full support of my delegation in carrying out the important tasks ahead of you.
76.	I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, whose untiring efforts on behalf of the world Organization we greatly respect.
77.	Crisis of economic growth and development, crisis in the Middle East, in southern Africa and in Indo-China—these are the subjects dominating international politics and especially politics within the United Nations. In his report, Secretary-General Waldheim speaks of "deep-seated feelings of anxiety" 
78.	In such times it is more important than ever to look beyond the day and to reflect on the fundamental current of history. That fundamental current was switched to a new course 200 years ago by the proclamation of civil liberties and by the Industrial Revolution. Up to that time oppression and poverty seemed to be the unalterable lot of the great majority of people. But then there opened up a future which gave all men the hope of one day living free from bondage and free from want. Ever since then the world—despite all crises and setbacks, despite terrible wars and inhuman crimes—has been pursuing that goal.
79.	The trend towards freedom has gathered momentum dramatically in our age: human rights became a universal idea; peoples living under colonial rule asserted their right to self-determination and achieved independence; the process of industrialization extended to the nations of the third world ; and in spite of the population explosion the per capita income of those countries grew 3.4 per cent annually in the 1960s.
80.	But people in many parts of the world are still suffering from hunger; there is still oppression; the problems of economic and social development are still unresolved; and world peace is still not secure. Indeed, today we must face new challenges: growth and development have slowed down, but the armaments spiral is spinning faster; the independence which the third world has only just achieved is threatened by new hegemonic aspirations; and violations of even the most elementary human rights show the great distance that still has to be covered before respect for the dignity of man becomes the day-to-day practice of all nations.
81.	Will mankind continue along the road to peace, to freedom from want and oppression, or will it not? The decision lies in our hands.
82.	The limits to progress that we have come up against are not insurmountable ones dictated by nature. They are social and political limits which we have imposed upon ourselves, because we still try to master the challenges of our time with the attitudes and methods of the past. A fundamental change in our way of thinking is more urgent than ever. This also holds true for international politics. Peace is no longer the exclusive concern of the big Powers, and economic stability is no longer a task for individual States alone.
83.	Safeguarding peace today requires the participation of all countries. The individual country can achieve growth only if the others achieve growth also. This new reality of global interdependence demands of us a different approach, a different kind of action.
84.	The power of fact forces nations onto the road of world-wide co-operation on the basis of equal rights. Multilateral diplomacy and international organizations are moving into the foreground. Their focal-point is the United Nations.
85.	This Organization has played an indispensable role in the peaceful process of decolonization, in defusing conflicts and in accelerating development. It has thrust the issue of mankind's future into our field of vision and opened up avenues for new dimensions in international co-operation. Its task is still to overcome the disparities in the world by means of co-operation and the reconciliation of interests.
86.	Those who want the world to achieve further progress must increase the efficiency of the United Nations. Because of new and wider-ranging activities its methods of work need to be streamlined. The mushrooming of institutions will have to be stopped.
87.	But for the United Nations to be able to fulfil its global responsibilities it will also be necessary to keep the principle of universality intact. The exclusion of Member States would affect the United Nations in its essence and deprive it of its ability to foster world-wide co-operation.
88.	Active and responsible participation in the work of the United Nations is a major element of the foreign policy of the Federal Republic of Germany. We uphold the principles of the Charter; they point the way to a future for mankind free from want and bondage.
89.	Progress requires peace. The policy of my country is a policy for peace, and the basis of that policy is our membership in the European Community and in the North Atlantic Alliance.
90.	The Irish Foreign Minister has set out the foreign policy positions of the nine States members of the European Community 
91.	Essential to the safeguarding of world peace is the consolidation of peace between East and West. East and West have different concepts and values and, consequently, different political objectives. We cannot erase this fundamental difference, but moderation must prevail. We must find ways and means of developing the co-operation necessary in this interdependent world, notwithstanding the contrasting systems.
92.	However, peace cannot be safeguarded unless there is a balance of forces. That balance is the basis of detente. The Federal Republic of Germany has from the very beginning been one of the main contributors to detente. We shall continue to make this contribution, together with our partners in the North Atlantic Alliance and in the European Community. To us, a policy of detente is a long-range policy; it is not just a fair- weather phase. This makes it predictable for all. No one has cause to doubt the unambiguity of our policy.
93.	We are constantly developing our relations with the Soviet Union and the other States signatories of the Warsaw Treaty. We are equally active in the multilateral process of detente in Europe, based on the Final Act of Helsinki.  All signatories of the Final Act should prove the sincerity of their will for detente by consistently honouring the commitments they entered into at Helsinki.
94.	Of special significance for detente is the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, since the border between East and West divides Germany. No nation can have a greater interest in detente than the German nation. Our aim is the continuous development of cooperation with the German Democratic Republic.
95.	We want to increase the possibilities for Germans on both sides to come to one another. Detente must be perceivable and tangible to the people in exercising their rights and in their daily lives. The German nation is divided against its will. But history has not spoken the last word yet. It remains the declared aim of our policy to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people can regain their unity in free self- determination.
96.	The switches for historical development have been thrown: for the realization of the right of self- determination and for peacefully bridging divisions, not deepening and perpetuating them.
97.	The symbol of detente in Europe is the city which in the years of the cold war was so often the scene of perilous tensions which affected the whole world: Berlin. The 1971 Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin has been a decisive feature in reducing those tensions. Its strict observance and full application remain the first essential for the progress of detente.
98.	Detente is indivisible. It must also prove itself in the East's and the West's relations with the nations of the third world. The East-West conflict must be kept out of the third world. The right of the developing countries to determine their future in their own way must be respected.
99.	The Federal Republic of Germany is opposed to any form of hegemony—whether it be military, political, economic or ideological. We do not want to force our form of government or social order on anyone. Rather, we want a world order in which all nations choose their way of life in free self-determination. A policy of partnership based on equal rights is the policy for the future.
100.	The movement of the non-aligned countries is of great importance to them in asserting their independence and their right of self-determination and hence in securing global stability. That movement will, however, be able to fulfil its task only if, rather than looking back, it recognizes the dangers which threaten independence and non-alignment today.
101. In his speech at the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana early this month, President Nyerere of the United Republic of Tanzania said:
' 'The non-aligned movement must remain itself—a group of countries which are proudly independent, which stand for justice and equality between men and between nations, and which refuse to ally themselves with any power bloc or major world Power."
If the movement of non-aligned countries adheres to that principle it will remain a powerful force for peace, stability and progress in the world. Anyone who wants to make that movement the so-called natural ally of the socialist camp is trying to lead it into a new dependence, to paralyse it and ultimately to deprive it of the basis for its actions.
102.	Respect for the right of self-determination of nations also means respect for their cultural identity, respect for the right of every nation to go its own way. We agree with the nations of the third world that do not see modernization as the blind adoption of foreign models but as the expression of their own character in the conditions of our time.
103.	Mankind needs diversity of cultures if its creative energies are not to peter out. We break a lance for the free exchange of ideas and information based on mutual respect and tolerance. We must promote this exchange and at the same time develop the ability of the third world to play an equal part in it.
104.	To be able to safeguard peace one has to settle conflicts by negotiation and the fair reconciliation of interests. I wish to single out the three conflicts which feature prominently in the General Assembly debates: those in the Middle East, southern Africa and IndoChina.
105.	In spite of all the efforts that have been made, peace has still not been achieved in the Middle East. The treaty between Egypt and Israel  has aroused hopes of a comprehensive peace settlement after 30 years of seemingly insurmountable hostility; but we know that there is still a hard road ahead and that many serious obstacles have to be cleared away before Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) can be implemented comprehensively and globally.
106.	The tragic situation in Lebanon also remains a source of great concern. The efforts by the constitutional authorities in Lebanon to preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their country deserve the support of us all.
107.	The Middle East is a region which has always been closely linked with Europe in many fields. Peace in that region is our peace, and vice versa. Together with our partners in the European Community, we have on several occasions, especially in the statement by the European Council on 29 June 1977, set out the principles for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The Irish Foreign Minister explained and reaffirmed those principles on behalf of the nine countries the day before yesterday.
108.	The nations of the world are becoming increasingly aware that without the inclusion of the Palestinian people in a comprehensive settlement there will be no lasting peace in the region.
109.	In the view of the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries, like the other States in the region, is unassailable. The recognition of this right, as well as of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, by all concerned is necessary for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace settlement. We called for the realization of the right of self-determination for the Palestinian people as early as 1974 during the debate on the question of Palestine in this forum.
110.	In southern Africa, only the removal of the remnants of colonialism and apartheid can bring peace to Namibia, Zimbabwe and the Republic of South Africa.
111.	In Namibia and Zimbabwe, a new approach is being made to the problem of ensuring a peaceful transition to independence. We are actively involved in the Namibia initiative of the five Western States.
112.	We welcome the new British initiatives to find a solution to the Zimbabwe problem with the agreement of all concerned; and we hope that the efforts of all participants in the London negotiations will at long last give the people of Zimbabwe the peace they long for.
113.	These efforts should not be disrupted by any side. The sooner the Republic of South Africa decides to take the necessary steps for the total elimination of all racial barriers the sooner will it be possible to enable people of all colours to live together in peace.
114.	The situation in lndo-China is a threat to peace and stability in South East Asia; it can become a threat to world peace.
115.	In Cambodia, peace can be restored only on the basis of that country's independence. That nation, which has undergone such a terrible test, needs a Government which expresses its will and which is recognized by all countries in the region. Neither the murderous Pol Pot regime nor the Heng Samrin regime installed by foreign forces meets this requirement. But the starving people of Cambodia cannot wait until a political solution has been found. They need help at once. The parties to the conflict must make it possible for that help to reach the people in all parts of Cambodia. No more time should be lost, since it is literally a question of a nation's survival.
116.	The misery of the refugees from Viet Nam poses yet another humanitarian challenge. Hundreds of thousands of desperate people have left their homeland. "Boat people" has become a new, horrifying phrase in the international vocabulary. The Federal Republic of Germany is doing all it can to help the Vietnamese refugees. Although we are a densely populated country, we are offering many of them a new home. We also support the programmes introduced by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for the benefit of the refugees in South-East Asia. But, here again, it is necessary—over and above the humanitarian aid—to get to the root of the problem. The freedom to leave one's own country is a human right; but it is equally a human right to be allowed to stay in one's native country.
117.	Starvation and distress still prevail in many parts of the globe, but the nations of the world are expending resources in excess of $400 billion a year for military purposes. The community of nations is called upon to make every effort to stop the armament spiral. The arms build-up is a threat to peace, it hampers development and it impairs the ability to provide development aid.
118.	The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the fact that, with the resolutions adopted at the tenth special session of the General Assembly in 1978, the United Nations has intensified its efforts to achieve disarmament. In a world in which hegemonic aspirations remain unchecked, every country must inevitably be at pains to maintain its security. The Western Alliance is resolved to do so, but it is doing no more than is necessary for the defence of its members. The Federal Republic of Germany is not a nuclear-weapon State, nor does it want to be. Nobody should underestimate the security interests of others.
119.	It is therefore essential for the safeguarding of world peace that nations should seek security, not in military supremacy, but in balance. Supremacy creates insecurity. Together with our partners in the Western defence alliance, we want to achieve such a balance, a balance at a lower level of armaments. That is the object of the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions in Europe. Their purpose is to establish an approximate parity of ground forces on both sides in central Europe.
120.	The participants in the negotiations in Vienna should now consider what agreements will be possible in the foreseeable future on the basis of reliable data. The agreement reached as a result of the second round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] likewise derives from the concept of parity. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes that agreement and hopes that it will soon enter into force. It is a major contribution to stability. It is, moreover, an important prerequisite for progress in other areas of arms control and disarmament. It is also of major significance for the progress of detente.
121.	In the context of the third round of SALT, there will also have to be negotiations on strategic medium- range ballistic missiles in Europe. Arms control and disarmament presuppose mutual trust. In Europe, the Final Act of Helsinki envisages confidence-building measures. One of the main tasks of the follow-up conference to be held in Madrid in 1980 must be to consolidate and further develop such measures. This is another reason why the Federal Republic of Germany considers that that conference should take place at the political level.
122.	We support the initiative of France for a conference on disarmament throughout Europe, which in the initial phase would concentrate on the conclusion of agreements to strengthen confidence.
123.	Confidence-building measures could also make for greater stability in other regions and make it easier to predict military and political conduct. We have, therefore, together with other countries, submitted a working paper entitled "Elements of a comprehensive programme of disarmament," which is designed to generate incentives for such measures. We hope that this session of the General Assembly will achieve further progress on the basis of that resolution.
124.	This year three major conferences have taken place in the context of the North-South dialogue: the fifth session of UNCTAD, the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, and the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development . These conferences have brought progress and opened up new areas for the continuing negotiations.
125.	It is, however, evident that the two sides have so far not really taken full advantage of the opportunity afforded by the North-South dialogue. The developing countries have proposed a global dialogue in the United Nations.
126.	We shall do everything in our power to ensure that this dialogue is structured in such a way that concrete results can be achieved within the foreseeable future.
127.	All concerned must negotiate in a new spirit and at long last recognize that in the North-South dialogue it is not a case of one side gaining and the other losing.
128.	Our common aim is to make accelerated progress in the developing countries and stable growth in the industrial countries possible again. But to achieve this, the industrial and the developing countries will jointly have to define which policy each side should pursue in order to reach this goal.
129.	A key issue is energy. The United States Secretary of State has rightly emphasized this. The challenge confronting us all is how to lead the world smoothly from the age of oil into an era of renewable sources of energy. This can only be achieved through the closest possible co-operation in a spirit of common responsibility. The Federal Republic of Germany, therefore, supports the idea of a world-wide, long-term energy dialogue.
130.	The oil-importing developing countries, whose oil requirements grow much more rapidly than those of the industrial countries, have the biggest problems. They must devote all their efforts to the development of their own sources of energy. The Federal Republic of Germany will increase its assistance to that end. We attach great importance to the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy scheduled for 1981.
131.	In order to accelerate development, the exports of the developing countries must be increased. The industrial countries will therefore have to resist the pressure of protectionist forces and keep their markets open for increasing exports, especially of manufactures, from the developing countries. This also applies to the Communist industrial countries. Up to now these countries have absorbed less than 3 percent of the exports of the third world, while the industrial democracies account for nearly 75 per cent.
132.	The Federal Republic of Germany advocates better access to markets. It is committed to the aim of restructuring the traditional patterns of trade within which the developing countries primarily supply commodities and the industrial countries supply manufactures,
133.	Accelerated development requires an increase in the transfer of capital. In the case of developing countries with low incomes, it will above all be necessary to increase official aid. The Federal Republic of Germany will in the three years ahead increase the growth rate of its aid twice as fast as that of the national budget.
134.	The main concern of middle-income developing countries is the transfer of private capital. These countries already meet well over two thirds of their external financial requirements from private sources. Direct private investment features prominently in private capital transfers. In order to promote such investment, two conditions will have to be fulfilled: the developing countries must have the assurance that such investment will dovetail organically with their development and that it will not be associated with any attempts to gain political influence. The investors, on the other hand, need legal security.
135.	Of major significance is the need to secure a fair balance of interests in the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea which will permit us to exploit the great economic possibilities of the oceans for development and growth. This concerns the utilization of two thirds of the earth's surface. A settlement giving fair consideration to all interests is above all necessary for sea-bed mining. It must give all States and enterprises access to the raw material deposits on the ocean floor and, at the same time, establish legal security without which the necessary long-term and large- scale investment will not be possible.
136.	However essential it may be that the industrial and the developing countries establish on their joint responsibility the global economic conditions for faster development and stable growth, we must all remain aware that this does not in any way diminish the importance of national economic and development policies. The industrial countries must bring inflation under control. They must conserve energy. They must economize on all raw materials and prevent waste. And they must master the structural change ensuing from the world economy and technological progress. All this requires painful adjustment processes, and we are aware of that.
137.	Adjustments will also have to be made by the countries of the third world. New development strategies are necessary so that the masses of the poor can be brought into the development process. In the developing countries, too, it is necessary to prevent a division of the economy and society into a modern, prospering sector and a traditionally stagnating sector. It is a question of creating development strategies designed to achieve growth not merely through capital-intensive investment, but also, and to a far greater extent than hitherto, by mobilizing human labour. The task is to give the millions of underemployed and unemployed the ability and the chance to use their energies for productive employment and self-fulfilment.
138.	Such a strategy requires in most developing countries the development of an efficient agriculture. A rapidly growing agriculture will in this process, owing to the demand for fertilizer, agricultural machinery and mass-produced consumer goods, become at the same time a driving force of industrialization.
139.	Instead of industrial enclaves there must be industrialization that forms an integral part of the economy of each of the developing countries concerned and at the same time helps those countries to improve their export capability on a broad basis.
140.	Only the development of agriculture can avert the threatening food crisis in the third-world countries and free them from the need to import food. This is the only way in which the unemployment problem can be kept within tolerable limits. Finally, only a strategy that links growth and social justice can prevent development from slipping into social unrest and internal chaos.
141.	One acute problem is the alarming increase in the number of executions in the world, many of them with a political background. The death penalty should be limited and ultimately abolished, as it was in my own country over 30 years ago, after the bitter experience of history. The next session of the General Assembly should debate the death penalty as a matter of priority.
142.	Thirty years ago the General Assembly proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as the common standard of achievement for all nations. That standard, more than any other, indicates how distant our goal remains. Human rights have still not been realized world-wide—neither the civil and political rights nor the social, economic and cultural rights.
143.	In the United Nations we have created procedures and institutions with the help of which we can actively promote the realization of human rights. These procedures are still weak. None the less, combined with the moral pressure of world opinion, they have already induced many countries to bring about improvements.
144.	We must strengthen and develop the institutions of the United Nations for the protection of human rights. Although many misgivings are still expressed about the establishment of a United Nations court of human rights, I am convinced that in the long run it will be generally realized that such a court would be meant solely to safeguard human rights and would not be directed against any country.
145.	International terrorism is a challenge to us all. Only by joint action shall we be able to overcome it.
146.	Effective measures against the taking of hostages are among the indispensable instruments for the protection of human rights. It was this consideration that prompted me three years ago to propose to the Assembly a convention against the taking of hostages.  That proposal met with support from the General Assembly. We are now all gratified that the Ad Hoc Committee appointed to elaborate a convention has completed its draft. I hope that this session of the General Assembly will adopt it.
147.	The future of the world has its beginning in man's consciousness, a consciousness that is today imbued with belief in the inalienable rights of the individual and the right of nations to self-determination. The will of the individual and the will of nations to assert those rights are the prime movers of our time. It is not possible to halt them, not even by force. In this certainty, the aim must be to work with determination and by peaceful means for the world-wide assertion of human rights and the right of self-determination.
148.	All men must be enabled to live in peace, free from fear, free from hunger, and free from want.﻿The sole aim of our General Assembly is to serve peace, and yet session after session here we note the consequences of disaster. To us, as leaders, one year means a great deal of diplomatic activity. But for some peoples one year means a great deal of suffering. There are 1 million refugees and 250,000 victims of war, and some 15 of our Member States are embroiled in armed conflicts. 
86.	However, serious and distressing though these conflicts may be none of them has so far jeopardized the global peace that the world has known since 1945. It is an inadequate peace to be sure, but it is peace just the same. Without it, all efforts towards progress would be destroyed in the general calamity. This peace is not based on terror and immobility. Despite its shortcomings and its failures, our world has made more progress during the final third of this century than it did during the three preceding centuries. I shall take just three examples. The old nations of Europe have been able to forget their age-old conflicts and to join together in a process of reconciliation; that vast country China, which had so long been kept aside, has taken its rightful place once more in the community of nations; and, lastly, more than 100 States have become independent and are now able to make their voices heard in this forum, which has truly become a world forum.
87.	These examples prove mankind's ability to change. They are evidence of the fact that catastrophes are not inevitable as long as human will is exerted.
88.	The community of nations has been able to demonstrate its unanimity on one point, a negative point to be sure but one that will henceforth be a fact of history, I am referring to the avoidance of a world war for more than 30 years. Why not go even further now, and express that unanimity in a positive manner by uniting our efforts against the other threats to peace?
89.	Thirty years without a general war: we have shown that that is possible. Thirty, years to ensure the survival of humanity: that is the very concrete problem that faces us, because between now and the year 2000 there will be another 2 billion human beings to feed — 2 billion. In 1925, that was the entire world population.
90.	If a world divided into antagonistic blocs quarrels over limited resources instead of uniting to develop them, living in interdependence will pose a threat. Instead, the world should organize its interdependence into solidarity so as to enable it to achieve greater security and genuine organization, which are the three components of true peace.
91.	That is why I shall discuss these three points in turn: first, a world of greater solidarity, one that will succeed in settling for the benefit of everyone the two problems on which the future of each of our peoples depends—poverty and energy; secondly, a more secure world that will undertake disarmament; and, thirdly, a better organized and a more human world, in which, alongside an Organization such as ours, whose role can only grow, the new kinds of regional solidarity will become organized.
92.	Concerning a world of greater solidarity, without for one moment forgetting the moral duty that gives solidarity its full significance, I intend to show that solidarity is also essential for the survival of mankind, for in fact we shall survive only if we resolve two problems—poverty and energy. Poverty is the failure of progress and hence the failure of us all. Energy is the key to progress and therefore an imperative common to us all.
93.	It is difficult to describe the scourge of poverty without lapsing into abstract figures and the demagoguery of sentimental platitudes. And yet we have to acknowledge an obvious fact that our minds reject: poverty is not on the decline. Development has succeeded in keeping it in check, but not in reducing it. The poorest regions are becoming poorer still. A half billion souls are going hungry. At least a half billion can neither read nor write. More than 1 billion have access neither to drinkable water nor to basic medical care. Poverty has not relinquished its hold. It scoffs at the modern world. It is no longer the humble, silent poverty that once escorted mankind throughout its history and all over the globe. It has borrowed from the modern world its violence, its clamour and its great surges. The poverty of shanty towns, the poverty of homeless people, the poverty of frustration that is at least as great as hunger—that is the face of the world, and we must not avert our eyes from it.
94.	We must, on the contrary, confront this poverty, and together we must all declare war on it on several fronts. Concerning the food front, a major rural development effort at the national and international levels must take up where the 'green revolution'' of the 1960s left off so as to improve the growth rate of agricultural production, especially in low-income countries in Asia and Africa. In the field of unemployment, a massive drive to create productive jobs—550 million between now and the year 2000, according to the World Bank, is crucial to the battle against poverty. In the matter of financing, all countries have a stake in preventing the constraints of financing from halting the progress happily already under way towards world economic integration. Now, the debts of the developing countries have more than doubled since 1974 and at this point debt-servicing costs are increasing faster than the debts themselves. France will therefore support measures designed to augment the financing capacities of the IMF regarding balance-of-payments adjustments, in the hope that the action taken will be specifically directed to the needs of the most impoverished countries. France also advocates greater efforts on behalf of those countries in the area of public development aid. I should like to recall that France has cancelled the debts owed to it by some countries.
95.	All countries should contribute to this aid— which, by the way, does not exempt us from giving our help to other developing countries—in particular by opening their borders to manufactured products from the most deprived countries; by allowing them access to natural resources, especially those from the sea; and, lastly, by increasing the volume of multilateral aid. France for its part has decided to double its contribution to UNDP between now and 1981, with an increase of more than 50 percent this year.
96.	As to energy, the anguish of tomorrow's world will arise from the sudden changes which we now see threatening us: the population explosion and the scarcity of resources, which would jeopardize growth and therefore the increase needed in employment. There will be neither growth nor new jobs without more energy, even if the advancement of technology and organization were to make growth possible at a rate faster than that of the increase in energy needs.
97.	True, and we all know this full well, countries in the different categories do not have the same interests or make the same analyses of this energy problem. To solve it, let us begin by understanding one another and accepting the validity of our respective concerns. 
98.	The producer countries are legitimately concerned with preparing for their future development and therefore with securing the foundations of their future growth in a prosperous economic climate by managing carefully their non-renewable resources and maintaining the value of their assets.
99.	The industrialized countries, for whom oil is still a basic resource, want the volume and price of supplies to remain stable, so that they can guarantee the growth, which, whatever happens, is necessary to the world economic balance.
100.	The developing countries that do not produce oil, and especially the most impoverished ones, are in a paradoxical position: they feel the effects of tensions in the oil market more severely than others, even though the place they occupy in that market is small. Nevertheless, their economies are more seriously affected by increases in oil prices.
101.	We must, I affirm, understand each other and move closer to each other's positions. There is nothing impossible about the quest for coherence among the policies of the three categories of country. Only that quest can help us to pass from the interdependence to which we are subject, to an organized solidarity.
102.	Let me say unequivocally that it is up to the industrialized countries to take the initiative in instituting stricter policies, because it is they who are the largest consumers. The decisions taken in Tokyo last June were a major turning-point. I emphasize that they were based on an initiative of the European Economic Community, which thereby in the circumstances demonstrated its sense of economic responsibility at the world level. The pledges made there to set ceilings on oil imports are significant in two important ways.
103.	On the one hand, they would break the link be-tween the pursuit of economic growth by the industrialized countries and the growth of oil imports. Sustained but sober growth on the part of the industrialized countries will henceforth be fuelled by energy sources other than oil.
104.	On the other hand, these pledges indicate that the oil energy so indispensable to the developing countries will be available for their use.
105.	France, for its part, has committed itself to a policy of conservation of energy and development of new energy sources that will enable it, I assure you; to achieve the goals it has set itself.
106.	I am confident that the oil-producing countries recognize the importance of this major change. Once the industrialized countries actually set out on the path of controlling their energy imports, the producer countries will be able to take into consideration the effects which their decisions have on the world economy, as they manage their resources. Any breakdown in supply, any reassessment of the price levels reached to date, would have disastrous consequences for the world economy.
107.	But oil is not solely the concern of the oil- producing and industrialized countries. In the interests of solidarity, the new energy needs of the developing countries must be met. To that end, a world programme of investment is indispensable. France supports the World Bank's plans in that regard, but feels that they should be further expanded. France is already making a substantial effort to provide technical assistance in regard to oil.
108.	Finally, we must work together more closely to ensure that the decisions made by the different parties are consistent. The 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy will assuredly bring progress in an area as yet largely unexplored, but one that is of capital importance for the future.
109.	We must do more. In this regard, France has taken note with interest of the proposal made by the Group of 77 to start new, comprehensive talks within the framework of the United Nations.
110.	Concerning a world of greater solidarity, and, at the same time, a more secure world, let us not deceive ourselves. To reduce the poverty of the poorest and to overcome the energy crisis, a conceited effort is needed. This will not be readily agreed to and will not produce results except in a climate of security and trust. When suspicion, mistrust and fear reign, we immediately see hallowed self-interests placed first, before all other considerations. When armed conflicts break out, the work of several years is reduced to nothing in a few days.
111.	We shall build a world of greater solidarity only if we work together to make it more secure.
112.	 That is why France sets such great value on the progress of detente and has made it one of the major and permanent lines of its policy. It welcomes, in this respect, the favourable development of its relations with the Soviet Union and with the other socialist countries in Europe, especially Poland.
113.	In Europe, detente has not only made it possible to defuse the most visible causes of confrontation. It has paved the way for dialogue and co-operation. It has made, and is continuing to make, an essential contribution to world peace.
114.	I mention the progress of detente, not to encourage complacency and passiveness, but rather to urge new efforts to expand detente and make its effects felt more deeply. Detente has probably been a contributing factor in containing flash-points all over the world, although it has not yet succeeded in dousing them completely. It has certainly put a brake on the excessive Build-up of arms, although it has not stopped it altogether.
115.	It is time for us to attack these two problems. The results achieved give us the means; they therefore also show us our duty.
116.	A review of the situations of crisis and tension that persist in the world shows that these fall into two categories. Some situations are linked to the process of decolonization, of which they are an anachronistic survival. This is the case with Namibia and Rhodesia. Others result from military faits accomplis and should 
be neither endorsed by the peoples concerned nor recognized by the international community. I refer to the Middle East and to South-East Asia. However, in all these instances, the crisis situation can be attributed to the fact that deeply rooted realities are being ignored or misperceived; that needed changes—needed because they are natural and legitimate—are being opposed or blocked; and that in some quarters the mistaken conviction that 'might is right" still persists.
117.	In Namibia as in Rhodesia, the deep-seated reality is the legitimate aspiration of the peoples involved to accede to genuine and internationally recognized independence. In this respect, hopeful signs are beginning to emerge. It is up to us to encourage them. For this reason, France has welcomed the agreement reached at the Meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Lusaka in August and places its hopes in the success of the talks that have opened in London under the aegis of the United Kingdom Government. For this reason also, in the case of Namibia France is participating actively—together with four other States and in close liaison with the Secretary- General of our Organization—in the five-Power initiative  with a view to achieving a solution for that territory that is consistent with the principles of our Charter.
118.	Turning to the Middle East, I come to a conflict that is quite different. It is as old as our Organization. Thirty years have elapsed, and with them how many hopes have gone unfulfilled and how many paths have been explored in vain in an effort to find the key to peace.
119.	My country makes no claim here to define a new framework for negotiation or to devise, in the wake of so many others, some new procedural skill. That is not where the problem lies. There has been too much passion and too much suffering for it to be possible to hope to be able to build peace on ambiguities.
120.	Here again, what is needed is recognition of the realities instead of escape from them, tackling the problems instead of evading them.
121.	The realities in this case are: the right of the Arab States to recover their territorial integrity; the right of the Palestinian people to a homeland; and the right of all the States in the area, the Arab States as well as the State of Israel, to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries.
122.	These three realities form a whole. They cannot be dissociated without being forsworn; they are valid for all the parties concerned, including—as the nine countries members of the European Economic Com-munity have just stressed—the PLO.
123.	This presupposes that both sides at last make the effort to look the facts in the face; these two great peoples, the people of Israel and the Palestinian people, will not be able to postpone indefinitely the moment when they recognize one another. It will be necessary to enlarge the dialogue, to cease insisting on exclusive rights; all the protagonists must agree to talk to each other. Certain indications lead us to hope that the time
is approaching. France is following the situation attentively and will make every effort to see these signs multiplied, because they point towards the only real path of peace.
124.	In speaking of peace in this area, I also have in mind Lebanon, which has so many ties to my own country. In recent months, Lebanon has been the object of attacks whose repetitive and excessive nature prompted the Security Council to convene. France condemns these attacks that strike at the unity and independence, as well as the territorial integrity, of Lebanon, They affect the Force sent by the United Nations to the southern part of the country; they put in jeopardy the very existence of one of our Organization's Member States.
125.	Lastly, South-East Asia and, more specifically, the situation in Cambodia. Last year, at this very rostrum my predecessor stressed the grave dangers of the situation. The events of the past 12 months have unfortunately confirmed our fears.
126.	The oppression and bloodshed of an inhuman regime have been superseded by the tragedy of a foreign invasion. The Indo-Chinese peninsula has once again been thrust into a state of war.
127.	My Government asked at the time, together with others, for the withdrawal of the forces to the international boundaries they had crossed; I note that the withdrawal has not been general.
128.	France cannot acquiesce in Cambodia's becoming a prize in and an arena for a confrontation that dwarfs it and that is in fact utterly alien to it. Cambodia has the right, like any other State, to see its independence and integrity respected. Its people, whose very existence is threatened even as I speak, has the right to live and to determine its destiny as a sovereign nation in peace and friendship with all its neighbours by acquiring a Government representative of the different political tendencies in the country. The exercise of its rights is indispensable to the reconstruction of this ravaged country and to the safeguarding of peace in the region. It is not compatible with the presence of a foreign army on its soil.
129.	Flash-points ignite violence in the world, but it is the incredible build-up of arms that could at any moment transform a local explosion into one of cataclysmic proportions. If we want our world to be more secure, it is not enough to defuse the causes of violence. We still have to control the inordinate quantity of instruments of violence; in other words, we must aim for genuine disarmament.
130.	All of us here know how arduous the task is, and we are familiar with the consistent way in which technological progress and the complicated mesh of mistrust can thwart the aspirations of peoples and the intentions of Governments.
131.	France for its part is too old a nation to imagine that disarmament is easy. But it believes too much in the future of humanity to think disarmament is impossible. Rejecting illusion, which is misleading, and resignation, which leads to despair, France is convinced that concrete progress can be made, providing that these three conditions are fulfilled: clarity and realism in objectives; continuity in action; imagination in initiatives.
132.	The President of the French Republic sought to meet the first of these conditions when he came here last year to set forth the main lines of the new approach France is proposing. 
133.	First, there is the right of each State to security. This right is the corollary, in disarmament terms, of what is, in the context of detente, the right of each State in sovereignty to decide on its internal options and its international alliances.
134.	Secondly, there is the idea that disarmament is first and foremost a universal problem: no State, no group of States, may arrogate to itself the right to determine the rules unilaterally and for all. The entire international community must share in the implementation, benefits and controls of disarmament.
135.	Finally, there is the need to bear in mind what I will call the "geography of security". The regional level would in fact be the easiest level at which to make concrete progress in this area.
136.	Once these principles have been accepted, they still must be put into practice, and this is where continuity of action enters the picture.
137.	Since the tenth special session was held in the spring of 1978, some progress has been made. We must not, however, relax our efforts.
138.	The new Committee on Disarmament, which together with others we helped to establish, has begun its work. The results of the first session show that broader and more equitable participation aid the progress of the discussion where bilateral debates might lead the talks to become bogged down. At this point we should take care not to disappoint the expectations that have been expressed. France for its part will work actively in the Committee in the hope of reaching concrete results at the next session, particularly in the area of chemical weapons.
139.	The United States and the Soviet Union have signed the second SALT agreement.  France is well aware of the importance of the step that has recently been taken. It considers the agreement to be balanced as a whole and hopes that it will enter into force soon. The fact remains that even with this agreement we are still only at the preface to true disarmament. The level of nuclear weapons held by the two signatory Powers is not only high now, it is to go still higher in the next few years. The future negotiations, for which the second round of SALT has paved the way, will, I hope, bring this level down very substantially. As for France, it would take appropriate action on the basis of such reductions only if there were a change in the extent of the disparity persisting between those two arsenals and its own arsenal, which France keeps at its disposal to ensure the security and credibility of its deterrent.
140.	In Europe, finally, France has proposed the convening of a conference on disarmament. By linking confidence-building measures and effective disarmament, by making a distinction between arms that serve deterrence and security and those that might fuel threats and intimidation, by defining a cohesive and significant geographical framework, its proposal aims to take into account the specific facts of Europe's situation. The positive reactions that have been forthcoming from various quarters have strengthened our conviction that this approach corresponds both to a real need and to a real possibility, thus encouraging us to proceed.
141.	In a field as difficult as that of disarmament, determination needs the help of imagination.
142.	With a view to stimulating reflection and imagination, we proposed the founding of an international disarmament institute. At the tenth special session, we also advocated that the most modern technology be made available to the international community by proposing the establishment of an international satellite monitoring agency. In both cases, we would be mobilizing science and scientists for the cause of disarmament.
143.	To this same end I should like to announce today that France is proposing to organize an international symposium in Paris on the theme 'Science for disarmament' This symposium, which could serve as a kind of preface to the work of the institute, would seek to involve the scientific community more closely with disarmament by demanding an intellectual and moral contribution from it.
144.	A world of greater solidarity, a more secure world, but also a more organized world is what we seek.
145.	The world we live in, if we reflect upon it, has two essential characteristics: diversity and disparity. There is diversity in political regimes, philosophical and religious creeds and national traditions and cultures. The disparities lie in power, wealth and access to knowledge.
146.	Diversity brings people closer together because it encourages them to participate in dialogues and ex-changes. Disparities separate them, on the contrary, because they divide people and set them one against the other.
147.	How can we act to preserve the former and to eliminate the latter?
148.	Allow me, as a European, to draw upon my experience. Thirty years ago the nations of Europe were emerging from world conflict, drained and in ruins. Where they had once been among the most powerful and wealthy of nations, now they did not even have the resources needed to set themselves back on their feet.
149.	Thirty years have gone by. Now those same nations have regained their place in the world thanks to the aid they received, thanks to their own efforts, but thanks also to the close co-operation they forged among themselves. Without relinquishing their identities or compromising their independence, they have formed a Community which, by the very fact that it exists and that it has demonstrated its ability to act, today constitutes an essential element in international equilibrium.
150.	There may have been fear in some quarters that the Europe of six, and later nine, countries—and undoubtedly tomorrow of twelve—by organizing itself, would become inward-looking. The experience of what is now more than 20 years has shown the opposite: among groups of comparable size, the European Community is without a doubt the most open to the world. This applies equally to its trade, to its part in aid for development and to its contribution to solving major world problems. Nor is it an accident that detente, throughout the entire European continent, has advanced at the same pace as has the organization of Western Europe.
151.	By increasing their co-operation and strengthening their cohesion, the countries of Europe have not created a bloc. Quite the contrary; they have introduced a new type of regional grouping. Because this co-operation is founded on the natural affinities of history, geography, culture and human values, it protects diversity and helps to attenuate disparities.
152.	The case of Europe is significant, it seems to me, but it is not an isolated case and is becoming less and less unique. Everywhere we are witnessing the advance of regional solidarity. There is growing vitality at the level of continents and subcontinents in geographically oriented organizations such as the Organization of American States, the OAU, the Andean Group and the Association of South-East Asian Nations. The phenomenon is too widespread for it not to be a response to a universally felt need. In my opinion, it reflects an aspiration on the part of each of our nations to reconcile two fundamental requirements—the need to assert themselves without becoming isolated and the need to participate without becoming subservient.
153.	The pluralistic, multipolar world that this aspiration heralds will be different from the world of yesterday—profoundly so. The conviction of France is that it will be a better world. So long as there are only two camps, the gains of one will inevitably appear to be the losses of the other. The logic of their relationships is confrontation—the only possible compromise is the status quo, in other words, immobility. In contrast to this, the multiplication of poles allows for more flexibility in the general equilibrium. It encourages necessary changes and makes it easier to resolve local conflicts. The positive role played by the Organization of American States in the evolution of events in Nicaragua and the decisive assistance provided by the African States in achieving a peaceful solution of the problem of Chad are telling examples.
154.	The recent events in central Africa provide a new and clear illustration of this. It was the Africans themselves who, by the decisions made at the Kigali conference, substantiated and condemned the atrocities perpetrated. It was the former President of the Central African Republic, the Prime Minister in office and other leaders who took the initiative of liberating their country. France, which had suspended its aid as soon as the Committee of African Magistrates presented its conclusions, gave an affirmative response to the request made of it on the spot by the new authorities. Thus it was possible to eliminate a tyrannical rule without bloodshed.
155.	There need be no fear that the strengthening of these regional organizations is likely to infringe on either the individual identities of national sovereignties to which we are attached or the universal nature of the international community. Quite the opposite; it cannot fail to protect the one and to enrich the other.
156.	This can be seen quite clearly, even here within our Organization. The existence of regional groupings has never prevented us from examining the great questions of our time. Indeed, it has made such examination easier and more productive.
157.	It is indeed characteristic of regional organizations that there is no better way of affirming their identity than through dialogue and co-operation,
158.	It is in order to take into account this new dimension of today's world that France has renewed its interest in the Latin American continent and, on this subject, I should like to recall the two visits made by Mr. Giscard d'Estaing to Brazil and to Mexico respectively. It was with this same idea in mind, too, that the French Head of State put forward the concept of a "trialogue" between Europe, Africa and the Arab countries. By giving substance to this project, these three groups will not only underline the obvious complementaries that unite them; they will also place them at the service of progress and peace. They will help to construct the foundations of a more balanced, more open world, where the old temptations of hegemony will have made way for the call to solidarity.
159.	The world of greater solidarity, security and organization that France hopes to see and which it is working to bring into being will have meaning only if it serves mankind, its dignity and its rights.
160.	Owing to the universality of our Organization and to the legitimacy conferred upon it by the membership of almost all nations, it has in this respect a crucial role to play. Our Organization is the expression of the universal conscience and, at the same time, of the diversity of cultures. More than ever, the Charter is the indispensable reference that will allow us to live together better and to render more effective and more widespread the dignity of man that it proclaims and that is defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The dignity of man must be expressed through the equality of all. Together with the entire international community, we condemn regimes that are founded on racial discrimination, such as apartheid.
161.	The United Nations is a decisive safeguard for the peace of the world and for the dignity of the individual. It has shown this in a great many situations, whether by recalling the principles and spelling out the law or through its actions and calls for the assistance of States. In the tragedy of the South-East Asian refugees, for example, our Organization, by acting in accordance with its peaceful and humanitarian purpose, has fulfilled its unique role. France, as is well known, has given the Organization its full assistance. As a country of asylum and refuge, it has opened its doors wide to those who have been exiled and will continue to receive all those to whom it is able to offer a future commensurate with their hopes.
162.	The efforts of our Organization and of States to respond to urgent and desperate situations should not, however, make us forget the silent hope of millions of individuals imprisoned by poverty. No man, no leader, can ever rest easy so long as suffering, fear and contempt for the law reign on this earth. This is one battle that we should all wage together, regardless of our differences, for it is the battle for peace on earth.﻿This is the first time that I have had the honour of addressing the United Nations. But no one who has lived through the last 34 years can fail to have been conscious of the United Nations or to be aware of what it has achieved and of what it has yet to achieve.
219.	There were 51 founder Members of the United Nations. Now there are 152 Member States. Last week, we welcomed Saint Lucia, formerly a British Territory, as the one hundred and fifty-second Member. I congratulate the Government and people of Saint Lucia on their achievement of full independence. This near- tripling of the membership is largely due to the dissolution of the great colonial empires. The United Kingdom worked with, and not against, that trend. This month, we in my country have mourned the death of Lord Mountbatten, who was a pioneer of decolonization. Since last year's General Assembly, besides Saint Lucia, the Republic of Kiribati has achieved full nationhood. We look forward to Saint Vincent joining them on 27 October. It remains our policy to respect the wishes of the peoples of our few remaining dependent Territories. It is for them to determine their own future in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter. We shall therefore continue to give every support and encouragement to any of them who seek independence. When there are difficulties, we will do our best to overcome them. In particular, we want to bring Belize to secure independence as soon as possible.
220.	The dismantling of the British Empire has led us either to join or create two new institutions, the European Community, whose President spoke earlier on this afternoon—and whose remarks I warmly endorse—and the Commonwealth, an institution sometimes referred to as a talking shop. If you are looking for an example of how valuable a talking shop can be, you need go no further than the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries in Lusaka two months ago. Talk there led first to greater understanding between the countries concerned, and then to action to try to solve the problems of Rhodesia.
221.	During the last two weeks, the British Government has engaged in intensive negotiations on Rhodesia, and these negotiations are continuing. But I thought it right to come to New York to inform the General Assembly of the stage that we have now reached.
222.	I do not intend to go back over the history of the Rhodesian dispute, now some 14 years old, apportioning blame to this party or absolving that. I would like to emphasize at the outset one point: throughout the vicissitudes of the Rhodesian problem, Britain has never succumbed to the temptation to abandon its responsibilities towards that unhappy country, leaving majority and minority alike to endless war. The whole approach of the present British Government is indeed based on a determination to fulfil our responsibilities towards the people of Rhodesia.
223.	When my government came to power in May this year, we were confronted with a new situation, though there were also some depressingly familiar features. The reality of change for the better had been symbolized in the elections which had taken place in April of this year on the basis of the principle of "one man, one vote. “Those elections have had many critics, but the plain fact is that they have led to the emergence of a parliament and an administration, most of whose members belong to the majority community and which is led by a member of that community. This represented a substantial step forward towards the abandonment by the white community of its privileged position, and my Government was determined to build on that, so as to make a further effort to bring Rhodesia to legal independence in a context of wide international recognition and acceptance.
224.	But the Patriotic Front did not participate in the April elections, and the war continued. The constitution under which those elections took place was marred by certain deficiencies. But to decry and dismiss the elections would have been to discourage further change. There was a need for urgent and imaginative action to exploit the opportunity which had been created to achieve a settlement that would gain wide international acceptance and, we hoped, bring an end to the war. Past efforts to solve the Rhodesian dispute showed, however, that it was essential to proceed step by step to build a solid foundation for negotiations.
225.	We therefore immediately engaged in an extensive series of consultations with all the parties concerned in the conflict in order to identify the elements for a solution. We spoke to the leaders of the Commonwealth, of the front-line States, of the Patriotic Front, and of the Salisbury parties. We also remained in close touch with our other friends and allies and took account of their views. These consultations were invaluable, and formed a sound basis for our present approach to a settlement.
226.	From these consultations two main conclusions flowed. The first was a general recognition of the extent of the changes which had taken place in Rhodesia, despite the short-comings of the Salisbury constitution. The second was the unanimous conviction that there should now be a further attempt to involve all the parties to the conflict in an attempt to find a solution, and that any solution should emanate from Britain as the responsible Power.
227.	The next stage was the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries as Lusaka in August, and it was here that the foundation of our present approach to a solution was laid. In Lusaka our proposals for a settlement were discussed and endorsed by a very important cross-section of the world community, including three of the front-line States. I wish to pay a tribute to the Heads of Government present at Lusaka for the helpful and constructive attitude which they all displayed during our discussions on Rhodesia, and especially to the wise chairmanship of President Kaunda of Zambia, which made a huge contribution to the successful outcome. The essence of the Lusaka agreement on Rhodesia was the acceptance by the Commonwealth of the British Government's constitutional responsibility to grant legal independence to Rhodesia on the basis of genuine majority rule.
228.	In our negotiations with the Salisbury parties and the Patriotic Front, we have continued to be guided by the principles defined at Lusaka. Our first task has been to seek agreement on an independence constitution comparable with the constitutions on which we granted independence to other former British dependent territories. It would be idle to pretend that in the special historical circumstances of Rhodesia, such a task is proving easy. Compromise on both sides is essential. We have already secured from the Salisbury parties agreement in principle to British proposals on the constitution. This was a bold decision by Bishop Muzorewa's delegation.
229.	Significant progress on certain points has also been made in discussions with the leaders of the Patriotic Front. All parties must sustain their efforts to continue the momentum of the Conference if the gains so far made are not to be eroded. A heavy responsibility will lie on any who fail to respond to this opportunity to achieve for the people of Rhodesia a fair settlement which will bring international acceptance and an end to the war. Much difficult negotiation undoubtedly lies ahead before the foundations of an independent and democratic society," in which all the people of Rhodesia will be able to live in security and at peace with each other and with their neighbours, are laid. I do not underestimate the difficulties which remain to be overcome, but I dare to hope that the moment may not be too far away when the British Government and Parliament will be able to grant legal independence to Rhodesia on the basis of genuine majority rule. Many attempts to solve the Rhodesia problem have failed in the past. I hope that it may be our privilege before too long to welcome an independent Zimbabwe to this Assembly as a full member of the United Nations.
230.	Namibia is another Territory where we must try to find an internationally acceptable solution through free and fair elections and not through bloodshed. The five Western countries, in close consultation with the Secretary-General, are pressing on with the search for a solution which would open the way to the arrival of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group in Namibia. Discussions are now concentrated on the detailed arrangements, which will need to be carefully worked out with the parties concerned, for a demilitarized zone. The idea of such a zone was proposed by the late President Neto of Angola, whose death we all deeply mourn. Our aim is to achieve early and complete agreement so that a date can be fixed for a ceasefire and the beginning of the transition to independence. Given goodwill and flexibility on the part of all concerned, this goal should not be beyond our reach.
231.	Namibia and Zimbabwe-Rhodesia are the immediate issues in southern Africa. But in the longer term it is on South Africa that the stability of this troubled region will depend. We share the international community's distaste of apartheid. It is neither just nor workable. But will threats and isolation bring about the changes we all wish to see? We in the British Government doubt it. We believe that the better course is to accept that the Republic's plural society gives rise to unprecedented problems and to offer our help to the leaders of all races to work together to find just solutions. In this way we can all contribute towards peaceful change in South Africa. Otherwise the future promises only violence and misery for all the people of South Africa, whatever their race.
232.	In the Middle East, the British Government greatly welcomes what has so far been achieved through the process begun at Camp David. It is in the interests of all parties to explore fully the opening which was created there. We hope that these continuing negotiations will lead to transitional arrangements which will lighten the burden of occupation in the West Bank and Gaza and help to create a climate of confidence and co-operation in practical matters. But the ultimate goal must remain a comprehensive settlement, based on the effective application of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in all its parts. This involves the acceptance by all parties of Israel's right to live in peace with its neigh- ours within secure and recognized boundaries. And, equally, it requires the withdrawal of Israel from territories occupied in 1967.
233.	There is one area in which a broad international consensus has recognized that resolution 242 (1967) is incomplete—that is, in the handling of Palestinian rights. The resolution takes no account of the legitimate political rights of the Palestinians, which go well beyond their status as refugees. Nor does it take any account of the Palestinians ' belief that they are a separate people with a right to their homeland. This, I believe, is an area in which resolution 242 (1967) may be supplemented—not, I emphasize, replaced, amended or distorted, but supplemented—to meet this point.
234.	My Government believes that a settlement which does not command the broad assent of the Palestinian people cannot last. But if the Palestinians are to exercise the right to determine their own future as a people, this must be in the context of a negotiated peace settlement which guarantees Israel's right to a peaceful and permanent existence within secure borders. Only if both parties recognize the legitimate rights of each other will it be possible to achieve the durable peace which all the peoples of the Middle East so desperately need.
235.	In the meantime, it is our earnest hope that all parties will avoid doing or saying anything to make it harder to establish the minimum trust without which successful negotiations would be impossible. We call on the Israel Government to cease its policy of settlement in occupied territories. That Government's present policy prejudices the chance of progress in the autonomy talks and makes the achievement of a comprehensive settlement much more difficult. We deplore' its recent decision to allow Israeli citizens to buy land in the occupied territories. And moreover, while we understand the Israel Government's preoccupation with security, we urge it to refrain from its present policies in south Lebanon. These undermine the authority of the Lebanese Government and frustrate the efforts of UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate. In that context, I pay a tribute to the dedication and courage with which the officers and men of UNIFIL are carrying out their dangerous and difficult task.
236.	Another area of dangerous tensions is IndoChina, where suffering due to natural causes has been made worse by the regimes which took power in 1975. I refer first to the Vietnamese Government, which, as I said on 20 July at the Meeting on Refugees and Displaced Persons in South-East Asia, in Geneva, has driven so many people to flee its shores that the problem has become one of international concern. I was in Hong Kong in May. I saw there the misery of the people who had risked perilous journeys in unseaworthy craft to escape the tyranny in their own country. It is not an experience that I shall ever forget. Nor can I forget the tens of thousands of those unhappy people who were simply lost at sea. The Secretary-General chaired, with his customary skill, the Geneva Meeting, which my Prime Minister had suggested should be held. As a result, a start has been made to resettle the refugees who did not perish. Most of them came either to Hong Kong or to the ASEAN countries. My Government fully understands the problems which the refugee influx posed for those countries. But the problem is likely to remain until the Vietnamese Government stops bearing down harshly on elements of its population. Meanwhile, I hope that that Government will abide by the undertakings it gave in Geneva about future action.
237.	Yet the most serious problems in Indo-China are perhaps to be found in Cambodia. The years of suffering to which that unhappy country was subjected by the Pol Pot Government are well known. That regime s human rights record is among the worst of any country in the world. The then British Government was among the first to draw attention to it. Then the country was brutally invaded by the armed forces of one of its neighbours. Now it is prey to starvation while fighting continues with the occupying forces. Unless those on the spot allow large-scale relief operations to start soon, the people of Cambodia will face yet another catastrophe. Food must get to these people soon, and those who want to help should not be asked to pay a political price for being allowed to do so. I shall only say now that in the British Government's view the Cambodian people has the same right as any other to live in peace under a Government freely chosen by itself. Without a settlement in Cambodia, stability and peace in South-East Asia will not be possible.
238.	In Europe itself possible sources of tension remain. The maintenance of stable East-West relations remains a foremost priority for us and for our allies, most notably the United States. We welcome the signature by the United States and the Soviet Union earlier this year of a second Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and hope that it will soon be ratified. That agreement is an example of the kind of detailed and verifiable arms control arrangement that is needed; mere talk of a desire for peace and co-operation is not enough.
239.	Meanwhile, the scale of the military build-up of the countries signatories of the Warsaw Treaty is a matter of serious and legitimate concern to all other European countries. So far the Warsaw Pact has shown little willingness to allay these concerns in any practical way, so we on the Western side have no alternative but to respond. Otherwise, the balance on which detente depends will be lost. Nor can we accept that detente should be a principle applied in Europe but ignored in the rest of the world. Detente, if it is to work anywhere, must work everywhere. The British Government is ready to work for greater confidence, stability and real co-operation. But this must be a two-way process, with give and take coming from both sides. It is certainly in that spirit that we shall approach the review session of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to be held in Madrid next year.
240.	But work to reduce the threat of war must go wider than East-West relations. Above all we must avoid the spread of nuclear weapons, while at the same time permitting access to the benefits of peaceful nuclear energy. The 1968 Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons now has 111 parties. I much regret that it has not won universal adherence. I hope that further progress can be made before the Review Conference next August. If universal membership of the Treaty could be achieved, it would halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
241.	As members know, a comprehensive test-ban treaty is being negotiated between the United States, the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom. We still have difficult problems to overcome. But when the treaty is completed, it will, I hope, meet the objections of those who argue that the non-proliferation Treaty discriminates in favour of the nuclear-weapon States. The latter have also, of course, given the non-nuclear- weapon States various assurances that nuclear weapons will not be used against them.
242.	Progress is important, too, in the field of conventional arms control. For this reason my Government supports the work of the Committee on Disarmament. We shall continue to take the position that measures to curb the nuclear arms race must go hand in hand with measures to reduce conventional weapons.
243.	This year this Assembly's deliberations take place against the sombre background of tension in several different parts of the world. The economic background is grim too. The large and sudden increases in the price of oil this year have serious and damaging implications for the world economy. They will lead certainly to higher inflation and to balance-of-payments difficulties for very many countries. The oil-importing developing countries will be the hardest hit. But we are all affected.
244.	The world's reserves of oil are not limitless. We all need to do what we can to use them properly and to reduce our consumption of oil. The British Government stands by the recent decisions of the International Energy Agency, the European Community and the Tokyo Economic Summit. These should have an important impact on the oil market by reducing demand for oil and by encouraging the development of other sources of energy, new and renewable.
245.	But we cannot solve our problems by acting in isolation. In energy, almost more than anywhere else, the world is one world. There needs to be joint consideration of world energy problems and closer contacts between those who produce oil and those who import it, whether developed or developing countries. A number of proposals to this end have recently been made. We are certainly ready to consider all these proposals sympathetically in the hope that we can agree on the way ahead.
246.	Finally, I should like to say something very shortly about the North-South dialogue. At a time when both developed and developing countries are struggling to stave off the effects of recession, it is hardly surprising that progress should be slow. I have spoken of the dangers of rhetoric. In this field of international economic relations, the dangers of rhetoric are perhaps at their greatest. We must all guard against the creation of new bodies whose primary function is the exchange of rhetoric. The first step has to be a substantial improvement in the shape and state of the world economy. It is increased production, not increased words, which creates resources. And without increased production how can there be a transfer of resources from rich to poor, whether at home or overseas, through increased aid, trade and investment? So our first priority must be to bring about the right framework in which more resources can be produced.
247.	That is why my Government has taken steps to cut public expenditure right across the board. That is inevitable, if we are to put our economy in order and if we are to be able to help the less developed countries to achieve prosperity. We are no less concerned than others about the large proportion of the world's population that is unacceptably poor. Nor are we turning our backs on the North-South dialogue, despite its frustrations. On the contrary, we recognize that in an interdependent world Britain has a vital interest—both economic and moral—in bringing prosperity to the poorer nations. That is why we have made it abundantly plain that we are in favour of maintaining the open trading system and of increasing overseas investment. Indeed, to encourage the latter, my Government has introduced considerable relaxations in exchange control. Provided the climate is right, these relaxations should be of direct benefit to the developing countries. Increased trade and increased investment are contributions we can make now. In due course increased growth should make it possible to provide more aid. But there 
are no easy short-cuts. The road back to greater prosperity—for North and South—is unlikely to be either easy or short. It will be even harder if each country or grouping tries to make it separately.
248.	We are one world, bound to support each other if we are not to undergo greater hardships on our own. This is true of our search for prosperity and it is true of our search for peace and security. In both fields the United Nations provides an essential forum for discussion which can lead to useful action. The tasks of the 1980s are formidable and they face us all. We can overcome them, but only if we allow our common interests to bring us together and work out our solutions as one community.
﻿Mr. President, it is indeed an honour and a privilege to greet you on your unanimous election, because you bring to this high office not only your outstanding skills and rich experience, but also something of the idealism and high sense of morality that characterizes your country's role in international affairs.
25.	It is also no mere formality when I express our great appreciation for the leadership provided by Mr. Lievano of Colombia as President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. The zeal and ability he displayed in discharging his responsibilities has enhanced his reputation, as well as his country's prestige.
26.	In the exemplary dedication to duty and the practical wisdom of our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, we have an assurance that the challenging tasks ahead will be met with faith and fortitude, vision and constructive statesmanship.
27.	Our family of nations has grown as Saint Lucia, our youngest and newest Member, has joined us. We wish the people of Saint Lucia prosperity and assure them of our goodwill and co-operation in the responsibilities awaiting them.
28.	India comes to this Assembly with the strength of a tradition which is more than 4,000 years old, dating from when our Vedic ancestors had the insight to declare; "the soil is my mother; I am the son of the earth". This was the germ of the concept of "one world", the unity of which was to be ensured by peace. This is why "peace, peace and peace" has been my country's constant invocation.
29.	I stand here today conscious of this rich heritage and of its reflection in the continuing national consensus which prevails in the pursuit of international objectives. Independent India's policies and attitudes to international problems show a continuity and consistency of which we are proud.
30.	Since the time, 31 years ago, when India's first Foreign Minister and Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, declared in this Assembly that "India adhered completely to the principles and purposes of the Charter'’, there has been in our expressions of support of the United Nations and its Charter every year a repetitive rhythm which should not be mistaken for ritual or formality. The United Nations unmistakably symbolizes the best balance between the right to independence and the compulsion to work together. It rep-resents a warning that we can survive only in good- neighbourliness. If international, problems have been aggravated at times during the 34-year career of this Organization, this is due to the fact that in our national perspectives we have overlooked the fact that we form one world and not 152 worlds of various sizes. Despite all the lessons of history, we are still bogged down in short-term problems and are still overlooking the fact that our long-term destinies are intertwined and must be safeguarded.
31.	If we look back over the decade of the 1970s, which are now drawing to a close, we find repeated confirmation of the Tact that the world's political problems arise from the short-term perspectives of many of the powerful-nation States which virtually distort the long-term imperatives. If we still see recalcitrant imperialism, malevolent or defiant racism, persistent habits of intervention, manipulation, domination and even aggression, this is because there are forces trying to stem the tide of history. So many world-wide and regional problems are the result of the obdurate refusal to accept the logic of coexistence and co-operation.
32.	This Assembly is meeting again after one more year and it can be seen that the world has been changing fast. The past year has not been more tranquil or less dangerous. The world continues to hang precariously between war and peace, development and stagnation, domination and justice. Many of the old myths have died,-but not the belief in them. The time when the world order could be maintained through the strength of military establishments is over. While many still see military power as supreme, its political consequences often mean that it cannot be used. No doubt there is a fleeting intellectual realization that things have changed, but this has not kept pace with the formulation of foreign policy by important countries.
33.	The days of an imperial role are gone; neither is there any scope for imperial management. Even the management of crises can no longer be left to a few great Powers, although they have an important responsibility. Countries may differ in power, wealth and beliefs, but the world community cannot be managed now without the voluntary participation and equitable involvement of the largest possible number of countries.
34.	It is also clear that the leverage of the weaker countries is a factor to be reckoned with in the emerging international order. Military power may have remained concentrated in a few hands, but popular power, if one may use that term, has become more widely dispersed. Recent events have again shown that, given will power and determination, even a small Power can hold a big Power at bay. The strength of the non-aligned movement is really the collective leverage exerted by the weaker countries on the global scene. This collective leverage, reflected in the demand for a new international economic order, is in essence a call for the democratization of world power.
35.	We are indeed in an era of increasing plurality. Just as the managerial revolution has replaced family management, the transformation of the world situation has brought about a diffusion of the power to shape and influence events. This requires a new awareness, a new approach and a new adjustment which would facilitate the evolution of a more just and equitable world order.
36.	May I underline in this context the growing revolutionary significance of a factor that has been emerging over the last two decades in the United Nations. The fact that well over 90 Members of the United Nations have joined the non-aligned movement has affected a quiet revolution in the functioning of the international organization. This constitutes a guarantee against the misuse of the United Nations or for that matter, of any intergovernmental organization.
37.	The fundamental problems of May arise from not accepting the natural and the inevitable. We have seen resistance and delay in the process of decolonization and the fulfilment of the will of all peoples for freedom and national emancipation. Even today, this important historical process is not complete. The war in VietNam arose from attempts to frustrate the national aspirations of the Vietnamese. We failed to recognize, and perhaps we still often deny in action if not in affirmation, the fact that each nation has the right to choose its own pattern or political system for social and economic fulfilment. Today, we see the vindication of the notion implicit in the first principles of the United Nations Charter: that differing ideological and socio-economic systems have to coexist. As an Indian, I cannot but recall that the principles of coexistence were first enunciated in the middle of the 1950s and enshrined ill the Declaration adopted by the African-Asian Conference, held at Bandung in 1955.
38.	Detente was enthusiastically acclaimed by some, much wished for by many. But in its realization we find that the effects of the cold-war years have been effaced neither in the functioning of this Organization nor in the various regions of the world. There is even a danger of detente’s becoming a facade behind which the role of the Organization stands reduced in the priorities of the great Powers and, paradoxically, regional wars and conflicts also flourish.
39.	Surely, if detente means the mere normalization of bilateral relations among the great Powers, then the vast majority of members of the international community will have little interest in it. Though normalization among great Powers is essential, an honest detente has to be global and universal and this indeed is our goal.
40.	It would also be wrong to assume that the process of even this limited detente is irreversible. The stalemate in the ratification of the treaty resulting from the second round of SALT negotiations, the deepening crisis in West Asia, the hardening of attitudes in relation to southern Africa, the polarized postures in Southeast Asia and the disturbing trend towards the formation of destabilizing political combinations are ominous portents.
41.	Consequently, reinforcing the fabric of peace must remain the primary concern in our discussions. Progress on disarmament in all its various aspects has to be seen as the touchstone of our commitment to peace. Lasting world peace can stand only on the foundation of effective disarmament.
42.	We must remind ourselves that the United Nations was established to save "succeeding generations from the scourge of war." For as long as nuclear stockpiles exist in the world, there is a definite threat of a nuclear holocaust. Nuclear war is possible through accident, miscalculation, misperception and impulsive or irrational behaviour under tension. The most urgent task facing humanity today is to delegitimize nuclear weapons, to dismantle the hierarchical international order that supports the present military system and to replace it by an alternative security system based on peaceful coexistence and the acceptance in practice of the equal sovereignty of all nations and of die right of each nation to choose its national and international policies.
43.	The tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, laid down a programme of action for nuclear disarmament. That programme consisted of steps for freezing the present nuclear arms race and for initiating reductions leading to the eventual elimination of all existing stockpiles of such weapons. It is a matter of deep regret that, despite the consensus behind that programme, there has been no progress towards its implementation. We are particularly concerned to note that the draft of the comprehensive test-ban treaty is not yet ready and the negotiations continue at a glacial pace. We strongly urge that the draft of the treaty be finalized without further delay.
44.	We welcome second SALT treaty. But it is only a beginning—though an important beginning, which must be formalized and implemented so that the world may move further towards real nuclear disarmament. At the same time we cannot but note with regret that that treaty does not incorporate any measure for the reduction of nuclear arsenals and that the growing and deadly sophistication of nuclear weaponry presents an ever greater danger to mankind.
45.	Much is being said, and rightly, about the problem of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 1 think it would be pertinent to remember that it was India that brought this issue to the attention of the United Nations when, in 1964, it specifically asked for the inclusion in the agenda of an item entitled "Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons".  Our approach was based on the premise, born of bitter historical experience, that both horizontal and vertical proliferation was integral parts of the problem which needed to be dealt with as a whole. The General Assembly accepted this concept and resolution 2028 (XX) stated that:
' 'The treaty should embody an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear and non-nuclear Powers".
46.	Unfortunately the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons concluded in 1968 deliberately sought to alter this concept. It addressed itself only to the aspect of horizontal proliferation, and if the Treaty has become an unworkable document, it is only because of this narrow and illogical approach. The protagonists have been trying to buttress their position by cartel- type arrangements and further discriminatory measures, such as the establishment of the so-called "London Club" of nuclear suppliers and the attempted imposition of full-scope safeguards, on the peaceful nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States, something that the nuclear-weapon States are themselves not prepared to accept.
47.	In a world where we now grapple with the task of evolving the methodology of a new international economic and political order based on justice and equity, it would be nothing short of anachronism for some Powers to play the role of barons and overlords in a system of nuclear feudalism. Such an attitude tends to make nonsense of national independence, equality of nations and the very concept of peaceful coexistence that is at the heart of the United Nations. 
48.	It may be recalled that during the special session on disarmament held last year, India took two significant initiatives—one seeking the non-use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances,  and the other calling for a suspension of nuclear-weapons testing pending a complete ban.8 We are gratified at the endorsement that the Assembly at its thirty-third session gave to those initiatives. We would urge the nuclear-weapon States on whom the primary responsibility lies to take meaningful steps in this direction.
49.	One further initiative I have in mind is the dissemination of public knowledge and through it the creation of enhanced awareness and popular will against the use of nuclear weapons. Efforts to build world public opinion would assist the Governments concerned to turn away from the path of nuclear competition in the direction of practical measures for avoiding nuclear war. The United Nations has achieved significant success in the past in helping to rouse the conscience of mankind on a number of humanitarian issues, through a variety of special observances. Would it not be appropriate that this vital question, on which depends the future and fate of man himself, should receive similar attention? It is only fitting that the second Disarmament Decade should begin next year with measures aimed at mobilizing world opinion for international co-operative action to consolidate world peace. The year 1980 could be the commencement year for laying the foundations for eliminating for ever the danger of nuclear war.
50.	If I have spoken at length on nuclear disarmament, it is because of the overwhelming fact that nuclear weapons, with their mind-boggling destructive capacity and their increasing degree of "overkill", constitute the greatest danger to mankind.
51.	The relationship between disarmament and development has been stressed by many earlier speakers, and I need not dwell upon it at any great length. The point has often been made that the total annual world military expenditure, now exceeding $400 billion, is equivalent to half the combined gross domestic product of all the third-world countries. It exceeds the global government expenditure on education and is more than twice the expenditure on public health services. In a world seriously afflicted by an energy crisis, by inflation, unemployment, mass poverty and so forth, it is surely criminal that our dwindling resources should be expended in this extravagant fashion for military purposes. In this, the International Year of the Child, is it not revolting that one Trident submarine costs as much as would be needed for the schooling of 16 million children in developing countries? What is the legacy we shall be leaving for our children if we continue in the present insane manner in the name of safeguarding security?
52.	Another problem that threatens civilized existence is the criminal combination of racist policies and colonial ambition that adds up to apartheid. A minority regime continues to violate openly and flagrantly the resolutions, decisions and sanctions of the United Nations and to subject the majority of the South African people to extreme forms of degradation, repression and torture. This situation is a reflection of the barrenness of our ritualistic reiteration of opposition to apartheid without our being able to ensure effective and comprehensive action against it. We have to mobilize the entire world community, without exception, if the opposition to this outrage is to be credible and effective. We should like to reaffirm our continued support for the measures to implement mandatory economic sanctions against South Africa. We also reiterate strongly our opposition to the economic and military collaboration—including nuclear collaboration—between certain Western countries and other States with South Africa.
53.	In Namibia, the action of the General Assembly and the Security Council over the last decade and beyond constitutes a history of lost opportunities. This continuing inefficacy casts serious doubts on the prospects for success of the United Nations plan for Namibia.  SWAPO, for its part, has displayed a consistent willingness to accept United Nations-supervised elections for the transition to majority rule and independence in Namibia. As long as South Africa continues its illegal presence inside Namibia, a just and peaceful change-over would be well-nigh impossible. My delegation fully supports the adoption by the Security Council of concrete measures to compel South Africa to end its illegal occupation of Namibia.
54.	In Zimbabwe, the liberation struggle continues at great cost in human suffering and ominous portents of escalation. The Rhodesia Constitutional Conference currently considering the problem of the transfer of power to the majority oscillates between hope and des-pair. We had welcomed the Lusaka agreement and had cautioned that its implementation should be a matter of time- bound urgency. We hope that a constitution acceptable to the Patriotic Front will be evolved in the Conference.
55.	In West Asia, developments in relations between certain States should not obscure consideration of the deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab territories in southern Lebanon.
56.	India believes that nothing but a comprehensive solution of the problem will bring about peace in the area. Central to this settlement is the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their own homeland; the total and unconditional Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories, including the Holy City of Jerusalem; and, finally, the right of all States in the region, including Arab Palestine, to live within secure borders. Full and equal participation of the PLO in any peace negotiations is a sine qua non for a final settlement. The growing threat to international peace and security resulting from Israeli policies and partial solutions can no longer be ignored, The continued Israeli acts of aggression in Lebanon also bear testimony to the Israelis' belligerent intentions.
57.	It is also painful to note that Cyprus continues to suffer foreign occupation of a sizeable part of its territory. We welcome the 10-point agreement reached in May 1979 and we urge the parties concerned to recognize each other's legitimate rights and interests and to display a spirit of mutual accommodation. Let us hope that the talks will lead to a just and peaceful resolution of the problems between the two communities, within the framework of the unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and non-alignment of Cyprus.
58.	The South Asian region, earlier plagued by war and dissension, is now freer from tensions. We have been able to respond to each other's interests and concerns in a spirit of accommodation. My country feels a sense of satisfaction at the resolution of some intractable problems. The improved environment provides scope for greater contacts and co-operation which will benefit the countries of the region. We rejoice that at last the entire subcontinent is now committed to the principles and policies of non-alignment and of peaceful coexistence. All this should augur well for peace and stability in the region. If, however, I advert to Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India, it is because there was reference to it by the foreign affairs adviser to the President of Pakistan in his statement to this Assembly on 1 October. We have repeatedly made it clear that United Nations resolutions have ceased to be relevant and the Simla Agreement holds the field. So the issue has to be bilaterally settled in accordance with the Simla Agreement.
59.	We are happy that in the region of South-East Asia, economic co-operation and efforts to establish a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality on the initiative of the Association of South-East Asian Nations have been making progress in spite of the many pressures operating in the area.
60.	We had thought that the retreat of foreign troops from Viet Nam over four years ago would usher in a new era of peace and co-operation in Indo-China and in the whole region of South-East Asia. That expectation was, unfortunately, short-lived. Foreign intervention and foreign involvement in Indo-China continued in new forms distorting the entire situation in that strategic area. Distrust and suspicion are rife in the region, as is the apprehension that great Powers may become involved. In consequence, the countries of Indo-China have not been allowed to settle down in peace to the reconstruction and development of their economies.
61.	The Sino-Viet Nam border remains tense, and there is no peace in Kampuchea as yet. We ardently hope that the tension between China and Viet Nam will not be allowed to escalate, and we believe that boundary questions and other problems between two great neighbouring Asian countries can and ought to be resolved through peaceful and friendly negotiations.
62. 	The brave people of Kampuchea, with whom we in India have age-old cultural ties, have been subjected to untold misery and deprivation. The present situation demands statesmanship from all parties, so that peace, stability, mutual confidence and co-operation may be restored, and so that respect for the personality and independence of every State can be strictly observed.
63.	There have been some indications that at least the humanitarian problems could be mitigated through goodwill and a constructive approach. We should like to congratulate the Secretary-General for the success of the United Nations-sponsored Geneva conference on the Indo-China refugees.  It is gratifying to note that since that conference the exodus of refugees has dropped to a trickle.
64.	The spectre of famine, however, looms large over Kampuchea. We welcome the recent understanding for extending international emergency relief and assistance. India would be ready to make its modest contribution in this regard.
65.	India is firmly committed to the creation of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean, as envisaged in the Declaration of the General Assembly. The increase, over the years, in great-Power military presence in the Indian Ocean and the further strengthening of military bases, such as Diego Garcia, are a matter of serious concern. On the most important issues pertaining to the implementation of the Declaration, the majority of the littoral and hinterland States were able to adopt a common position at the meeting held in New York in July this year.
66.	We invite the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean with a view to convening a conference on the Indian Ocean.
67.	It was a disappointment for us when the negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States for the reduction of their military presence in the Indian Ocean were abruptly suspended in March 1978. We welcome the agreement reached at the Vienna summit to resume the dialogue and urge early and meaningful negotiations.
68.	In the field of human rights, it is immensely important to realize that, in the ultimate analysis, individual human rights must rest on the foundation of collective human rights. National liberation creates the framework for the latter, and only after achieving it can one think of ensuring human rights for individuals. The stability of newly gained freedom is essential for ensuring socio-economic change and for the widening and deepening of the ambit of human rights. These need to be properly institutionalized, for only thus will there be a safeguard against their possible abuse, suppression or total eclipse.
69.	The present world economic order continues to follow the rule that to him who hath even more shall be given. The two United Nations Development Decades, one of the 1960s and the other of the 1970s, and a series of protracted negotiations, have proved sterile exercises, belying the hopes that had been raised that inequity between nations need not be an inexorable law and that, for reasons as much economic as ethical, the rich should assist the poor.
70.	We are now on the threshold of the third United Nations Development Decade, covering the 1980s, and of the special session of the United Nations which will be held next year. Despite the bleakness of past experience, we must not miss this opportunity to impart a momentum to the negotiations for establishing a new economic order. Among the vital requirements of such an order, is an international trading system that would be more responsive to the needs of developing countries. Multilateral trade negotiations portend nothing more than disappointment for the developing countries. Protectionism by advanced countries grows unabated and has assumed new forms. The fifth session of UNCTAD concluded in Manila without coming to grips with the issues that relate to the structure of the present economic order. The special session must therefore address itself squarely to the task of dealing with basic structural issues if it is to have any meaning. The current imbalance; the dependence and external vulnerability of the developing countries; the urgent need to make a perceptible dent in the worst aspects of mass poverty—these are a few of the issues that the developed countries need to look at from a fresh perspective. Without giving up existing commitments, they will have to conceive new forms of resource transfers, which can ensure that responsibility is shared and which are capable of leading us to greater common prosperity. Even though the main thrust towards development should come from the developing countries themselves, the developed world in its own enlightened self-interest must realize that its prosperity is best ensured if the world at large can meet its basic minimum requirements, thus forming a large and growing market for developed countries.
71.	The disparity in the dissemination of scientific knowledge and technological know-how in the world is one of the basic causes for the widening gap between the developed and developing nations. The United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, recently concluded at Vienna, was successful in focusing attention on this question and in evolving an agreed plan of action at the international level.  We hope that the new Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development will be able to promote agreement on adequate and sustained measures for the transfer of technology to the developing countries.
72.	The developing countries expect to, and indeed must, participate fully in the world decision-making processes. Having abandoned, with the earlier decades, the framework that was formulated for appraising performance and ensuring joint responsibility of both the North and the South, we have yet to agree on a draft of the preamble of a new international development strategy. We run the risk of going to the special session marking the commencement of the third development decade without an agreed strategy, jeopardizing the outcome of the Decade itself.
73.	Similar mechanisms to promote international accountability are required in specific areas of multilateral economic functioning particularly within UNCTAD and UNIDO. One of the principal tasks at the forthcoming Third General Conference of UNIDO to be held in New Delhi in 1980 will be to equip the agency with an effective mechanism to examine and monitor the implications of the Lima target of 25 per cent of the world's manufacturing output as the share of developing countries.
74.	Finally , the developing countries must not forget the imperatives of collective self-reliance as a major component of the new international development strategy. In fact, it could well provide the special session in 1980 its principal theme. When meshed together, the unutilized complementarities and the surplus resources of developing countries give the developing countries enhanced bargaining power with the developed world,
75.	India has, at the recent Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which met in Havana, taken a number of initiatives in fostering collective self-reliance. We have, with Bangladesh, proposed the establishment of a food security system for developing countries. Though a developing country which has had to feed an immense population, we in India today are in a position to make a modest contribution to any agreed international system of food security that may be evolved. It is time that the world, and especially the advanced nations, realized that food security is even more important than military security in maintaining peace and stability in the world.
76.	Similarly, the Havana Conference approved the proposal to study the possibility of establishing a project development facility. We hope that the facility would become operational by the end of 1980. India, with extensive experience in technology relevant to developing countries, is willing to collaborate with others in setting up facilities for research and training in priority areas, geared specially to their needs. We would be glad to share our experience and welcome their participation.
77.	The policy guidelines on reinforcing mutual solidarity recently adopted in Havana are a welcome expression of the political will of the non-aligned and other developing countries to co-operate among themselves to meet their minimum needs and emergency requirements. The guidelines, which are not confined to oil, have wide implications of a long-term nature, since they cover all primary commodities and raw materials. It is our sincere hope that these policy guidelines will be expeditiously translated into concrete commitments.
78.	Another problem which has bedevilled the evolution of a just and equitable world economic order has been the energy problem. Half of India's total import bill, for instance, is now accounted for by oil imports and the latest round of price increases has further raised the burden by a crushing $1.4 billion per year. Even more critical has been the problem of securing minimum requirements of petroleum from the world market, where we have to compete with the affluent nations.
79.	I need hardly emphasize the enormous significance of energy in the context of developing economies, characterized as they are by limited substitution possibilities for priority uses such as transport, by the high capital intensity of alternative energy resources and by the problems inherent in reducing a level of consumption which is already at the bare and essential minimum. Clearly these countries are particularly vulnerable to the world oil situation. Is it not unconscionable that out of the total world consumption of 60 million barrels a day the United States, Europe, Japan and Canada should together consume 45 million? Or that in the year 2000 the per capita daily consumption of oil will be 62 barrels in North America, 32 for each European, 10 for those living in the oil-producing countries and only some 4 barrels for the rest.
80.	All the developing countries should have a right, indeed a special right, to secure a fair share in the world consumption of energy and other raw materials.
81.	In the ultimate analysis, the question involves the principle of equity. The core of the present resource crisis is the attempt by developed countries to pre-empt the bulk of the world's natural resources in order to maintain their current pattern of consumption and continue their existing life-styles. The disaster that profligate consumption is leading to calls for a change in fife-styles in developed countries. Such a change is also necessitated by the imbalance between material and spiritual growth that has prompted many in the West to turn to the philosophy of the Orient in their quest for inner peace and harmony. Echoing the present predicament of the mature industrial or post-industrial societies, T. S. Eliot spoke of " . . .the torment of desire unsatisfied and the greater torment of desire satisfied".
82.	The political, economic and social order in our world has to be refashioned not only with reference to ourselves but for the sake of the future of our children. Appropriately, the observance of the International Women's Year and the International Year of the Child has coincided with the efforts at promoting a new inter-national economic order. With the mother and the child at the core of our thoughts we obviously cannot concentrate on a political order based on power and exploitation and a development process which is myopic and inequitable. In fact, if the process is to begin with the child in the mother's womb, as it ought to, we have to work for the creation of a total environment which would ensure equality at birth to every child and provide for his development throughout the formative period. The symbolic significance of observing a particular year as dedicated to a particular cause can only find real meaning if the problem is considered in a larger perspective. Standing on the threshold of the 1980s, we shall have to begin the desired development process now.
83.	Is it not a pity that we assemble here year after year to do little more than patch up our petty quarrels and pay lip service to some lofty ideas and principles? It is time we ceased to concern ourselves merely with the past and the present and began to look to the future with the spirit of collective creativity which must be the hallmark of the United Nations system. The United Nations has to be not merely the engineer of truce but rather the architect of a new era—an era that could see the rise of the new man of the twenty-first century. To do this, we need to help the United Nations to extend the frontiers of its perception. The time to do so is now.﻿161.	Mr, President, please accept my congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly. We are confident that you will guide the work of the Assembly efficiently and fairly.
162.	I would also like to express our appreciation to the President of the last session of the General Assembly, Ambassador Lievano of Colombia.
163.	It is my pleasure to congratulate Saint Lucia on its independence and admission to the United Nations.
164.	As we reflect on the development of the United Nations throughout the past year, we find the spectacle far from encouraging. The fundamental obstacle to the Organization's work is the selectivity which has been forced upon it by an automatic majority of the membership, which is far from impartial and prefers expediency to principles. The United Nations specialized agencies have suffered badly from this. Organs like UNESCO, WHO, the ILO and others have been severely affected by heavy politicization which has influenced their functioning. Instead of dedicating themselves solely to their specific fields in the service of mankind, they have been reduced to forums of political one-sidedness.
165.	There must be a return to the United Nations Charter. Consultation and agreement should be restored to their primary place. In particular, the specialized agencies must abandon the dangerous path of politicization along which they have been dragged, so that they may devote themselves to the economic, social, humanitarian, scientific and technological tasks which they were set up to perform and which they perform so well when permitted to do so.
166.	There has been little improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Even though the number of exit visas for Soviet Jews has increased recently, the gap between the number of Jews applying for exit visas and those granted them is growing, while an even larger number of Soviet Jews have been denied the fundamental right to emigrate—a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Helsinki Declaration. Those Jews who do insist on their rights are subjected to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment and, in some cases, to arrest and imprisonment. We have taken note of the fact that seven Jewish prisoners were released a few months ago. However, we are particularly concerned by the harsh prison sentences imposed on other Jews whose only crime is their desire to re-join their families in Israel—Iosif Begun, Boris Kalendarov, Iosif Mendelevich, Ida Nudel, Anatoly Shcharansky, Simon Shnirman, Vladimir Slepak, Aleksandr Vilic and Amner Zavurov. The Soviet Union should release these and other prisoners of conscience and permit everyone who seeks to emigrate to Israel and join his people and his family to do so.
167.	We cannot be silent in the face of the rising incitement against the State of Israel and the Jewish people, its religion, culture and national movement, as manifested day by day in the official Soviet media. In this regard, it must be noted that the Soviet authorities still do not permit Jews to practise their religion and culture. We appeal to the Soviet Union to allow Jewish religion and culture to be practised and expressed freely, and to put an end to anti-Jewish propaganda.
168.	We also deeply regret that the Government of Syria continues to violate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international conventions by refusing to permit its Jewish citizens to leave and to be reunited with their relatives living in other lands. We appeal to the Syrian Government to change this policy.
169.	The past year witnessed a historic break-through in the Middle East. In March, Israel and Egypt signed the first ever Israel-Arab peace treaty. President El-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Begin of Israel concluded that Treaty after intense negotiations, which lasted a year and a half and which demanded great leadership and courage. Israel wishes to express its appreciation and gratitude to the United States of America and to its President, Mr. Jimmy Carter, personally for the vital role which they played in bringing about this historic achievement, which has created a new reality in our region.
170.	Let me recall here that Israel has throughout the first 30 years of its independence constantly extended its hand to its neighbours in the search for peace. This found expression on the very first day of the establishment of our State, in the Israel Declaration of Independence of 14 May 1948. Let me add specifically that as early as in the summer of 1967, very shortly after the six-day war, Israel had taken the initiative and offered to sign a treaty of peace with Egypt, declaring its readiness to withdraw from the Sinai and return it to Egyptian sovereignty in the context of a peace treaty. This Israeli proposal was rejected, and the answer given by Egypt at the time was: "No negotiation, no recognition and no peace with Israel: what was taken by force will be taken back by force." This year, however, has seen the beginning of a new era in the Middle East. After a generation of continued warfare, the realization of a dream begins.
171.	The Treaty of Peace, which, as stated in its preamble, is "an important step in the search for comprehensive peace in the area," has provided for a role in its implementation to be fulfilled by the United Nations. United Nations forces and observers were called upon to carry out functions in order to see that the peace treaty was fully implemented. Ironically and paradoxically, that initiative taken by some States Members of the United Nations in the cause of peace was rejected by the United Nations. The Security Council was exposed to the threat of a Soviet veto, and the mandate of UNEF was not renewed, so that the Security Council in effect disassociated itself from the first positive and major step in the great effort to relieve the Middle East from the dangers of war.
172.	Although our assumption and hope that the United Nations would assist in the implementation of the Treaty of Peace have been disappointed, we will proceed along the path of peace. The attitude of the United Nations will not damage the peace process; but it will, no doubt, lower the prestige and even the moral stature of the United Nations, one of whose basic principles and purposes is, as stated by the Charter, to "maintain international peace and security . . . and to bring about by peaceful means . . . settlement of international disputes. . . ''.
173.	As a result of the Treaty of Peace, the process of normalization in the relations between Egypt and Israel has already begun. We are confident that in the months ahead we shall make further progress in cementing new bonds of co-operation.
174.	The frequent visits and meetings of the leaders of both countries are also an expression of the common desire to promote understanding and closer personal relationships. The most recent—and most impressive—visit of President El-Sadat to Israel three weeks ago and the reception given him in the city of Haifa, where Jews and Arabs coexist in harmony and cooperation, indicated the deep feelings of all the population of Israel towards the era of peace and, we hope, left warm memories in the minds and hearts of our Egyptian guests.
175.	Over the past year the situation in Lebanon has become grave. The intervention of Syria has, in fact, plunged the northern part of that formerly prosperous country into a state of anarchy, and the Lebanese Government has become incapable of ruling and exercising its authority over all of its territory. The southern part of Lebanon has been, to a great extent, in the hands of the terrorist groups of the PLO, whose murderous activities have been a source of danger and harassment not only to Israel, but also to the Christian and Moslem Lebanese in that area.
176.	UNIFIL was established by Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978.
177.	Israel, having been compelled to act militarily against the PLO in southern Lebanon in a clear act of self-defence, agreed to withdraw its forces, provided that the new United Nations force would undertake to restore peace and security in the area and to assist the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective authority in the country.
178.	Unfortunately, the aim of restoring Lebanon's integrity has not been achieved, and the Lebanese Government is still incapable of exercising its sovereignty. PLO terrorist groups are still functioning all over Lebanon and, in quite a large number of cases, inside the area of United Nations units. In this region, which was free from any terrorist presence at the time of the Israeli withdrawal, there are now about 700 PLO terrorists, who are acting murderously through the lines of the United Nations Force against the people of Israel. The Force was supposed to act against this. The Secretary-General, in his initial report of 19 March 1978 spoke of the right of self-defence of the Force, including resistance by forceful means to attempts to prevent it from discharging its duties.
179.	In his report of 13 September 1978, the Secretary-General stated, among the guidelines and terms of reference of UNIFIL, that "uniformed or armed personnel and military equipment are not allowed to enter the UNIFIL area of operation"." However, there are too many cases in which the Force has in fact reconciled itself to the presence and activities of the terrorists in its own area. UNIFIL has not carried out its mandate and duties in this respect, despite the fact that its units have themselves suffered from terrorist activities and at least eight UNIFIL soldiers have been killed in these incidents. The presence and activities of the PLO terrorist groups in the region are in violation of the UNIFIL mandate, and it should be understood that Israel cannot be expected to sit back while terror is being unleashed against its population, no matter where in Lebanon these actions originate.
180- Once again it must be emphasized that terrorism could be virtually eliminated if certain countries ceased to provide arms, training and refuge to its practitioners. No cause can justify terrorism. The issue is, therefore, a fundamental one for the international community, and the struggle against terrorism should continue until terrorism has been brought to an end.
181.	The PLO, by its very nature and actions, is a terrorist organization. Its true character is reflected in its so-called' 'Covenant", which calls for the purging of the Zionist presence from Palestine. The same document denies the existence of the Jewish people and its unbroken historical ties with the land of Israel. It alleges that the establishment of the State of Israel is null and void and rejects outright any plans to settle the Middle East conflict by peaceful means.
182.	The PLO has not hesitated to try to translate its vicious doctrine into criminal deeds. It has conducted an unceasing campaign of terror aimed at the mass murder of innocent civilians in Israel. From June 1967 to date, over 640 people have been murdered and 3,300 others have been wounded in Israel by the PLO. It has also terrorized and intimidated Arabs prepared to negotiate peace with Israel, killing more than 350 Arabs and injuring almost 2,000 others.
183.	Given the PLO's character and aims, it was, in fact, recognized by the parties at Camp David that the PLO could not be a partner to the peace process. No country can or should be expected to negotiate with a party which denies its very existence, aims at its destruction, and uses terror against its civilian population. On the other hand, careful provision was made in the Camp David agreements to include Palestinian Arab residents of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District in the peace process.
184.	The Framework for Peace in the Middle East, Agreed at Camp David by the President of Egypt and the Prime Minister of Israel, and witnessed by the President of the United States of America, refers positively and constructively to Palestinian Arab rights, as well as to the rights and security interests of the other parties. It is based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which are the only agreed basis for peace negotiations in the Middle East. Any tampering with them can only gravely jeopardize the current peace process.
185.	This Framework agreement sees the solution of the question of the Palestinian Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District in terms of granting them full autonomy, for a transitional period of five years, before reaching an agreement on the final status of the area. For that reason, it was agreed to negotiate on a principle of self-government—exercised through an administrative council—for the Arab inhabitants of the areas in question.
186.	Moreover, in the preamble to this Framework, the signatories invited other parties to the Arab-Israel conflict to adhere to it as well. In the letter sent by the President of Egypt and the Prime Minister of Israel to President Carter on 26 March 1979—the date of the signing of the peace treaty—they invited the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to Join the negotiations.
187.	This Framework provides for negotiations on the transitional period of five years, and also for the subsequent negotiations on a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan, in which the location of the boundaries dividing the two countries will be agreed. The option of creating a third State between Israel and Jordan is, therefore, not considered in the Camp David agreements.
188.	Thus, the objective of the negotiations being held now, based on the Camp David Framework, is the provision of full autonomy for the inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza. The Israeli military government and its civilian administration will be withdrawn as soon as a self-governing authority has been freely elected by the inhabitants. This Framework also specifies measures that will be taken to assure the security of Israel and its neighbours.
189.	The only way to keep the process of peace going on is for us to adhere strictly to the Camp David agreements in their letter and spirit, and I should like to assure this Assembly that this is the policy of Israel.
190.	Before concluding, let me say a few words about Jerusalem, the eternal capital of Israel and of the Jewish people.
191.	Jerusalem has known many foreign rulers during the course of its long history, but none of them regarded it as their capital. Only the Jewish people has always maintained it as the sole centre of its national and spiritual life. For thousands of years, Jews have prayed daily for their return to Jerusalem and, for the past century and a half, Jerusalem has had a continuous and uninterrupted Jewish majority.
192.	Jerusalem cannot be divided again by barbed wire and there can be no return to the repeated shooting at our civilians and the barbaric desecration of the Jewish quarter of the City, the Holy Places and cemeteries, as happened before 1967, when the eastern part of Jerusalem was under the occupation of Jordan. It is relevant to recall that, in grave violation of the 1949 Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement; Jordan prevented Jews from having access to their Holy Places and cultural institutions and tried to eliminate systematically every trace of Jerusalem's Jewish past. By contrast, as a result of Israel's policy of free access to all Holy Places, millions of Moslem and Christian tourists and pilgrims—in addition to Jewish visitors—have come to Jerusalem since 1967, and have prayed and worshipped freely at its mosques and churches.
193.	Jerusalem is now a city of coexistence between Jews and Arabs. At the same time, the Government of Israel is and has always been conscious of the fact that Jerusalem is of deep concern also to other faiths, and that its religious and cultural sites are precious to Christians and Moslems, as well as to Jews. There should be completely free access to all the holy shrines by believers of all religions, without any exception, completely protected and guaranteed by the law of the country, and those holy shrines should be administered by the respective representatives of the religions concerned, without any interference.
194.	The choice before the United Nations is clear. This Organization, whose Charter enjoins it to support the cause of international peace and security, must not submit to the designs of those who reject peace. Let the United Nations give peace its full support. Let the Governments of Jordan, Syria and Lebanon and the representatives of the Palestinian Arabs residing in Judaea, Samaria and Gaza join the negotiations in order to achieve the noble goal of a real and durable comprehensive peace in our area.﻿As a member of the Commonwealth, New Zealand is pleased to welcome Saint Lucia to the United Nations and to offer its warmest congratulations to the representatives of Saint Lucia at this session of the General Assembly. We look forward to working with the delegation of Saint Lucia in furthering the purposes of this Organization.
248.	It is a pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, and other officers of the Assembly on your election. I should be grateful if you would convey my special greetings to Ambassador Salim, the President of this session. New Zealand values its special link with the United Republic of Tanzania. We work together in partnership, within the Commonwealth. We admire Tanzania's example of self-reliance in the struggle for social and economic progress. We admire the leadership Tanzania has given to the movement for self-determination not only in Africa but for all people. We New Zealanders value, in particular, the help Ambassador Salim, as Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, has given us as we have worked, loyally and consistently, to promote the principle of self-determination in the small island Territories of the South Pacific which have been associated with us.
249.	Ambassador Salim has had the opportunity of seeing how remote and isolated are the islands of the Pacific. New Zealand, too, is remote from the trouble- centres of the world. This geographical isolation, how-ever, has never cut us off from the impact of world events. This year we have followed with attention, and with concern, events in three areas of instability: the Middle East, southern Africa and South-East Asia. We have welcomed the political progress made in the Middle East, limited though that may have been. On the other hand, we have deplored the continued escalation of oil prices, for this has jeopardized efforts to establish a stable world economic order and damaged the economies of many countries. We have taken part, through the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries in Lusaka, in the efforts of the Commonwealth to break the impasse on Rhodesia. But our most direct concern, naturally enough, has been with the conflict that has taken place nearest to us. The calamitous events in Indo-China have caused us the gravest concern. There we have seen continued armed conflict. Vast numbers of people have been forced to move. Starvation and suffering are daily facts of life. Fighting goes on and may well spread. The already desperate food shortage threatens to get worse. The situation is little short of disastrous.
250.	My Government is deeply concerned by these developments. The conflict in Indo-China has polarized South-East Asia: a gulf of mistrust now divides the States of Indo-China and the members of ASEAN.
251.	New Zealand has close and friendly ties with the five countries that belong to ASEAN. We have welcomed the rapid progress they have made in developing their economies and improving the living standards of their peoples. It has been a remarkable achievement. ASEAN has emerged as a significant force in international affairs. It has been able to make a major contribution towards the stability of the But the longer the conflict continues, the greater the danger that the great Powers will once more involved and establish themselves in the area, the longer the fighting goes on in Kampuchea the more risk there is that it will spill over into Thailand. The conflict in Indo-China threatens to jeopardize not only the prosperity of the ASEAN countries but also their effectiveness as an influence for peace and stability in Southeast Asia.
252.	Two attempts have been made this year to resolve the conflict by force. Neither has succeeded, the conflict arises from deep-seated issues—ancient animosities, revived and stimulated by recent actions that have been aided and inflamed from outside IndoChina. Nationalism runs too high for any one party to impose its will on another by force. Peace will be restored only when the countries of the area—those in Indo-China and their neighbours, too—learn to respect one another's independence and territorial integrity, as they pledged to do when they joined the United Nations.
253.	There can be no justification for any government to send armed forces into another country against the will of its people. There is no justification for a government to drive out vast numbers of its own people to hazard their lives on the high seas. It has been abundantly demonstrated that government policies can stimulate, and can retard, the flow of refugees. If that desperate flow of people begins again, the world will know where the responsibility lies. If, however, it ends once and for all, the process of political negotiation can begin. If the withdrawal of forces can be brought about, the normalization of relations can be contemplated. The massive task of relief and rehabilitation for the suffering people of Indo-China can proceed without hindrance.
254.	New Zealand has always said that the most pressing need was to begin working towards a political settlement. That need is even more urgent today. Any settlement must be based on the fact that there are three separate countries in Indo-China, each with its own national tradition. These three countries must live closely together. In practice this means that there can be no peace until the independence of Kampuchea is assured and Kampuchea is prepared to co-operate with its neighbours.
255.	My Government accepts as logical the decision taken by the General Assembly on the question of Kampuchean credentials. That does not mean that we condone in any way the policies of the Pol Pot Government. That regime was tyrannical in the extreme. It was notorious for its cruelty and its utter disregard for the most basic human rights of its people. Nevertheless, it was the established Government of Kampuchea, and it was recognized by the international community. The same cannot be said of the regime headed by Heng Samrin. That regime was installed by foreign forces. It has failed to demonstrate its independence. The main aim of any political settlement must be to let the people of Kampuchea express themselves freely without the dominating presence of foreign troops. They must be able to decide their own future until those conditions exist my Government sees no justification for expelling the present representatives of Kampuchea or for accepting another delegation 
256.	Meanwhile, we face the practical problem of dealing with the human consequences of the continuing conflict. On one aspect of it the United Nations has already taken some effective action. The Meeting convened by the Secretary-General in Geneva in July succeeded in mobilizing greatly increased resources for the relief of refugees from Indo-China. My Government welcomed the Secretary-General's initiative. We are playing our part in the programme he has launched. We have also noted with satisfaction the decline in the flow of refugees since the Meeting. That showed that the Government of Viet Nam was accepting its responsibilities. We can hope, therefore, that there will be no resurgence of the tragedies we saw earlier this year.
257.	The most desperate human problem at this moment is in Kampuchea. Continual fighting, following the internal troubles of recent years, has uprooted a large part of the population. Food supplies have been severely disrupted. Before long, 10 per cent of the country's population may be starving. Famine would bring a new wave of desperate refugees who would flee to Thailand. The world must stop this disaster happening. Another great effort by the international community is essential. Food and medical supplies must be provided—and right away. New Zealand is ready to join in this new effort.
258.	We do not forget that in other regions there are also massive displacements of people. Some of these situations are of tragically long standing. Here, too, the search for negotiated solutions to the conflicts that have caused this human suffering must be a prime concern of this Assembly.
259.	In southern Africa there have been some promising developments. The most significant was the agreement reached by the Commonwealth Heads of Government at Lusaka last month. From this came the Rhodesia Constitutional Conference on Zimbabwe Rhodesia. My Prime Minister, to underline his support for the agreement reached at Lusaka, sent a message to all 24 delegates assembled in London for the conference. He said:
"The road to a peaceful settlement is now open to you. It is for you—each and all—to make your contribution to the final stage and to lead your country into independence, peace and stability. I do not minimise the difficulties that lie ahead of you. But I hope that you will keep in mind at all times that the fate of millions of your men, women and children, now and in the future, lies in your hands—and in your hands alone."
260.	New Zealand hopes that, through this Lusaka initiative, which underlines once more the value of the Commonwealth association, one area of southern Africa will at last reach peaceful and legal independence.
261.	My Government is also encouraged that the consultations which five Western Powers initiated, over two years ago, on Namibia have been resumed. A possibility now exists for the final, legal independence of the Namibian people.
262.	But if there are prospects for a peaceful solution to two of the problems of southern Africa, the third the intolerable system of apartheid, still exists unchecked in the Republic of South Africa. New Zealand joins with the rest of mankind in urging the Government of that unhappy country to move now to break down the barriers of apartheid— those barricades that deny the very essence of human rights and human dignity to the vast majority of its people. Apartheid nurtures the seeds of bitter and vicious conflict. If only for that reason— though it is only one of many—the Members of the United Nations cannot rest until the risk of this conflict has been eliminated.
263.	In his inaugural remarks the President called on this Assembly to pursue practical means, rather than to promote ever-increasing resolutions, in the search for solutions to the many problems which afflict the world today. Nowhere could his advice be better heeded than with respect to the situation in the Middle East. My Government sees as a significant advance the dramatic events of the past two years, which culminated in the Camp David agreements and the subsequent negotiations between Egypt and Israel. The current efforts of the leaders of these States must be given a chance to succeed. A critical dialogue has begun. The objective of the world community now should be to broaden that dialogue.
264.	My Government continues to believe that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) contains the essential element for a negotiated settlement. That resolution remains a central foundation, and it can be built on. It is now widely recognized that the search for a political solution in the Middle East must involve the participation of the Palestinian people. The rights of the Palestinians, including their right to self-determination and to establish an independent Palestinian State if they so desire, can no longer be ignored.
265.	The road to a negotiated, just and lasting solution in the Middle East will not be easy. It is critical therefore, that everyone concerned should eschew insensitive or provocative acts. We believe that the continued establishment of Israeli settlements in land occupied during the 1967 war is one such act. The recent outbreak of hostilities in southern Lebanon is another. My Government rejects the policy of pre-emptive strikes by Israel as strongly as it rejects any act which violates the territorial integrity of Israel. The road to peace is fragile. It should not be put at risk.
266.	The year 1979 could have been a watershed year for the international community in its continuing debate on global economic reform. The fifth session of UNC- TAD and the Tokyo round of the multilateral trade negotiations were major events which held great promise for a new break-through in North-South relations, but then ended inconclusively. The urgent task of this session of the Assembly will be to find a way of restoring momentum to the debate on the establishment of a New International Economic Order, for the international community faces pressing and dangerous economic problems. The economic "ripple-effects" of this year's sharp price rises in oil have become painfully obvious—to developed and developing countries alike. The outlook is for severe disruption to the process of global economic growth. Sluggish rates of economic growth will inhibit the continued development of enlarged "northern" markets for "southern" goods—and vice versa. Heavier foreign debt burdens for many countries seem inevitable. Inflation, unemployment, balance of payments disequilibrium and protectionism will feed upon global economic uncertainty. The pressing need to develop new energy sources will be set back financially—and therefore technically.
267.	No Government need imagine that it will be able to insulate its economy entirely from the effects of a spreading economic malaise. Developing countries— and all small economies, that rely on trade, including my own—will be especially vulnerable.
268.	In the face of these probabilities we can no longer afford the luxury of debating the possibility of new forms of global economic co-operation, structural adjustment and institutional reform. The time has come to put an end to the polemics and arid definitional disputes which have so far characterized the dialogue between North and South. Let us do so in the sure knowledge that if we do not master the forces of economic and social change, they will surely master us.
269.	New Zealand looks to this session of the General Assembly, and to the special session to be held in 1980, to bring a new sense of purpose to the unfinished task of formulating strategies for global economic management. We believe that the effectiveness of these strategies and the future well-being of the interdependent global economy will rest, to a very considerable degree, on the success of renewed efforts to find constructive solutions in two critical sectors—trade and energy.
270.	The explosion in world trade in the last quarter of a century has brought greater prosperity to many countries. We must ensure that this growth is maintained, based upon acknowledgement of the doctrine of comparative efficiency and a positive assault on the forces of protectionism. New Zealand cannot accept that there should be two sets of rules, one for the old industrial producers and another for the rest, that is, for the new industrial producers and for the agricultural producers. Agricultural protectionism is practised by almost all industrialized countries—to the disadvantage of their consumers and to the frustration of internationally efficient producers, such as New Zealand. That, we believe, is a denial of the responsibility of this generation to establish an efficient production base for feeding the next. This responsibility demands new approaches and positive adjustment policies based on the principles of free multilateral trade.
271.	We also have to learn to see energy issues in a new perspective. Experts predict that within the next 10 years the production capacity for our present oil- based energy system will have reached a ceiling. There will be further rises in the real price of oil and an absolute and increasing shortage in relation to total global import requirements. Therefore, there can be no argument: we must move to new energy systems. The challenge lies in how we manage the transitional period. The General Assembly has already risen to this challenge by deciding to convene in 1981 a United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy. New Zealand attaches the highest importance to this Conference. It intends to play its full part to ensure its success. While many important energy questions lie outside its purview, the Conference has the potential to make a significant contribution to identifying new energy systems that will benefit us all.
272.	In its short history this Organization has often taken the lead in promoting new goals for social justice, international peace and racial equality. Now it must define new standards for global economic co-operation. New Zealand sees this as an evolutionary process. Not all countries share this view. Yet, regardless of our individual prescriptions for the world's economic ills, I am sure we can all agree that this is the place, and now is the time, to give force to the concept of global economic interdependence which we have talked about for so long. What is needed now in the North-South dialogue is not resolutions, but resolution.
273.	We in New Zealand are conscious of the sense of disenchantment in the United Nations and in other international economic bodies with the use to which these existing mechanisms are put. We are ready to look with an open mind at proposals that may come forward for new mechanisms, or new methods of working, to help us find a way around the obstacles which at present inhibit our efforts to achieve a new order in international co-operation. The recent meeting of the Committee of the Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174 took an important initiative to this end. Such a proposal is an expression of faith in our collective capacity to control our economic destiny. We may from time to time lose faith in the machinery. We cannot afford to lose faith in the goals.
274.	Another major topic on the agenda of this Assembly is the problem of disarmament. There are some areas in the vast network of negotiations currently in progress where there is a clear and urgent need to bring the negotiations to a head and to reach new agreement.
275.	Foremost among these is the need to conclude a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. The Pacific was for many years an arena for the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. Underground tests are still being conducted in the South Pacific, and elsewhere, despite repeated calls for a halt by the overwhelming majority or the United Nations membership. Last year the General Assembly set a time-table for the conclusion of a treaty. To the regret of us all, that time-table has not been met. It was a reasonable time-table, given the very substantial agreement already apparent on the main provisions of such a treaty. The problems that still stand in the way of a treaty are described as technical. But as a contributor to the work of the ad hoc seismic group, formed to study some of the requirements of a system to monitor compliance with the treaty, we must frankly say that the problems in this area do not seem to us to justify further delay. The conclusion of a treaty is widely recognized as a key to preventing horizontal as well as vertical proliferation.
276.	We shall also support endeavours to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. We continue to attach primacy to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to universal adherence to it. Some States continue to stand aside. The balance of advantage under the Treaty appears to them to favour the nuclear-weapons States. They believe also that the nuclear-weapons States have not honoured the obligation they incurred under the Treaty to advance the control and limitation of their nuclear arsenals, and to facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Be that as it may, the pursuit of a nuclear option by any State not currently possessed of nuclear weapons must inevitably have the gravest implications for regional stability and global security. No nation will enhance its security by these means.
277.	How can the international community allay the fears that may lead a country to keep this nuclear option open? It can encourage and support efforts to accommodate differences within regions. At the global level more can be done. The nuclear-weapons States have been prepared to make unilateral declarations undertaking not to use or to threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapons States. Each has, however, qualified the statement in a different way. Without minimizing the difficulties in the way of reconciling these statements, New Zealand would support further exploration of the ground for bringing these assurances together so as to give them a collective and ultimately binding force.
278.	New Zealand has welcomed, as a major step in the limitation of nuclear arsenals, the signature of the second SALT Treaty by the United States and the USSR. Like others, we hope it will soon be ratified. We look forward, also, to further rounds of negotiations that will lead not only to reductions in nuclear armament but to corresponding limitations in the conventional field. It is on the success of these efforts, and on the growing confidence that should come from such successes, that progress in other areas will rest. It would be a tragic irony if the acceptance of restrictions in one area led to pressures for enhanced capacity in others. Peoples everywhere legitimately expect that the process of reducing armaments will be made irreversible and that resources currently spent on defence will be redirected to reduce suffering and to advance human welfare.
279.	Finally, my Government wishes to pay a tribute to this Organization for its leadership in the field of human rights. In the International Covenants we have a mechanism for the genuine advancement of human rights. Last year in the general debate the Prime Minister of New Zealand expressed our intention to ratify both Covenants. We have done this, and the New Zealand Human Rights Commission has among its tasks that of overseeing their implementation. As a consequence, there have been distinct advances in positive action programmes to enhance the position of minorities, where this is necessary and to introduce new procedures and practices that will help women take their place in the full range of national life. The International Year of the Child has been the occasion of spontaneous action throughout the community to take heed of the needs of children.
280.	We have taken pride in our domestic record in the field of human rights, but we are not complacent. As our multiracial society develops, new perceptions gleaned in part from the international oversight which we have accepted as a party to the Covenants, impel us to further efforts to improve our performance.
281.	New Zealand wishes this Assembly well in its indispensable endeavours.﻿Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to this most responsible position and to express the conviction that your activities will contribute to a fruitful session of the United Nations General Assembly.
93.	In the Soviet Union, as elsewhere, we learned with great sadness the news of the demise of the President of the People's Republic of Angola, Agostinho Neto. Our memories of that great political leader of Africa, that tireless fighter for peace and friendship among peoples, will for ever remain in the hearts of the Soviet people.
94.	The current session of the United Nations General Assembly is the last one to be held in the 1970s. This gives us certain grounds not only for considering the topical issues of today but also for summing up some of the political results of the decade which is about to close and for casting a glance at the past. For the problems of today, as indeed the future itself, are more clearly seen against the background of what the past has to tell us about what action was successful and what was not.
95.	It is worthwhile to recall the circumstances which brought about the founding of the United Nations. The war was still raging and the sword of just retribution had not yet fallen on those who instigated it when the leaders of the major nations of the anti-Fascist coalition undertook a task which today still retains its vital importance: the setting up of a reliable barrier against another world tragedy. That task was indeed enshrined in the United Nations Charter as the main goal of this Organization. The effectiveness of the United Nations in maintaining international peace has been and remains the main yardstick in judging all its activities.
96.	Has the United Nations lived up to its mandate? There can be no simple answer to that question. Yet it should be recognized that it has done a lot of good for consolidating peace and promoting international cooperation. It is also evident that the United Nations could have done more than it has.
97.	We are all aware that the manner in which the States Members of the United Nations act in international affairs cannot be reduced to one common denominator. Here the amplitude between different policy trends is great: some have not yet abandoned their claims to dominate the rest and even to hegemony in the world arena; others, naturally, cannot and will not reconcile themselves to this.
98.	Some countries make every effort to put an end to the arms race and demonstrate a serious and responsible approach to this task; others, on the contrary, hurl ever more funds into that race and inflate their military budgets,
99.	In short, the United Nations, as the broadest international organization, shows up in the boldest relief the characteristic features of the world with all its contradictions and collisions and, at the same time, the growing hopes of the peoples for a peaceful future.
100.	The Soviet Union has never abandoned the belief in the possibility of building a solid edifice of peace. Our people and their Government take this as their basic premise and that there is weighty reason for this has been confirmed by the decade of the 1970s.
101.	At the beginning of the current decade there was a new lease on life, so to speak, through a series of treaties which have brought international relations in Europe in line with the realities of its post-war development. The first Soviet-American agreements on the limitation of strategic arms and the basic principles of relations between the USSR and the United States of America were also concluded at that time.
102.	Special mention should also be made of the historic Conference of the top leaders of 35 nations at Helsinki, which sealed in a document the evolution of Europe towards stronger security and co-operation. In that period, long and serious negotiations at the second round of SALT resulted in the Soviet-American Treaty, whose entry into force, one can say, the whole world is looking forward to.
103.	Indeed, all of us can say that the 1970s will hold an important place in history. These years have seen the positive trend in international affairs which was named "detente" becoming a broad process. Detente—and the Soviet Union stood at its cradle— express the aspirations of our entire nation and, we are sure, those of all peoples of the world.
104.	The attitude towards detente is the best indicator of any country's political intentions. In recent years many a good word has been said about detente. But even very good words in favour of detente are not enough; they must be buttressed by deeds, by the policies of States.
105.	There are still people in the world today who frown when they hear the word "detente"; their faces wrinkle like that of a hungry cat tasting a cucumber in a kitchen-garden.
106.	Take, for instance, the questions of renouncing the spread of enmity and hatred among nations and the prohibition of war propaganda. This is, we may say, a minimum for any State adhering to the policy of detente and desirous of promoting a healthy political climate in the world.
107.	As far back as 1947 the General Assembly adopted a resolution against the propaganda for another war. Over 30 years have elapsed since then, but who would undertake to assert today that such propaganda has been stopped? In many States it has not even been outlawed.
108.	The Soviet Union did that long ago. The provision stating that "war propaganda is banned in the USSR" is a formal part of our Constitution, the fundamental law of our State.
109.	On more than one occasion we have emphasized the urgency of this matter. Indeed, before the guns of the aggressors who unleashed the Second World War began to thunder, war propaganda had been in full swing for many years. Incessant calls had been made for the map of Europe and of the world to be carved up to suit the aggressors' designs. The Soviet Union mentions this fact because the forces that seek to condition people to think in terms of war and the arms build-up are still active.
110.	It is becoming a tradition in some countries to play out scenarios of military conflicts. "Look," they say, "that is how things are going to develop." And estimates are made of the casualties and the number of cities to be swept away. Tens or even hundreds of millions of lives are written off in those callous calculations.
111.	The ancient Greeks, and not they alone, left us wise myths whose beauty lies in glorifying what is human in man. It is not to the credit of our contemporaries that other myths are invented today which are designed to stupefy man with pessimism and to make him despair of the triumph of reason. They depict war as totally unavoidable.
112.	There is no doubt as to the purposes for which these and other myths are invented and the policies which they are designed to serve.
113.	What a huge number of films, books, articles and speeches of politicians and "quasi-politicians", all shot through with falsity and deception, are produced to make people believe the fictitious stories about the source of a threat to peace.
114.	One example is the campaign launched with regard to Cuba, in the course of which all sorts of falsehoods are being piled up concerning the policies of Cuba and the Soviet Union. But the truth is that this propaganda is totally without foundation in reality, and is indeed based on falsehoods. The Soviet Union and Cuba have already stated as much. Our advice on this score is simple: the artificiality of this entire question must be honestly admitted and the matter closed.
115.	The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist community have never threatened anybody, nor are they doing so now. A society which is confident of its creative forces and abilities needs no war. It needs peace. These words have been inscribed on the banner of our foreign policy ever since the days of Lenin.
116.	The policy of peace and friendship among peoples, the policy of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems, has invariably been expressed in the decisions of the congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. This policy course will be followed unswervingly in the future- as well. 
117.	Naturally, the USSR and its Warsaw Treaty allies cannot fail to take into account the fact that some States are continuing their military preparations and stepping them up. In these circumstances the USSR and its allies are compelled to look after their security. At the same time our approach in this matter can be described as follows: "The defence potential of the Soviet Union", as L.I. Brezhnev has pointed out, ' 'must be at a level that would deter anyone from attempting to disrupt our peaceful life. A course aimed not at achieving superiority in weapons, but at reducing armaments and easing military confrontation—such is our policy."
118.	He who trusts this policy will never be deceived. The USSR and the socialist countries can always be relied upon in the struggle for peace, disarmament and detente and for the freedom and independence of peoples. Those countries have common ideals and are guided by common goals. Shoulder to shoulder, their peoples are working hard in the grandiose effort of construction.
119.	Indeed the whole world knows how many proposals, and what kind of proposals, have been submitted by the socialist States to other countries, first of all in the United Nations, with the aim of deepening the process of easing tensions in the world, of broadening peaceful co-operation among States, and of strengthening international security.
120.	The countries making up the socialist community co-ordinate their policies for the sake of universal peace, the security of their own peoples and the peoples of other countries. This was again confirmed with new vigour by the fruitful results of the latest series of meetings held by L.I. Brezhnev with top Party and State leaders of socialist countries which took place in the Crimea last summer.
121.	I feel that our opinion will not differ from that of most participants in this session if I say that a comparison of the United Nations Charter provisions with what is going on in the sphere of military activities in some countries reveals a glaring contradiction. Although those States affixed their signatures to the United Nations Charter and its peaceful purposes and principles, they are nevertheless doing everything to see that stockpiled mountains of weapons grow.
122.	In the meantime, the world has long since crossed the line beyond which the arms race has become sheer madness. We urge all States Members of the United Nations to counter this madness with common sense and the will to strengthen mutual trust. For its part, the USSR, together with other countries, will continue to work consistently to stop the arms race, to start dismantling the war machine part by part and to reduce the military arsenals of States down to general and complete disarmament.
123.	Here at the United Nations and at various forums where the disarmament problem is under discussion, there is certainly no dearth of proposals that are well considered and based on the principle of equality and equal security. There are proposals relating both to weapons of mass destruction and to conventional weapons. We are still seized with the question of the reduction of military budgets.
124.	There has been no small number of major initiatives directed towards a general improvement of the political climate in the world, including the proposal for a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations. In our view, not a single State that sincerely strives for peace and good relations with other countries could possibly object to such a treaty.
125.	There are also initiatives concerning various regions of the world. I should like to point, in particular, to the idea of the States bordering on the Indian Ocean that this ocean be turned into a zone of peace, an idea which is supported by the majority of the countries Members of the United Nations. The Soviet Union is certainly in favour of implementing this idea. It is actively working for an early resumption of the Soviet- American talks on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in the Indian Ocean, talks which were interrupted through no fault of ours. An appropriate agreement on that subject would undoubtedly give this idea a more tangible shape, and this would have a favourable impact on the entire international situation.
126.	Yet, on the whole, one has to note with concern that all or almost all proposals for ending the arms race and for disarmament as a rule encounter opposition on the part of a number of States. They frequently get bogged down in the quagmire of debate. And it takes tremendous efforts to bring them up to the stage of decision-making, though such decisions do not yet ensure real disarmament even in limited areas.
127.	A considerable period of time has already elapsed since the question was raised about reaching an agreement on ending the production of all types of nuclear weapons and the gradual reduction of their stockpiles until they have been completely liquidated. In our days there is no more burning problem than that of removing the threat of nuclear war. Every reasonable person understands this. And it cannot be effectively solved without stopping the assembly line producing an incessant flow of weapons of monstrous destructive power—nuclear warheads, bombs and shells.
128.	As we have repeatedly stated, the Soviet Union is prepared to discuss this fundamental problem together with other countries, and it is proposing that specific negotiations be initiated. All the nuclear Powers without exception are in duty bound to take part in them.
129.	It is sometimes said that ending the production of nuclear weapons and their liquidation are too difficult a task. But can this be a reason for not starting the search for ways and means to resolve the problem? We are sure that reaching an appropriate agreement is not beyond the realm of possibility if States, and first of all the nuclear States, adopt a responsible approach.
130.	The complex of questions relating to nuclear weapons includes the ensuring of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States and the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there are no such weapons at present.
131.	The General Assembly has already adopted resolutions of principle on these matters. It is now necessary to embody them in binding international agreements. 
132 In our view, further efforts should be made to strengthen the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The responsibility for this lies upon all States. We hope that the forthcoming Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will be crowned with positive results. This Conference will be held soon.
133.	Negotiations on a number of essential aspects of disarmament are already in progress, and on some they have been going on for a long time. I should like to single out a couple of questions whose solution could, in our view, be found in the not-too-distant future.
134.	Progress has been achieved in the negotiations between the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. We would expect that no complicating elements will be introduced in the negotiations by our partners. But, unfortunately, these complications are being introduced even today.
135.	In the course of Soviet-American consultations, basic elements of an agreement banning radiological weapons have been worked out. If work on the agreement is not impeded artificially, it can be speedily prepared for signature. This means that, following the can on bacteriological weapons, one more type of weapon of mass destruction will be prohibited.
136.	The file of constructive proposals on various aspects of the disarmament problem is impressive and proper use should be made of it. This offers broad opportunities for action by the United Nations, which, at its tenth special session, devoted to disarmament, adopted a programme which on the whole is a good one. A United Nations resolution should not merely remain on paper. For the time being, however, it is but a paper, though a well-written one.
137.	The signing of the Soviet-American Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms is convincing proof that, given goodwill and readiness to take into account each other's legitimate interests, it is possible to achieve agreements on the most difficult questions. The Treaty builds a bridge to the further limitation and reduction of strategic weapons. It also contains great potential for exerting a positive influence on other negotiations on the limitations of the arms race and on disarmament.
138.	It can be stated without exaggeration that a major step has been taken for the USSR, the United States of America and the entire world. It is quite understandable, therefore, that, one after another, the representatives of States speaking from this rostrum speak out in favour of that Treaty.
139.	The strengthening of universal peace is inseparable from ensuring security in Europe. The situation on the European continent is not merely a part of the general picture of the world situation: today, as in the past, it has a profound impact on the course of international developments.
140.	Since the historic moment when it raised the banner of a new social system, our country has been pursuing a consistent course towards creating conditions of reliable peace in Europe. Everything we have accomplished in the name of that goal is an open book, and we are proud of its every page.
141.	Of course, we are far from underestimating the contributions made by other States. We give their due to the countries that took part in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which was crowned by the adoption of the Final Act. That document provides guidelines for further efforts to deepen the process of detente in Europe.
142.	Today the basis for the peaceful co-operation of States on the European continent is more solid than it was yesterday. Favourable changes have taken place in relations between socialist and capitalist countries in Europe.
143.	Soviet-French co-operation is on the rise. There is a considerable degree of mutual understanding and agreement on major issues of European and world politics, and accordingly there is a possibility for the further development of fruitful co-operation.
144.	The development of our relations with the Federal Republic of Germany has been following a positive trend. Both sides appreciate the mutual advantages of what has been achieved, recognizing that a good deal could yet be accomplished in the future. I should like to express the hope that there will be no move on the part of the Federal Republic of Germany that would reduce such possibilities for the future or that would run counter to the peaceful line in Europe and to the easing of international tensions.
145.	We are interested in the consistent development of Soviet-British relations. We are hopeful that there is a desire for this in the United Kingdom, too.
146.	We have good relations with Italy. The assets accumulated in these relations must be multiplied.
147.	I should like to note the genuine and traditional good-neighbourly relations between the USSR and Finland. We appreciate all the good achievements that have been made in our relations with other Scandinavian countries.
148.	A positive shift is taking place in our relations with Spain.
149.	The development of our ties with the rest of Western Europe is also a source of satisfaction.
150.	On the whole, both in the field of bilateral relations with States having a different social system and in other fields, the Soviet Union is following the course charted by the Helsinki Conference.
151.	The roots that political detente has taken on European soil cannot, however, be viable unless practical measures are taken in the field of military detente. In this regard, great prospects have been opened up by the proposals contained in the Declaration of the Political Advisory Committee of the Warsaw Treaty Organization adopted last November, and in the May communique of the Committee of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of that Organization.
152.	First of all, I wish to refer to the initiative concerning the conclusion between the European States participants in the Helsinki Conference of a treaty on the non-first use of either nuclear or conventional weapons against each other, the intent of which is self- evident.
153.	Unfortunately, our Western partners have not yet shown themselves ready to engage in talks on this problem. Nevertheless, we expect that a sober approach and a sense of responsibility will prompt them to react positively to our proposal.
154.	The socialist countries are still waiting for a response to yet another important initiative of theirs— concerning the convening, at a political level and with the participation of all European countries as well as the United States and Canada, of a conference on strengthening confidence among States, easing military confrontation and the subsequent thinning out of armed forces and armaments in Europe, and their reduction. Each of those countries could make its own contribution to the work of that conference.
155.	In the opinion of the Soviet Union, substantial work is needed on a bilateral as well as a multilateral basis to ensure the success of both the conference on military detente on the European continent and the Madrid meeting to be held next year of representatives of the States participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. Far from competing with each other, those two forums are complementary.
156.	As for the Madrid meeting, it should focus its attention on truly urgent issues of detente in Europe. No narrow selfish interests should be allowed to prevent this.
157.	Now a few words about the Vienna talks, the subject of which, as will be recalled, is the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. This is not a problem of significance to Europe alone. Our country invariably adopts constructive positions at those talks and puts forward initiatives which also take into account the legitimate interests of the Western partners. Only strict observance of the principle of undiminished security of either party would bring the Vienna talks to the road leading to agreement, and the sooner that happens the better.
158.	The review of problems relating to Europe would be incomplete if no reference were made to attempts undertaken from time to time by some countries to test the durability of the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin.  This is contrary to the long-term interests which provided the basis for that agreement and which must serve as guidance for all States, particularly the parties to it.
159.	The root-cause of the complexities and contradictions of the international situation at the present day lies to no small extent in the fact that the existing sources of tensions and conflicts between States do not disappear and that now and then new ones keep springing up.
160.	There is more than one such source in Asia. It was only six months ago that aggression was committed against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Practically the whole world branded the aggressors as such, but have appropriate conclusions been drawn from that event by all those who should have drawn them?
161.	This issue cannot be drowned in the artificially whipped up propaganda campaign concerning Indo- Chinese refugees, a campaign whose sharp edge is directed against Viet Nam. No, that edge should be turned in another direction, which is well known.
162.	It is also no secret who imposed and nurtured the bloodthirsty murderous regime of Pol Pot. Today that regime in Kampuchea has been done away with and there will be no return to the past. The legitimate representatives of the Kampuchean people must be given the opportunity to take the seat belonging to Kampuchea in the United Nations.
163.	The policy of some States that are intensifying their interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan is short-sighted—there is no other term for it. That country, which has chosen the road of progressive democratic transformation, comes out in favour of good relations with its neighbours and pursues an independent foreign policy, a policy of non-alignment. The Soviet Union, which has long-standing ties of friendship and good neighbourliness with Afghanistan, con-siders that this inadmissible interference must be stopped.
164.	With respect to such Middle East States as Turkey and Iran, not only have we common borders but we also maintain relations of traditional co-operation with them. We take a positive attitude to the steps which those and other Asian countries take to protect and strengthen their sovereignty, and we are willing to develop relations with them.
165.	We in the Soviet Union are satisfied with the friendly nature of relations between the USSR and India, that great Asian country with its consistently peaceful policy. The Soviet-Indian relationship is a major factor for stability and peace on the Asian continent.
166.	We wish to maintain, naturally on the basis of reciprocity, normal good relations with all States, whether in south or south-east Asia or in the Far East. This applies to Japan, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and other countries of those regions.
167.	Like all peace-loving peoples, the Soviet people are gravely concerned over the state of affairs in the Middle East—one of the "hottest" spots on earth, where now there emanates a serious threat to peace.
168.	The Middle East problem, if divested of what is immaterial, boils down to the following: either the con-sequences of the aggression against the Arab States and peoples are eliminated or the invaders will be rewarded by being allowed to appropriate lands that belong to others. A just settlement and the establishment of lasting peace in the Middle East require that Israel should end its occupation of all the Arab lands it seized in 1967; that the legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including the right to establish their own State, be safeguarded; and that the right of all States in the Middle East, including Israel, to independent existence under conditions of peace be effectively guaranteed.
169.	The separate deal between Egypt and Israel resolves nothing. It is nothing but a means designed to lull the vigilance of peoples. It is a way of piling up on a still greater scale explosive material capable of producing a new conflagration in the Middle East. Moreover, added to the tense political atmosphere in this and the adjacent areas, is the heavy smell of oil.
170.	It is high time that all States represented in the United Nations realized how vast is the tragedy of the Arab people of Palestine. What is the worth of declarations in defence of humanism and human rights— whether for refugees or not—if before the eyes of the entire world the inalienable rights of an entire people, driven from its land and deprived of a livelihood, are grossly trampled upon?
171.	The Soviet policy with respect to the Middle East problem is one of principle. We are in favour of a comprehensive and just settlement, of the establishment of durable peace in the Middle East, a region not far from our borders. The Soviet Union sides firmly with Arab peoples, who resolutely reject deals at the expense of their legitimate interests.
172.	By adopting in 1960 the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples—one of the most significant acts of the United Nations—the world community acknowledged the indisputable fact that the hour of colonialism had struck. Since then an overwhelming majority of peoples have cast off the yoke of colonialism. But humanity's conscience continues to revolt against the fact that the shackles of colonialism and racism have not yet been completely broken. And it is above all of southern Africa that we should be talking here.
173.	For many years now the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia have been waging a selfless struggle for their freedom and independence. The Soviet Union is entirely on the side of their noble cause. We have raised and shall continue to raise our voice in their support, and we shall co-operate with those States, especially African States, which adhere to the positions of justice, of upholding the inalienable rights of those peoples. All kinds of combinations, no matter how superficially clever, which are aimed at preserving the domination of racists and colonialists with the help of hastily formed puppet regimes should be resolutely rejected.
174.	Is it possible to achieve a political settlement in southern Africa? Yes, it is possible and there are ways leading to it. But so far the racists and their stooges have replied with bullets to proposals that a choice be made in favour of a just and peaceful solution.
175.	The session of the General Assembly of the United Nations will be right if it clearly states its resolute support for the liberation struggle of the peoples of southern Africa and condemns attempts to drown this struggle in blood as a crime against humanity. It is a direct duty of the United Nations to make those who ignore the decisions of the United Nations on southern Africa respect them.
176.	The Soviet people are well aware of the contribution of the peoples of Latin America to the struggle for peace and national liberation. This contribution will be all the greater the more the stand of Latin American States in defending their independence is resolute and the less their policies are influenced from the outside. In this connexion, we note with satisfaction the growing authority of Latin America in international relations.
177.	In its approach to all continents, to all countries of the world, the Soviet Union does not apply different yardsticks when it comes to the sovereignty of States, the freedom of peoples and genuine human rights. One cannot hold aloft the Charter of the United Nations in one situation and hide it under the table in another. The provisions and principles of the Charter must be applied equally to any State and any people.
178.	The Soviet Union has repeatedly stressed, notably in the United Nations, the significance of the non-aligned movement and its peaceful orientation. We are confident that the non-aligned States will continue to make use of their entire political weight in the interests of peace, disarmament and detente. This confidence of ours is supported by the successful results of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which recently ended in Havana. This was an important forum and a major international event.
179.	What is needed in the first place to resolve any important international problem of a political, economic or other nature is an atmosphere of peace. And whether peace will be more durable or less stable depends to an important extent on the state of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. That conclusion is objective and indisputable.
180.	The leadership of the Soviet Union makes no secret of its desire to have normal and, what is more, friendly relations with the United States. This only requires the observance of principles which have become well-established in international relations; and they are recorded, in particular, in the well-known Soviet-American documents—that is, the principles of peaceful coexistence between States and of non-interference in the affairs of others. We shall not allow anybody to meddle in our internal affairs. Concern for Soviet-American relations is a matter for both sides. It is only on this basis that the relations between the USSR and the United States can develop successfully.
181.	Our position was stated with exhaustive clarity and precision by L. I. Brezhnev in Vienna, in particular, in the course of his meeting with the President of the United States, Mr. Jimmy Carter. The meeting showed that, given the wish on both sides, the USSR and the United States are able to find mutually acceptable solutions and to co-operate in the interests of international detente and peace,
182.	L. I. Brezhnev has stated:
"There is no country or people in the world, in fact, with which the Soviet Union would not like to have good relations; there is no topical international problem to the solution of which the Soviet Union would not be willing to contribute; there is no source of danger of war in the removal of which by peaceful means the Soviet Union would not be interested." 
183.	In the succession of post-war developments, along with positive events there were also dangerous ones which gravely threatened the foundations of peace. A closer look at these developments would easily reveal that the evolution of the international situation largely depends upon the States which have the most powerful levers to influence it.
184.	When those levers are activated to attain objectives contrary to, or even openly defying, the United Nations Charter, conflict situations and international crises arise. The instigators of such events usually seek to whitewash themselves and, in that, they do not hesitate to pin all kinds of labels on others. That is a procedure that is, unfortunately, sometimes followed.
185.	One such tactic consists in juggling with the term "hegemonism", which in recent years has been increasingly used in international political practice. Although of recent origin, the term "hegemonism" denotes a phenomenon that is far from new. On the contrary, it has been known, so to speak, from time immemorial. It means striving for world domination, for domination over other countries and peoples.
186.	The Soviet attitude towards hegemonism and domination is clear. Since its very first days, the Soviet State has resolutely objected to anyone's being a hegemonist with others submitting to his will, and to any States' holding a position of domination over others.
187.	Twenty million human lives were sacrificed by our people to defeat Hitler's designs for world domination and to bury hegemonism in its Fascist attire. This figure alone is indicative of our score with hegemonism.
188.	Hegemonism is a direct antipode to the equality of States and peoples, an antipode to the ideal which the October Revolution proclaimed for the whole world and which the United Nations, as prescribed by its Charter, should promote in every possible way in international relations. Its manifestation in our day constitutes a serious obstacle to the process of detente to which there is not and cannot be any reasonable alternative.
189.	The time has come for all States Members of the United Nations to take an unambiguous position with regard to hegemonism—to condemn it and to block any claims to hegemony in world affairs. Its inadmissibility should be raised to the level of a principle that must be rigorously observed.
190.	Guided by all this, the Soviet Union is proposing the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of an important item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of hegemonism in international relations" and is submitting an appropriate draft resolution to be considered at the session.
191.	The purport of this draft resolution is that no States or groups of States should claim, under any circumstances or for any motives whatsoever, hegemony in regard to other States or groups of States.
192.	We are convinced that all those who approach the conduct of international affairs on the basis of equality and in the interests of detente and peace cannot oppose the adoption of such a draft resolution. It is to be hoped that the General Assembly will consider the draft with a high sense of responsibility.
193.	Following the General Assembly, the United Nations Security Council, with the five nuclear Powers as its , permanent members, could also express itself against hegemonism. It would be a good idea subsequently to couch the renunciation by States of a policy of hegemonism in all its manifestations in terms of a broad international agreement and to conclude such an agreement or treaty.
194.	In conducting its policy, our country scrupulously complies with the principles of the United Nations Charter and invariably pursues its purposes. We never lose sight of the fundamental basis of the activities of the world Organization, that is, concentration of its efforts in ensuring that the peoples can live in conditions of peace. The Soviet Union has consistently come out in favour of strengthening the United Nations, of no one's being allowed to erode it.
195.	The peoples will assess the results of the current session, like those of previous sessions, of the General Assembly primarily in terms of what it will have achieved to make people feel more secure. Hence, great responsibility rests with all States Members of the United Nations and with their representatives assembled in this hall.
196.	Everything positive that we can achieve today will help us in the 1980s to consolidate and to develop the successes of the 1970s. That in turn will largely determine the thoughts and feelings, the memories of the past and the faith in the future that mankind will take with it into the next millennium.
197.	We wish, and we shall do all in our power to ensure, that the work of the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly may culminate in the adoption of resolutions that will be commended by the peoples of the world.
﻿We meet in this General Assembly on the threshold of a new decade. It will be a time of complex challenge, a period in which, more than ever, co-operative endeavours among nations are a matter not only of idealism but also of direct self-interest.
39.	The decade now drawing to a close has been characterized by rapid, far-reaching and fundamental change. Awesome technological developments are all about us. The assertion of national independence has reshaped the political geography of our planet. Within nations we see an accelerating rise in individual economic, political and social expectations. The unrelenting hostility of the cold war has given way to a more complex relationship between East and West, with elements of both competition and co-operation. The simple notion of a bipolar world has become obsolete. Increasingly there is a profusion of different systems and allegiances and a diffusion of political and military power. The world economic order is also undergoing inexorable transformations. Many nations formerly among the disadvantaged are now achieving global economic power. Economic interdependence has become a daily reality for the citizens of every nation.
40.	These sweeping changes have for the most part worked in constructive directions, changing lives for the better and opening new possibilities for collective effort and creative diplomacy.
41.	But while these developments demonstrate that progress is possible, they by no means demonstrate that it is inevitable. I say this for two reasons.
42.	First, in a number of areas the pace of current progress is dwarfed by the scope of coming challenges. The next decade will decide whether we have the collective wisdom and the common will to surmount a series of imposing and interrelated problems which must be dealt with in a comprehensive manner.
43.	The need to develop new forms of energy will pose a continuing challenge. We have entered the difficult transition from a petroleum economy to one based on other forms of energy.
44.	Even without this added burden, we face an imposing task in providing for the basic needs of people and in narrowing the combustible disparity between wealth and despair. The food shortage facing developing countries, for example, was 12 million tons in 1975. It could be 70 to 85 million tons by 1990, unless productivity rises sharply.
45.	We must strike a decent balance between the burgeoning demands of more people for a better life and the inescapable reality of a fragile environment.
46.	Such prospects carry the seeds of future discord. As these seeds ripen, and the growth and spread of weapons continue, regional conflicts become all the more dangerous in their toll of lives and resources and in the heightened risk of wider confrontation.
47.	And despite our emergence from the days of unrelenting hostility, the East-West relationship can deteriorate dangerously whenever one side fails to respect the security interests of the other.
48.	Our ability to meet these tests depends on a second issue: will we confront such challenges together, and benefit together? Or will we let adversity divide us, and thus conquer?
49.	I must be frank and say that I am not sure what the answer will be.
50.	There are some reasons for encouragement. In recent years the nations here represented have found it easier, in many different forums, to talk with each other rather than at each other. East and West have entered into the broadest arms control agenda in history. The Soviet Union and the United States have negotiated significant limitations on strategic arms in a treaty that now awaits ratification. North and South have made progress on financial, trade and commodity issues—far more progress than has been acknowledged. Agreement has been reached on a sharp increase in the resources of IMF. Lending by the multilateral development banks has increased. Expanded trade opportunities have been opened by the recently concluded trade negotiations. We have moved ahead on other matters, such as international debt and a common fund for commodities. We should recognize such progress and build on it. We have taken steps as well towards the resolution of some deeply embedded regional disputes.
51.	But I am concerned that there are also factors at work which could reverse this co-operative trend. The severity of the problems we face could drive nations to the pursuit of their own separate advantage at the expense of international co-operation. In times of economic trouble, even relatively prosperous countries find it more difficult to look beyond their internal concerns to meet international needs. Indeed, it is a vivid lesson of history that hardship can breed short-sighted insularity. It can arouse instincts for self-preservation at the expense of others. In such times, the voices of economic nationalism will be raised in all our countries. We must resist them. We must resist, as well, the voices of international confrontation. In a number of international negotiations, political as well as economic, we have worked our way through to the toughest issues involved. We must not react now in frustration, and unleash a spiral of rhetoric which could deepen rather than resolve our divisions.
52.	The challenges of the 1980s can be met—if each of us here represented meets the responsibilities which we share.
53.	Our first responsibility is to persist in the search for peace, to reduce both the danger and the destructiveness of war. The future of two regions—the Middle East and southern Africa—depends on specific decisions that will be made in the coming months.
54.	We believe that the 26 March Treaty between Egypt and Israel has reduced the dangers inherent in the Arab-Israeli conflict and has laid the foundation for a settlement that can be both durable and just.
55.	But the dramatic achievement of peace between Israel and Egypt and the successful implementation of the first phases of the Treaty of peace have not obscured the necessity of moving toward peace between Israel and its other neighbours. Indeed it remains the resolute view of my Government that further progress towards an over-all peace is essential.
56.	We know that an ultimate settlement must address the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The Palestinian question must be resolved in all of its aspects.
57.	As the peace process continues to unfold, it is our deepest desire that representatives of the Palestinian people and the Governments of Jordan and Syria should join in this great quest. 
58.	This is consistent with—indeed it underscores— our unshakable commitment to Israel's security and well-being, now and in the future.
59.	None of the parties involved in this difficult negotiation has any illusions that resolving the Palestinian issue will be easy. But the United States is convinced that progress will be made towards that goal.
60.	Preserving the integrity of Lebanon is also critical to peace in the Middle East. There has been a cease-fire in southern Lebanon, the fragility of which is underscored by the events of today. We need not only a temporary cease-fire, but a broader truce. We will be working towards such a goal in our discussions with other interested Governments here at this Assembly. Lebanon has suffered all too much.
61.	The desire for peace is shared by all the peoples of the Middle East. We recognize that there are disagreements about how best to reach that common goal. We believe the course on which we are embarked is the right one, indeed the only one that has shown practical results. We call on all who genuinely seek peace to join in this endeavour.
62.	A step towards peace has been taken as well on the Rhodesian conflict. The parties are now engaged in negotiation towards a solution that could combine true majority rule with essential minority rights. The United Kingdom Government, the Commonwealth nations, and the parties themselves deserve great credit for this new step. The deepening agony of war could be ended by agreement on a fair constitution and new elections, as called for in the final communique issued by the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August
63.	We have made substantial progress in Namibia. But obstacles remain. The contact group is working with the parties concerned to find ways to resolve the few outstanding issues. We do not underestimate the difficulties, but neither should any of us underestimate the opportunities that a settlement would bring for all of southern Africa.
64.	In most negotiations, we can best make progress by stages. A knot can never be untied from the inside. We must begin with the parts that we can grasp, and work our way through to the end of the problem.
65.	History will judge us severely if we let our opportunities for peace slip away. As negotiations proceed, the issues we address become progressively more difficult. But we must not let future fears or ambitions undermine the progress that has been made.
66.	As we work on these and other conflicts; let us also squarely face the fact that our planet is plagued by those who make war on innocents, as we saw just weeks ago in the tragic death of Lord Mountbatten. We must have greater international co-operation to combat the barbarous practices of the terrorist. The United States strongly supports the basic elements of the draft convention against the taking of hostages, the conclusion of this treaty will contribute to a growing consensus that terrorism will not be tolerated, regardless of the political cause its perpetrators claim to pursue.
67.	Finally, the requirement of peace carries with it an international responsibility to limit the spread and accumulation of arms. A particular obligation falls to the largest nuclear Powers—the United States and the Soviet Union—to contain the competition in strategic weapons. The treaty concluded after the second round of SALT can be a major step towards the fulfilment of that obligation.
68.	The goal of strategic stability will be further served if the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States are able to agree on a comprehensive ban, on nuclear tests. As the nuclear super-Powers seek the path towards mutual restraint, all nations must also recognize the direct threat to their security from the spread of nuclear weapons. Developments in recent years can bring new impetus to the non-proliferation effort—including progress in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation—which can help us to find safer ways to develop nuclear energy for humanity; the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards; the substantial increase in the number of parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the entry into force of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), which now finally appears within grasp; and the pledge by a number of nuclear Powers, under specific circumstances, to refrain from the use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States.
69.	But there have also been serious setbacks- further demonstrations of intent to acquire nuclear weapons, in disregard of the inherent dangers for regional and international security. The Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be held next year, will be a critical time for taking stock—and for redoubling our efforts to make progress on this urgent international priority.
70.	Beyond the search for peace, a second responsibility that we share is to be sensitive to the international consequences of our national economic decisions, and to resist the temptation to solve our economic problems at the expense of others.
71.	The imprudence of economic nationalism has been harshly demonstrated in the past. The world depression a half-century ago was spread, deepened and prolonged by a wave of protectionism. That memory has spurred us towards a new multilateral trade agreement intended to open markets and keep them open, even in a time of economic strain.
72.	Today, let me address one of those issues which most clearly reflects the direct connection between national decisions and global consequences. That issue is energy. In almost no area is the need for common action more apparent or more urgent. It is an issue which now threatens to divide us, economically and politically. In a future of greater scarcity, these divisions could weaken the fabric of international comity which this organisation embodies.
73.	All nations will suffer if all nations do not act responsibly in their consumption, of energy, in its pricing and in its production. Despite a difficult prognosis for our energy future, I believe the basis may exist for progress. 
74.	Until the 1970s modern industrial economies operated on two basic assumptions, which also governed relations between oil importers and exporters. These two assumptions were that oil is cheap, and that supplies are unlimited. Now all nations realize that these assumptions no longer hold.
75.	The commitments made by the major industrial countries at the Tokyo Economic Summit demonstrate this clearly. My Government is taking ambitious action to address the energy problem and is making efforts to exceed these commitments. President Carter has committed the United States not to import more than 8.2 million barrels of oil a day in 1979, and never to exceed the peak level of our imports reached in 1977. Total United States energy research and development this year is $3.2 billion. We are investing $528 million this year—and $600 million next year—in the development and use of solar energy. We are significantly expanding our development of synthetic fuels, to take advantage of the abundant coal and oil shale in our country.
76.	Much of this new energy technology will have application in other countries as well. We will seek to make it available to others under mutually satisfactory conditions. For we recognize that by helping others resolve their energy problems, we help resolve our own.
77.	Let me indicate some of the ways in which we are prepared to work with others to meet our common energy needs.
78.	We have joined other industrial nations in agreeing to establish a provisional international technology group which will recommend ways to broaden international participation in the commercial development of alternative fuels.
79.	I pledged last year that the United States would do more to mobilize its technical talents on behalf of the development of others. I am pleased to report that next month we will establish an Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation. This Institute will work for the goals set by the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development. It will help the people of developing nations to benefit from our technologies. The Institute's Policy Council will include experts from developing nations. Energy development will be among its highest priorities.
80.	We will participate actively in preparations for the 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy.
81.	At the recent Tokyo Economic Summit, the World Bank was invited to take the lead in coordinating our assistance to developing nations in the field of energy. We suggest that the World Bank bring together a group of experts to review the question of energy research, development and training in detail. Specifically, that group could evaluate the work of existing energy research and training centres, both national and international, in developing countries. In addition, it could recommend how current institutions could be strengthened and whether new multilateral ones should be created. We are supporting the expansion of the World Bank's programme for the exploration and development of mineral fuels. The Bank is also considering whether local programmes of development finance are adequate to support the rapid application of solar, small hydroelectric and other renewable energy technologies in developing nations.
82.	The Inter-American Development Bank has proposed creation of a facility to provide political risk insurance and loan guarantees for private investment in energy and minerals projects in its region. This could be an effective means of stimulating energy development there. We are willing to pursue with the Bank its initiative and work with other countries to develop an acceptable proposal.
83.	As the industrial countries make serious efforts to restrict oil demand, and to help the developing countries meet their energy challenges, the question increasingly becomes whether the oil-producing nations are prepared to stabilize prices, and, to the extent it is within their control, ensure adequate supplies. A failure to do so will continue to have harsh consequences for the world economy, especially the poorer nations.
84.	We understand the natural desire of oil-exporting nations to husband this valuable resource for future generations. And we accept the fact that oil prices must reflect not only the strength of demand, but also the long-term scarcity of supply—so long as scarcity is never contrived to manipulate price,
85.	But oil producers must understand that there is a limit to what the economies of the oil-consuming nations, and the global economy, can sustain.
86.	We must all proceed with a responsible recognition that our national energy decisions will have profound global effects—and will return either to haunt or to help their makers.
87.	A third common responsibility is an intensified commitment to help improve the lives of our fellow human beings—to provide the necessities of life, to afford the chance to progress, to assure a voice in decisions which will determine their future.
88.	We have made progress in the field of human rights, but we must do more. In the past year, some nations have taken steps to restore legal protections and democratic institutions. And we have seen the inauguration of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the forceful call of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] for the creation of regional human rights institutions on the continent of Africa, and the activation of UNESCO's human rights procedures. The growing concern for human rights is undeniable. Yet the sad truth is that, even as we sit here today, men and women face torture, death and oppression for daring to exercise rights set forth in the Charter of this body three decades ago. Our joint challenge is to advance the aspirations of all peoples for human dignity.
89.	Our commitment must be to economic as well as political and social rights—for all are indispensable to human dignity. Improvements in economic well-being, opportunities for participation in the political process, and a growing sense of both economic and political equity can do much to defuse the grievances which can lead to national convulsions and international tensions.
90.	To meet this commitment to a better life for all peoples, we must each strive to move the North-South dialogue beyond grand themes and on to specific cases—to priority areas in which practical development goals can be met. Let me discuss in this connexion our efforts towards a goal we should adopt as a matter of simple humanity—that by the end of this century no person on this bountiful earth should have to go hungry.
91.	Last year, I noted that we must not be lulled by good weather and plentiful harvests into losing our sense of urgency. Since then, poor harvests in a number of countries have substantially increased the international demand for food. This situation underscores the need to accumulate adequate stocks to support world food security. I assure Members that the United States will do all it can to prevent a global food crisis. The American harvest this year will be of record size. We have removed all restrictions on wheat production for next year. We have established farmer-owned grain reserves which, through the accumulation and release of stocks, have helped stabilize supplies.
92.	An international wheat agreement still eludes our grasp. We should not abandon this goal. But we should move immediately to complete negotiations for a new food aid convention. The World Food Council has urged an agreement by mid-1980. We support that recommendation. In the meantime, we are already implementing the higher food aid pledge the convention would entail.
93.	At the same time, major emphasis must be placed on improving global food production. Over half of American direct development aid is now devoted to agriculture. We will continue working to improve the yields of major food crops, to preserve croplands and to expand research on ways to increase the production of traditional and new crops, especially those grown by poor farmers.
94.	These efforts have received effective support from the International Agricultural Research Centres. We support proposals to double the resources contributed to those centres and intend to increase our contribution. We hope additional countries will become contributors.
95.	We must be aware; however, that in the long run these efforts could be vitiated if the world's population growth is not slowed. Half the couples of child-bearing age still do not have adequate access to family planning services. We must strive to make family planning services—along with other elements of basic health care, adequate food supplies and clean water— available to all as rapidly as we can.
96.	And in the short run, we must be prepared to meet emergency needs wherever famine afflicts humanity or refugees seek haven—in Africa, in Latin America, in South-East Asia or elsewhere.
97.	The proposal made by Vice-President Mondaleat the Geneva Meeting for a refugee resettlement fund reflects our belief that the international community should deal on a global basis with a global and grave refugee crisis. We urge broad participation in this fund.
98.	Vigorous and large-scale international action is required to bring relief to the starving in Kampuchea, now facing one of the great human tragedies of modern times. Tens of thousands of sick and hungry Khmer are already pressing on Thailand's border. Hundreds of thousands may soon follow them. Even more widespread famine and disease are in prospect, especially in view of recent reports of intensified fighting. To avert unthinkable catastrophe» an international programme of humanitarian relief must be established in Kampuchea as soon as possible. International organizations must be able to bring a co-ordinated, massive and adequately monitored programme of emergency relief to all needy Khmer. We would endorse such an effort.
99.	The food crisis in Kampuchea promises both to multiply the flow of refugees and to take a terrible toil among those who cannot escape. The flood of refugees from Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea already has brought great suffering to hundreds of thousands of innocent people, as well as imposed heavy burdens on countries of first asylum.
100.	The international community has begun to respond. But humanitarian steps are not enough. The community of nations must make a more active effort to restore peace to the region and to resolve by non- military means the problems that developments in Indo-China have carried in their wake. They pose a threat to the stability of the region as a whole.
101.	I believe we can meet the challenges before us. But let us not misjudge their magnitude.
102.	Resolution of regional disputes and placing new limits on the instruments of war will require new acts of national and international will. The 1980s could portend a prolonged energy crisis. It could be a decade of widespread famine. Unless the swelling deficits of developing countries can be managed, many of their economies may stagnate and some could be threatened with collapse. Global problems like these require global solutions.
103.	This Assembly will decide whether to launch a new round of negotiations on economic co-operation for development. Let me state today that the United States would participate, in the Committee of the Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, in consultations to decide on the most effective way of conducting such negotiations.
104.	If new global negotiations are to succeed, the participants must be realistic about each other's political and economic capabilities. We must assign priority to those issues on which concrete results are possible, and we should avoid duplicating the work of existing institutions. In this way, the negotiations could help build a global consensus for action.
105.	Many of the issues I have addressed are already prominent on the agenda of the United Nations. The need for co-operation in addressing them requires that we continue to strengthen this institution. Financial, procedural and management reforms are urgently necessary. As a first step, we urge that the Secretary-General's recommendations, now adopted by this Assembly, be fully implemented.
106.	The urgency of the requirements I have described calls for something more on the part of all Members of the United Nations.
107.	The distinctions between North and South, like those between East and West, reflect differing interests. They have a role in defining the issues and in clarifying our choices. But we must commit ourselves to finding areas where our interests converge.
108.	Each of us has our special values to be nurtured, our particular goals to be served, and I do not suggest it can or should be otherwise. The United States believes in a world of diversity.
109.	But let us resolve—here, at this Assembly — to find in our common needs and common humanity a renewed dedication to the search for common ground.
﻿195.	Allow me, first of all, to extend my congratulations to you on your election as President of the thirty-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly. I sincerely wish that, under your presidency, the current session may achieve positive results.
196.	Allow me also to express, on behalf of the Chinese delegation, our warm welcome to the delegation of Saint Lucia on its admission to membership in the United Nations, believing that it will play its part in international affairs and in the work of the United Nations.
197.	The current session is the last session of the General Assembly in the 1970s. We are about to enter the 1980s. Looking back on the past and forward into the future, we feel encouraged and are also aware of our grave responsibility.
198.	The past 10 years were no ordinary years. The growth and further strengthening of the third world marked a significant change in the international situation over the period. An additional number of oppressed nations won national independence after waging protracted struggles. The people of the newly emerging States firmly oppose foreign aggression and interference and defend their national independence and state sovereignty. They not only want complete political independence, but are determined to lift themselves from economic dependency and backward-ness. They have worked hard to develop the national economy and build up their countries and have achieved marked successes in this regard. Acting in concert and strengthening their co-operation, they are striving tirelessly for the establishment of a new international economic order. They have waged an extensive struggle for world peace against the ever more intensified arms race between the big Powers and against the imperialist and hegemonist policies of war and aggression and have made important contributions. Strengthening their unity and persevering in struggle, the third-world countries have played an ever greater role in international affairs. They have become a decisive force on the world political scene, and the outlook of the United Nations has undergone a tremendous change. It will be impossible for one or two big Powers to manipulate the destiny of the world as they wish.
199.	Along with the awakening of the people of the third-world countries and the growth of their forces, Western Europe, Japan and other developed countries, faced with the hegemonist threat of aggression and expansion, have heightened their vigilance and strengthened their unity and defence capabilities to safeguard their state sovereignty and security. They, too, are exerting a positive influence in maintaining world peace and security and promoting a favourable development of the international situation.
200.	But we must not lose sight of the disquieting aspect of the developing situation. In the past decade, the ever fiercer rivalry between the two super-Powers has caused continued turbulence in the international situation. Particularly overbearing is the late-coming super-Power, whose inclination to aggression and adventure is visibly growing. Waving the slogans "disarmament" and "detente", it is engaged in frenzied arms expansion unprecedented in scale and speed. It is seeking to achieve an overwhelming superiority in nuclear as well as conventional arms and in every sphere, land, sea and air. Relying on its fast growing military strength, it is pushing a global "offensive strategy". More and more frequently it is using proxies and organizing mercenaries to launch unscrupulous armed invasions and military coups in other countries. With a view to encircling Europe, controlling strategic routes, seizing strategic resources and speeding up its expansion and strategic deployment for global hegemony, it has increasingly directed the spearheads of its aggression to Africa, the Middle East, the Gulf area and South-East Asia. Facts prove that the late-coming super-Power is the main source of threat to world peace and security and is the most dangerous source of a new world war. In the face of this harsh reality, more and more people are talking about "the more turbulent 1980s" and the possibility of a new world war. Such talk is not groundless,
201.	Now, this very super-Power which is pushing its policy of hegemonism everywhere has the effrontery to propose at this rostrum an item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of hegemonism in international relations". Obviously, this is the habitual clumsy tactics of a thief crying, "Stop thief!" and of gaining fame by demagogic means. Its aim is to pursue hegemonism even more unscrupulously under the guise of opposing hegemonism. However, the term "hegemonism" has its precise meaning that brooks no wilful interpretation. In the world today, who is practising hegemonism and who is against it is an objective fact known to everyone. No subtle rhetoric can alter it.
202.	We are optimists with regard to the future of mankind. The 1980s pose a new challenge, but also promise new hopes. We believe that ultimately the people are masters of their own destiny. Historical experience tells us that, while it is necessary to face up to reality, it is more important to change the reality. The harsh facts tell us that hegemonism means aggression and war. Peace is not secured by waiting or begging; it can only be secured through struggle and defended by action. Opposing hegemonism and defending world peace are two sides of the same coin. We believe that the just cause of world peace will continue to be victorious so long as all the peace-loving countries and peoples unite and, through hard struggle and solid work, persevere in opposing hegemonism and frustrating its strategic moves. The future of mankind and the world is bright.
203.	The broadly-based non-aligned movement is an important force in the contemporary international arena. At the Sixth Conference of the Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which concluded not long ago, the divisive and disruptive schemes were frustrated, and the basic principles of the non-aligned movement and the unity of the movement upheld thanks to the joint efforts of the great majority of the member countries and after acute and complex struggles. This is a significant achievement scored by the non-aligned movement along a road beset with difficulties. In recent years, the super-Power that claims to be the "natural ally" of the non-aligned movement has used and collaborated with its agents in an attempt to bring the movement into the orbit of its own global strategy. But their line of action is most unpopular, and their clumsy performance only serves to reveal their true colours more clearly to the non-aligned countries.
204.	China has always highly appreciated the independent, sovereign and non-bloc principles of the non- aligned movement and supported its just position of opposing imperialism, colonialism and foreign domination and hegemonism of all forms. The Chinese Government and people sincerely hope that the non-aligned countries will unite and co-operate and eliminate outside interference so that their movement will play a greater role in the struggle of all nations to safeguard sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and develop national economies and cultures, and in the struggle for the establishment of a new international economic order and for world peace.
205.	Indo-China is now one of the centres of world tension that attracts the close attention of the international community and causes it grave anxiety.
206.	As is well known, the crux of the Indo-Chinese situation lies in the brutal aggression imposed on Kampuchea. Towards the end of last year, Viet Nam brazenly mounted an armed invasion against Democratic Kampuchea, a sovereign State, occupied large tracts of its territory and set up a puppet regime there, plunging Kampuchea into unheard-of calamities. This naked aggression by Viet Nam is not only an act against the Vietnamese people's desire for recuperation, rehabilitation and peaceful construction after the war but also a gross violation of Kampuchea's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and a direct threat to the peace and security of the South-East Asian countries. It tramples underfoot the United Nations Charter and fundamental principles of international law. Earlier this year the United Nations Security Council held urgent meetings to discuss this grave situation." At the meetings, the overwhelming majority of the member States strongly condemned Viet
Nam's act of aggression and demanded an immediate withdrawal of foreign forces from Kampuchea. It was only because of the veto arbitrarily used by one permanent member that the Security Council failed to adopt resolutions and take effective action. Now the best part of the year has passed, but instead of stopping its aggression against Kampuchea, Viet Nam is sending more troops there and stepping up its deployment in preparation for a new massive dry-season offensive to wipe out the patriotic Kampuchean armed forces at one blow and then threaten the whole of South-East Asia, The disaster that today befalls the people of Kampuchea may befall those of other countries tomorrow. How can such practice of power politics be allowed to go unchecked in this contemporary age? We are pleased to note that the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, summing up experience and readjusting its policies, is uniting extensive patriotic forces under the banner of the patriotic and democratic front of great national union and fighting heroically to drive all the Vietnamese aggressors from Kampuchean territory. Historical experience has repeatedly proved and will continue to prove that no foreign aggression and oppression can vanquish a whole nation and that the just cause of a nation against alien domination is invincible,
207.	It should be pointed out here that the so-called Heng Samrin regime is nothing but a puppet propped up by the Vietnamese aggressors at bayonet point. Playing the jackal to the tiger, that regime has helped the Vietnamese aggressors to suppress the Kampuchean people in cold blood. Naturally, such a puppet regime is spurned by the Kampuchean people, opposed by the Governments and peoples of the South-East Asian countries and condemned by world opinion. On the other hand, the Government of Democratic Kampuchea, which has been holding high the banner of national independence and persistently fighting a national war of self-defence, is the sole legal representative of the Kampuchean people. Democratic Kampuchea is a State Member of the United Nations. To support and safeguard the legitimate rights of Democratic Kampuchea fully accords with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. It is the solemn and bounden duty of each of us Member States to uphold the purposes and principles of the United Nations. The recent decision taken by the General Assembly on accepting the credentials of the representatives of Democratic Kampuchea is a manifestation of the just position of the international community against foreign armed aggression and another indication that the aggression committed against Democratic Kampuchea by Viet Nam with the backing of its behind-the- scenes boss is most unpopular.
208.	While carrying on aggression and expansion abroad, Viet Nam has practised a policy of genocide at home and created the world-shocking tragedy of Indo- Chinese refugees. Over the past year or more, as a result of the massive persecution and expulsion by the Vietnamese authorities, nearly a million innocent people were forced to leave their homes and drift from place to place. Countless refugees were drowned in the sea or perished in the wilderness. Their tragic plight and serious case were something rarely seen since the Second World War. Such actions on the part of Viet Nam not only violate the basic humanitarian principle but have created tremendous economic burdens and grave social problems for the South-East Asian region and affected the tranquillity and stability of the countries there. At the international meeting on the question of Indo-Chinese refugees last July, Viet Nam, under the pressure of world opinion, orally undertook to control the exodus of refugees, but in fact continues to persecute and export them. We hold that the key to a solution of the Indo-Chinese refugee problem lies in a complete change by Viet Nam of its reactionary policy of cruel persecution and export of refugees. If the problem is not tackled at its source, this human tragedy will continue.
219. There is a deep-rooted cause for the deterioration of the Indo-Chinese situation to its present state. It is the result of the aggressive and expansionist policies pursued by the big and small hegemonists. As is well now, under President Ho Chi Minh's leadership, the Vietnamese people fought heroically over long years to win national liberation and defend national independence and so won praise and admiration from the people of all countries. But after the passing of President Ho Chi Minh, the Vietnamese authorities betrayed his political line step by step and feverishly pushed a policy of expansion. With Soviet backing, they committed armed invasion and military occupation of weaker neighbours in an attempt to realize their dream of regional hegemony by establishing an "Indo-Chinese Federation" totally under their thumb. Exploiting the Vietnamese authorities' ambition for expansion, the Soviet Union has used Viet Nam and Indo-China as its "strategic base" in South-East Asia and, through the instrumentality of Viet Nam, has sought to control the region and then establish an "Asian collective security system" so as to link up its strategic deployment in the Pacific with that in the Indian Ocean. People have come to realize more and more clearly that Vietnamese invasion and domination of its neighbours are by no means a local issue but an important component of Soviet attempts to establish an "Asian collective security system" in furtherance of its strategy of seeking world hegemony.
220.	It is also well known that in the course of the Vietnamese people's struggle for independence and liberation, the Chinese Government and people, sharing their weal and their woe, firmly stood on their side and gave them all-out support. The two peoples forged a deep revolutionary friendship in their long-term common struggles. But now China is regarded by the Vietnamese authorities as an enemy simply because it does not approve of their present policies of aggression and expansion. They carried out frenzied hostile anti-China activities and even committed incessant armed provocations and made intrusions into China's border areas, so that the Chinese side was compelled to make a counter-attack in self-defence. This just action of ours punctured the aggressive arrogance of the expansionists; it was also in the interest of safeguarding the peace and security of South-East Asia and the whole world.
221.	The three Indo-Chinese States are China's neighbours. The Chinese Government and people have consistently supported the people of these countries in their just struggle to win or safeguard national independence and build up their countries. The Chinese Government and people cannot but feel grave concern over the deterioration of the Indo-Chinese situation. We hold that the United Nations has an unshirkable responsibility to take effective measures, first to make Viet Nam withdraw forthwith all its troops from Kampuchea, stop its aggression and military occupation in Kampuchea and then to solve the other related questions. At the suggestion of the five countries members of the Association of South-East Asian Nations, the United Nations General Assembly is going to consider the Kampuchean situation at the current session. We firmly support the just demand of the Association and all other justice-upholding countries for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops from Kampuchean territory, for this is the key to a solution of the Indo- Chinese question. The Indo-Chinese question must be solved by the Indo-Chinese peoples themselves on the basis of respect for their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and free from all foreign interference.
222. The peaceful reunification of Korea has an important bearing on peace in east Asia and the Pacific region. The Chinese Government and people firmly support the Korean people's sacred cause of independent and peaceful reunification of their country and are firmly opposed to acts aiming at creating "two Koreas" and perpetuating the division of Korea. The resolution on promoting the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its thirtieth session should be implemented in earnest. The United States should withdraw all its troops and armaments from, and stop its military aid to, South Korea. The "United Nations Command" must be disbanded. These steps will help to maintain peace on the Korean peninsula and achieve the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea. In our view, the proposal of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on holding Korea-United States talks and replacing the armistice by a peace agreement is reasonable and should meet with a positive response. As for the discussion of the reunification of Korea through a North-South dialogue, it is purely the Korean people's own business which brooks no foreign interference. We support the three principles and the five-point programme President Kim II Sung put forward for solving the Korean question, and we support dialogue between the North and South and hope that this dialogue will yield positive results.
223.	The people of the world are now watching the Middle East situation with anxiety. The developments in the Middle East since the thirty-third session of the United Nations General Assembly show that the crux of the Middle East question still lies in the struggle between the super-Powers for oil resources and strategic areas and the expansionist policy of Israel. One super-Power sticks to its position of partiality to Israel. The other has used all opportunities to carry out infiltration and expansion, split Arab unity and undermine the stability and peace of the Middle East. The Israeli authorities remain adamant in obstructing and opposing an over-all settlement of the Middle East question. They have kept making armed attacks on southern Lebanon and have subjected the Palestinian and other Arab peoples to new war threats and provocations. There is a long way to go towards an over-all and just settlement of the Middle East question.
224.	Of late, more and more countries and world opinion have come to agree that, in order to have stability and peace in the Middle East, it is essential to respect the Arab national interests and the Palestinian people's national rights. Such is the truth and the general trend. It should be pointed out that this growing tendency is the result of the just struggle which the Palestinian and other Arab peoples have persistently carried out over long years. The ultimate realization of the national aspiration and objectives of the Arab people mainly depends on the solid unity and sustained struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. However, the United Nations should also play its due role in promoting a settlement of the Middle East question.
225.	Here, we would like to reiterate that the Chinese Government and people will unswervingly support the just struggle of the Arab and Palestinian peoples. We strongly condemn the expansion and rivalry of the super-Powers in the Middle East and are firmly opposed to the sinister super-Power attempt to sow discord among the Arab countries and Israel's peremptory attitude of obstructing an over-all settlement of the Middle East question. Occupied Arab territories must be recovered and the Palestinian people's national rights, including their right to their homeland and to establish their own State, must be realized. We sincerely hope that all parties of the Arab world will show mutual understanding, rebuild their unity and work together to speed up their victory.
226.	The people of the African countries are increasingly demanding a speedy end to the racist rule and apartheid in southern Africa. In the past year, with the support of the people of Africa and the world at large, the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania have made new progress in their struggle for liberation and have dealt increasingly heavy blows to the racist forces of South Africa and Rhodesia. In their last-ditch struggle, these racist forces are intensifying their Fascist military repression at home while launching armed attacks against neighbouring countries. They have kept playing political tricks in an attempt to maintain their racist rule in disguised forms and preserve their vested interests.
227.	In recent years, various proposals and suggestions for a negotiated settlement of the independence of Zimbabwe and Namibia have been put forward internationally. Many African States have made great efforts towards this end, and their efforts have won sympathy and support from the international community. But so far these negotiations have not made substantive progress because of the intransigence of the racist forces. Facts fully show that the racist regime of South Africa and the racist forces of Rhodesia are the fundamental obstacles to a settlement of the questions of Zimbabwe and Namibia, which is long overdue. All countries which uphold justice should exert effective pressure on the racists and give energetic support to the liberation struggle of the people in southern Africa. An early end to the racist rule in Zimbabwe and Namibia and the attainment of independence based on a genuine majority rule will help to stabilize the situation in southern Africa, exclude external meddling and interference and push forward the struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa. The Chinese Government and people will, as always, firmly support the just struggles of the peoples of Zimbabwe, Namibia and Azania. The current international situation is very favourable to the liberation struggle in southern Africa Although there may be difficulties and twists and turns on their way to progress, the people in southern Africa persisting in unity and struggle, guarding against external interference and sabotage, and supported by African and all other countries and peoples which uphold justice, will certainly foil the heinous acts of the racist forces of South Africa and Rhodesia and win complete liberation for the whole African continent.
228.	We are pleased to note that, since the tenth special session of the General Assembly, which was held on disarmament last year, the role of the United Nations and of the small and medium-sized countries have been strengthened in the struggle for genuine disarmament. This year, in the United Nations framework, there were held the first session of the Disarmament Commission, the Meeting of the Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean and a series of other meetings, at which relevant resolutions were adopted. The convening of these meetings reflected the strong dissatisfaction of the peace-loving countries with the super-Powers' arms expansion and war preparations. It also shows that the control of the disarmament machinery by a few countries is being broken up. This undoubtedly is of positive significance. Chinese delegations took an active part in these meetings and put forward documents, including the Chinese proposal on the elements of a comprehensive disarmament programme.  We have always held that all countries, whether big or small, strong or weak, and whether with or without nuclear weapons, are entitled to take part in the consideration and settlement of disarmament issues on a completely equal footing. It is no longer permissible for anybody to use the United Nations as a platform to sing the praises of certain bilateral negotiations or make the disarmament machinery a ploy at his disposal.
229.	Nuclear disarmament is a matter of great concern to everyone. We have always held that the complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear weapons are the fundamental way to nuclear disarmament and the elimination of the threat of a nuclear war. Pending this, all the nuclear countries should undertake not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear countries and nuclear-weapon-free zones. As for the way to apply concrete measures of nuclear disarmament, an important principle must be followed, as was rightly pointed out by the representatives of many countries: namely, the two super-Powers with the largest nuclear arsenals should be the first to reduce their nuclear armament.
230.	When substantial progress has been made in this regard, the other nuclear countries shall join them in reducing nuclear armaments according to reasonable ratios until finally nuclear arms are totally destroyed. We consider this principle to be fair and reasonable. However, those who cling to their nuclear superiority and are bent on seeking nuclear over-lordship are obdurately opposed to this principle. They are fervently advocating the idea of all nuclear countries "simultaneously" reducing their armaments by the same quantity and quality. This is obviously a demagogic trick. Now that the super-Powers enjoy a tremendous nuclear superiority and are in a position to fight a nuclear war at 
any time with the huge number of nuclear weapons at their disposal, would any nuclear disarmament plan make our world safer if it does not change this state of affairs? It is obvious that only a genuine nuclear disarmament will contribute to international security, and a genuine nuclear disarmament must begin with the substantial reduction of the nuclear arsenals of the superpowers. The second SALT Treaty signed by the Soviet Union and the United States neither calls for a significant numerical reduction of the strategic arms nor provides for a substantive qualitative limitation. No wonder that people have pointedly commented that the treaty has nothing in common with genuine disarmament. We hope that the Soviet Union and the United States will take practical measures to carry out genuine nuclear disarmament, as called for by many other countries.
231.	The reduction of conventional arms is another matter calling for attention. In view of the growing danger of a massive conventional war, we hold that conventional disarmament and nuclear disarmament should be given equal importance, and that the two should be carried out in conjunction.
232.	This is the last year of the United Nations Dis-armament Decade. Regrettably the objective of the Dis-armament Decade, on which many countries placed their hopes, has not been attained; on the contrary, this past decade has been one of massive arms expansion by the super-Powers. What is the reason? As rightly put by the representatives of some countries, the crucial reason is that the super-Powers have no sincere desire for disarmament. This shows that we still face arduous and complicated tasks in the field of disarmament.
233.	So far as China is concerned, we are always for genuine disarmament. We firmly support all reasonable proposals conducive to genuine disarmament and are prepared to make unremitting efforts for its realization.
234.	The steady deterioration of the international economic situation is one of the important factors making for international turbulence. Some developed countries, especially the super-Powers, have used various means to shift the consequences of their economic crises and difficulties on to the developing countries so that the latter face worsening trading terms, mounting foreign debts and great difficulties in their economic development. The energy problem is an increasing concern of most countries. Many developing countries have pointed out that the root-cause of all evils of the present international economy lies in the existing inequitable and irrational international economic order. Therefore, they strongly demand a fundamental re-structuring of the international economic system. This demand is entirely just, being in the interest of the overwhelming majority of the people of the world.
235.	Five years ago, thanks to the efforts of the developing countries, the sixth special session of the General Assembly adopted the Declaration and Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order which constitutes a basic document guiding economic negotiations and dialogues. Five years have passed, but how much progress has been made in these negotiations and dialogues? Very limited progress. They are mostly at an impasse. The reasons are clear to all. The most important reason is that the two superpowers have set up obstacles of all kinds. The obstacles have multiplied especially since the beginning of this year. At the fifth session of UNCTAD and other international economic forums, many reasonable proposals made by the developing countries on changing the outdated international economic relations have thus been stalled. This unreasonable state of affairs cannot be allowed to continue. The developing countries have come to realize more and more that, in order to achieve progress in the negotiations for the establishment of a new international economic order, they must strengthen their unity, uphold principles, persevere in struggle and energetically promote mutual economic assistance and co-operation. The Arusha Programme for Collective Self-Reliance and Framework for Negotiations,  adopted at the ministerial meeting of the Group of 77 held last February, and the economic documents adopted at the recent Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries provide clear guidelines for promoting the economic co-operation among the developing countries and strengthening their negotiating positions with the developed countries, and they give expression to the common will and desire of the third-world countries. Thanks to the efforts of the developing countries, the recent United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development registered some preliminary results. We believe that the united struggle of the third-world countries will secure continuous progress for the just cause of establishment of a new international economic order.
236.	In order to bring about effective solutions to international economic problems, the recognition of the developing countries' full rights and true equality in decision-making in international economic affairs is essential. The correct way to settle pressing economic problems is for the developed countries and the developing countries to sit together for all-round consultation, break the present impasse, explore and adopt effective measures to narrow down the gap between the rich and poor countries and establish a new international economic relationship that is equitable, rational and based on equality and mutual benefit.
237.	Having realized the importance of a constructive dialogue with the third-world countries, a number of developed countries have in their bilateral or multilateral relations adopted positive measures, such as increasing their economic and scientific technical aid and supporting the establishment of an Integrated Programme for Commodities and its Common Fund. These measures are welcome. It is in the interest of the developed countries themselves to strengthen their cooperation with third-world countries on the basis of respect for independence and sovereignty and genuine equality. Moreover, this will help advance the common cause of world peace and stability. We hope that more developed countries will understand the situation and favourably respond to the demands of the developing countries.
238.	The Chinese Government sincerely hopes that the special session of the General Assembly scheduled to be held in 1980 at the suggestion of developing countries will make an important contribution in helping the economic development of the developing countries, establishing a new international economic order and formulating a new international strategy for development. The Chinese Government will work together with the other developing countries to that end.
239.	This year witnesses the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. These days the Chinese people are warmly celebrating this festival of historic significance.
240.	The birth of New China terminated once and for all the age of imperialist enslavement and oppression of the Chinese people and ushered in a new era in the history of China. By making arduous efforts in the 30 years since then, the Chinese people have achieved great successes in all fields of national construction and aid a good foundation for future development. Our cause has enjoyed the sympathy and support of many friendly countries and the people of the world. On behalf of the Government and people of the People's Republic of China, I would like to take this opportunity to express to them our heartfelt thanks.
241.	China today is vastly different from what it used to be in the old days. However, China is still a developing country, and our industry, agriculture, science and technology are not yet developed. With a view to bringing about a complete change to this state of affairs, we are determined to turn China into a modern socialist country by the end of the century in accordance with the behests of Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou Enlai. As from this year, the focus of our work throughout China has been shifted to socialist modernization. The task before us is beyond doubt an arduous one. But we are confident that, relying on the joint efforts of the entire people, we will be able to fulfil our historical mission successfully.
242.	In international affairs, China has consistently pursued a foreign policy of peace, which is China's fundamental policy in its relations with other countries. The Chinese people are engaged in gigantic socialist construction. China is a country with a large population and a vast territory. To turn China into an advanced, modern and powerful socialist country calls for the hard struggle of several generations. We are thus required to secure a lasting peaceful international environment China has in the past 30 years made unremitting efforts to oppose the imperialist and hegemonist policies of aggression and war and to win or safeguard world peace. In the present turbulent world situation, in which the danger of war continues to grow, China will as always, work together with all other peace-loving countries and peoples of the world to oppose hegemonism and safeguard world peace.
243.	The just struggle of the people of all countries support each other and advance the cause of progress of mankind as a whole. The Chinese Government and people adhere to the principle of internationalism, support all the oppressed nations and peoples in their struggle against imperialism, colonialism and hegemonism and for liberation and social progress. We have done so in the past and will continue to do so in the future. We will always stand together with the people of all countries. A modernized China will certainly contribute to the preservation of world peace, to the furtherance of friendship and co-operation among all peoples and to the advancement of the cause of human progress.
244.	The People's Republic of China first sent its delegation to take part in the activities of the United Nations in the early 1970s. In the past eight years the Chinese delegation has worked together with the delegations of other Members to enable the United Nations to play its due role in maintaining world peace, supporting various countries in their endeavour to win or safeguard national independence, State sovereignty and territorial integrity, establishing a new international economic order and promoting international co-operation. With the advent of the 1980s, the Chinese delegation sincerely hopes that the United Nations will give full expression to the common will of the people of all countries, faithfully apply the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and play a more effective and active role in international affairs. China is prepared to work to this end together with the other countries which love peace and uphold justice.
﻿First of all, I should like, on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf, to extend to you, Sir, warmest congratulations on your unanimous election as President of the thirty-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly. With you as President, this important task falls to an experienced diplomat who, during his many years of service at New York, has rightly won everyone's respect. You can be sure of the full support of my delegation in carrying out the important tasks ahead of you.
76.	I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, whose untiring efforts on behalf of the world Organization we greatly respect.
77.	Crisis of economic growth and development, crisis in the Middle East, in southern Africa and in Indo-China—these are the subjects dominating international politics and especially politics within the United Nations. In his report, Secretary-General Waldheim speaks of "deep-seated feelings of anxiety" 
78.	In such times it is more important than ever to look beyond the day and to reflect on the fundamental current of history. That fundamental current was switched to a new course 200 years ago by the proclamation of civil liberties and by the Industrial Revolution. Up to that time oppression and poverty seemed to be the unalterable lot of the great majority of people. But then there opened up a future which gave all men the hope of one day living free from bondage and free from want. Ever since then the world—despite all crises and setbacks, despite terrible wars and inhuman crimes—has been pursuing that goal.
79.	The trend towards freedom has gathered momentum dramatically in our age: human rights became a universal idea; peoples living under colonial rule asserted their right to self-determination and achieved independence; the process of industrialization extended to the nations of the third world ; and in spite of the population explosion the per capita income of those countries grew 3.4 per cent annually in the 1960s.
80.	But people in many parts of the world are still suffering from hunger; there is still oppression; the problems of economic and social development are still unresolved; and world peace is still not secure. Indeed, today we must face new challenges: growth and development have slowed down, but the armaments spiral is spinning faster; the independence which the third world has only just achieved is threatened by new hegemonic aspirations; and violations of even the most elementary human rights show the great distance that still has to be covered before respect for the dignity of man becomes the day-to-day practice of all nations.
81.	Will mankind continue along the road to peace, to freedom from want and oppression, or will it not? The decision lies in our hands.
82.	The limits to progress that we have come up against are not insurmountable ones dictated by nature. They are social and political limits which we have imposed upon ourselves, because we still try to master the challenges of our time with the attitudes and methods of the past. A fundamental change in our way of thinking is more urgent than ever. This also holds true for international politics. Peace is no longer the exclusive concern of the big Powers, and economic stability is no longer a task for individual States alone.
83.	Safeguarding peace today requires the participation of all countries. The individual country can achieve growth only if the others achieve growth also. This new reality of global interdependence demands of us a different approach, a different kind of action.
84.	The power of fact forces nations onto the road of world-wide co-operation on the basis of equal rights. Multilateral diplomacy and international organizations are moving into the foreground. Their focal-point is the United Nations.
85.	This Organization has played an indispensable role in the peaceful process of decolonization, in defusing conflicts and in accelerating development. It has thrust the issue of mankind's future into our field of vision and opened up avenues for new dimensions in international co-operation. Its task is still to overcome the disparities in the world by means of co-operation and the reconciliation of interests.
86.	Those who want the world to achieve further progress must increase the efficiency of the United Nations. Because of new and wider-ranging activities its methods of work need to be streamlined. The mushrooming of institutions will have to be stopped.
87.	But for the United Nations to be able to fulfil its global responsibilities it will also be necessary to keep the principle of universality intact. The exclusion of Member States would affect the United Nations in its essence and deprive it of its ability to foster world-wide co-operation.
88.	Active and responsible participation in the work of the United Nations is a major element of the foreign policy of the Federal Republic of Germany. We uphold the principles of the Charter; they point the way to a future for mankind free from want and bondage.
89.	Progress requires peace. The policy of my country is a policy for peace, and the basis of that policy is our membership in the European Community and in the North Atlantic Alliance.
90.	The Irish Foreign Minister has set out the foreign policy positions of the nine States members of the European Community 
91.	Essential to the safeguarding of world peace is the consolidation of peace between East and West. East and West have different concepts and values and, consequently, different political objectives. We cannot erase this fundamental difference, but moderation must prevail. We must find ways and means of developing the co-operation necessary in this interdependent world, notwithstanding the contrasting systems.
92.	However, peace cannot be safeguarded unless there is a balance of forces. That balance is the basis of detente. The Federal Republic of Germany has from the very beginning been one of the main contributors to detente. We shall continue to make this contribution, together with our partners in the North Atlantic Alliance and in the European Community. To us, a policy of detente is a long-range policy; it is not just a fair- weather phase. This makes it predictable for all. No one has cause to doubt the unambiguity of our policy.
93.	We are constantly developing our relations with the Soviet Union and the other States signatories of the Warsaw Treaty. We are equally active in the multilateral process of detente in Europe, based on the Final Act of Helsinki.  All signatories of the Final Act should prove the sincerity of their will for detente by consistently honouring the commitments they entered into at Helsinki.
94.	Of special significance for detente is the relationship between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, since the border between East and West divides Germany. No nation can have a greater interest in detente than the German nation. Our aim is the continuous development of cooperation with the German Democratic Republic.
95.	We want to increase the possibilities for Germans on both sides to come to one another. Detente must be perceivable and tangible to the people in exercising their rights and in their daily lives. The German nation is divided against its will. But history has not spoken the last word yet. It remains the declared aim of our policy to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German people can regain their unity in free self- determination.
96.	The switches for historical development have been thrown: for the realization of the right of self- determination and for peacefully bridging divisions, not deepening and perpetuating them.
97.	The symbol of detente in Europe is the city which in the years of the cold war was so often the scene of perilous tensions which affected the whole world: Berlin. The 1971 Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin has been a decisive feature in reducing those tensions. Its strict observance and full application remain the first essential for the progress of detente.
98.	Detente is indivisible. It must also prove itself in the East's and the West's relations with the nations of the third world. The East-West conflict must be kept out of the third world. The right of the developing countries to determine their future in their own way must be respected.
99.	The Federal Republic of Germany is opposed to any form of hegemony—whether it be military, political, economic or ideological. We do not want to force our form of government or social order on anyone. Rather, we want a world order in which all nations choose their way of life in free self-determination. A policy of partnership based on equal rights is the policy for the future.
100.	The movement of the non-aligned countries is of great importance to them in asserting their independence and their right of self-determination and hence in securing global stability. That movement will, however, be able to fulfil its task only if, rather than looking back, it recognizes the dangers which threaten independence and non-alignment today.
101. In his speech at the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Havana early this month, President Nyerere of the United Republic of Tanzania said:
' 'The non-aligned movement must remain itself—a group of countries which are proudly independent, which stand for justice and equality between men and between nations, and which refuse to ally themselves with any power bloc or major world Power."
If the movement of non-aligned countries adheres to that principle it will remain a powerful force for peace, stability and progress in the world. Anyone who wants to make that movement the so-called natural ally of the socialist camp is trying to lead it into a new dependence, to paralyse it and ultimately to deprive it of the basis for its actions.
102.	Respect for the right of self-determination of nations also means respect for their cultural identity, respect for the right of every nation to go its own way. We agree with the nations of the third world that do not see modernization as the blind adoption of foreign models but as the expression of their own character in the conditions of our time.
103.	Mankind needs diversity of cultures if its creative energies are not to peter out. We break a lance for the free exchange of ideas and information based on mutual respect and tolerance. We must promote this exchange and at the same time develop the ability of the third world to play an equal part in it.
104.	To be able to safeguard peace one has to settle conflicts by negotiation and the fair reconciliation of interests. I wish to single out the three conflicts which feature prominently in the General Assembly debates: those in the Middle East, southern Africa and IndoChina.
105.	In spite of all the efforts that have been made, peace has still not been achieved in the Middle East. The treaty between Egypt and Israel  has aroused hopes of a comprehensive peace settlement after 30 years of seemingly insurmountable hostility; but we know that there is still a hard road ahead and that many serious obstacles have to be cleared away before Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) can be implemented comprehensively and globally.
106.	The tragic situation in Lebanon also remains a source of great concern. The efforts by the constitutional authorities in Lebanon to preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their country deserve the support of us all.
107.	The Middle East is a region which has always been closely linked with Europe in many fields. Peace in that region is our peace, and vice versa. Together with our partners in the European Community, we have on several occasions, especially in the statement by the European Council on 29 June 1977, set out the principles for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The Irish Foreign Minister explained and reaffirmed those principles on behalf of the nine countries the day before yesterday.
108.	The nations of the world are becoming increasingly aware that without the inclusion of the Palestinian people in a comprehensive settlement there will be no lasting peace in the region.
109.	In the view of the Federal Republic of Germany, Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries, like the other States in the region, is unassailable. The recognition of this right, as well as of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination, by all concerned is necessary for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace settlement. We called for the realization of the right of self-determination for the Palestinian people as early as 1974 during the debate on the question of Palestine in this forum.
110.	In southern Africa, only the removal of the remnants of colonialism and apartheid can bring peace to Namibia, Zimbabwe and the Republic of South Africa.
111.	In Namibia and Zimbabwe, a new approach is being made to the problem of ensuring a peaceful transition to independence. We are actively involved in the Namibia initiative of the five Western States.
112.	We welcome the new British initiatives to find a solution to the Zimbabwe problem with the agreement of all concerned; and we hope that the efforts of all participants in the London negotiations will at long last give the people of Zimbabwe the peace they long for.
113.	These efforts should not be disrupted by any side. The sooner the Republic of South Africa decides to take the necessary steps for the total elimination of all racial barriers the sooner will it be possible to enable people of all colours to live together in peace.
114.	The situation in lndo-China is a threat to peace and stability in South East Asia; it can become a threat to world peace.
115.	In Cambodia, peace can be restored only on the basis of that country's independence. That nation, which has undergone such a terrible test, needs a Government which expresses its will and which is recognized by all countries in the region. Neither the murderous Pol Pot regime nor the Heng Samrin regime installed by foreign forces meets this requirement. But the starving people of Cambodia cannot wait until a political solution has been found. They need help at once. The parties to the conflict must make it possible for that help to reach the people in all parts of Cambodia. No more time should be lost, since it is literally a question of a nation's survival.
116.	The misery of the refugees from Viet Nam poses yet another humanitarian challenge. Hundreds of thousands of desperate people have left their homeland. "Boat people" has become a new, horrifying phrase in the international vocabulary. The Federal Republic of Germany is doing all it can to help the Vietnamese refugees. Although we are a densely populated country, we are offering many of them a new home. We also support the programmes introduced by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for the benefit of the refugees in South-East Asia. But, here again, it is necessary—over and above the humanitarian aid—to get to the root of the problem. The freedom to leave one's own country is a human right; but it is equally a human right to be allowed to stay in one's native country.
117.	Starvation and distress still prevail in many parts of the globe, but the nations of the world are expending resources in excess of $400 billion a year for military purposes. The community of nations is called upon to make every effort to stop the armament spiral. The arms build-up is a threat to peace, it hampers development and it impairs the ability to provide development aid.
118.	The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the fact that, with the resolutions adopted at the tenth special session of the General Assembly in 1978, the United Nations has intensified its efforts to achieve disarmament. In a world in which hegemonic aspirations remain unchecked, every country must inevitably be at pains to maintain its security. The Western Alliance is resolved to do so, but it is doing no more than is necessary for the defence of its members. The Federal Republic of Germany is not a nuclear-weapon State, nor does it want to be. Nobody should underestimate the security interests of others.
119.	It is therefore essential for the safeguarding of world peace that nations should seek security, not in military supremacy, but in balance. Supremacy creates insecurity. Together with our partners in the Western defence alliance, we want to achieve such a balance, a balance at a lower level of armaments. That is the object of the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions in Europe. Their purpose is to establish an approximate parity of ground forces on both sides in central Europe.
120.	The participants in the negotiations in Vienna should now consider what agreements will be possible in the foreseeable future on the basis of reliable data. The agreement reached as a result of the second round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] likewise derives from the concept of parity. The Federal Republic of Germany welcomes that agreement and hopes that it will soon enter into force. It is a major contribution to stability. It is, moreover, an important prerequisite for progress in other areas of arms control and disarmament. It is also of major significance for the progress of detente.
121.	In the context of the third round of SALT, there will also have to be negotiations on strategic medium- range ballistic missiles in Europe. Arms control and disarmament presuppose mutual trust. In Europe, the Final Act of Helsinki envisages confidence-building measures. One of the main tasks of the follow-up conference to be held in Madrid in 1980 must be to consolidate and further develop such measures. This is another reason why the Federal Republic of Germany considers that that conference should take place at the political level.
122.	We support the initiative of France for a conference on disarmament throughout Europe, which in the initial phase would concentrate on the conclusion of agreements to strengthen confidence.
123.	Confidence-building measures could also make for greater stability in other regions and make it easier to predict military and political conduct. We have, therefore, together with other countries, submitted a working paper entitled "Elements of a comprehensive programme of disarmament," which is designed to generate incentives for such measures. We hope that this session of the General Assembly will achieve further progress on the basis of that resolution.
124.	This year three major conferences have taken place in the context of the North-South dialogue: the fifth session of UNCTAD, the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, and the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development . These conferences have brought progress and opened up new areas for the continuing negotiations.
125.	It is, however, evident that the two sides have so far not really taken full advantage of the opportunity afforded by the North-South dialogue. The developing countries have proposed a global dialogue in the United Nations.
126.	We shall do everything in our power to ensure that this dialogue is structured in such a way that concrete results can be achieved within the foreseeable future.
127.	All concerned must negotiate in a new spirit and at long last recognize that in the North-South dialogue it is not a case of one side gaining and the other losing.
128.	Our common aim is to make accelerated progress in the developing countries and stable growth in the industrial countries possible again. But to achieve this, the industrial and the developing countries will jointly have to define which policy each side should pursue in order to reach this goal.
129.	A key issue is energy. The United States Secretary of State has rightly emphasized this. The challenge confronting us all is how to lead the world smoothly from the age of oil into an era of renewable sources of energy. This can only be achieved through the closest possible co-operation in a spirit of common responsibility. The Federal Republic of Germany, therefore, supports the idea of a world-wide, long-term energy dialogue.
130.	The oil-importing developing countries, whose oil requirements grow much more rapidly than those of the industrial countries, have the biggest problems. They must devote all their efforts to the development of their own sources of energy. The Federal Republic of Germany will increase its assistance to that end. We attach great importance to the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy scheduled for 1981.
131.	In order to accelerate development, the exports of the developing countries must be increased. The industrial countries will therefore have to resist the pressure of protectionist forces and keep their markets open for increasing exports, especially of manufactures, from the developing countries. This also applies to the Communist industrial countries. Up to now these countries have absorbed less than 3 percent of the exports of the third world, while the industrial democracies account for nearly 75 per cent.
132.	The Federal Republic of Germany advocates better access to markets. It is committed to the aim of restructuring the traditional patterns of trade within which the developing countries primarily supply commodities and the industrial countries supply manufactures,
133.	Accelerated development requires an increase in the transfer of capital. In the case of developing countries with low incomes, it will above all be necessary to increase official aid. The Federal Republic of Germany will in the three years ahead increase the growth rate of its aid twice as fast as that of the national budget.
134.	The main concern of middle-income developing countries is the transfer of private capital. These countries already meet well over two thirds of their external financial requirements from private sources. Direct private investment features prominently in private capital transfers. In order to promote such investment, two conditions will have to be fulfilled: the developing countries must have the assurance that such investment will dovetail organically with their development and that it will not be associated with any attempts to gain political influence. The investors, on the other hand, need legal security.
135.	Of major significance is the need to secure a fair balance of interests in the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea which will permit us to exploit the great economic possibilities of the oceans for development and growth. This concerns the utilization of two thirds of the earth's surface. A settlement giving fair consideration to all interests is above all necessary for sea-bed mining. It must give all States and enterprises access to the raw material deposits on the ocean floor and, at the same time, establish legal security without which the necessary long-term and large- scale investment will not be possible.
136.	However essential it may be that the industrial and the developing countries establish on their joint responsibility the global economic conditions for faster development and stable growth, we must all remain aware that this does not in any way diminish the importance of national economic and development policies. The industrial countries must bring inflation under control. They must conserve energy. They must economize on all raw materials and prevent waste. And they must master the structural change ensuing from the world economy and technological progress. All this requires painful adjustment processes, and we are aware of that.
137.	Adjustments will also have to be made by the countries of the third world. New development strategies are necessary so that the masses of the poor can be brought into the development process. In the developing countries, too, it is necessary to prevent a division of the economy and society into a modern, prospering sector and a traditionally stagnating sector. It is a question of creating development strategies designed to achieve growth not merely through capital-intensive investment, but also, and to a far greater extent than hitherto, by mobilizing human labour. The task is to give the millions of underemployed and unemployed the ability and the chance to use their energies for productive employment and self-fulfilment.
138.	Such a strategy requires in most developing countries the development of an efficient agriculture. A rapidly growing agriculture will in this process, owing to the demand for fertilizer, agricultural machinery and mass-produced consumer goods, become at the same time a driving force of industrialization.
139.	Instead of industrial enclaves there must be industrialization that forms an integral part of the economy of each of the developing countries concerned and at the same time helps those countries to improve their export capability on a broad basis.
140.	Only the development of agriculture can avert the threatening food crisis in the third-world countries and free them from the need to import food. This is the only way in which the unemployment problem can be kept within tolerable limits. Finally, only a strategy that links growth and social justice can prevent development from slipping into social unrest and internal chaos.
141.	One acute problem is the alarming increase in the number of executions in the world, many of them with a political background. The death penalty should be limited and ultimately abolished, as it was in my own country over 30 years ago, after the bitter experience of history. The next session of the General Assembly should debate the death penalty as a matter of priority.
142.	Thirty years ago the General Assembly proclaimed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as the common standard of achievement for all nations. That standard, more than any other, indicates how distant our goal remains. Human rights have still not been realized world-wide—neither the civil and political rights nor the social, economic and cultural rights.
143.	In the United Nations we have created procedures and institutions with the help of which we can actively promote the realization of human rights. These procedures are still weak. None the less, combined with the moral pressure of world opinion, they have already induced many countries to bring about improvements.
144.	We must strengthen and develop the institutions of the United Nations for the protection of human rights. Although many misgivings are still expressed about the establishment of a United Nations court of human rights, I am convinced that in the long run it will be generally realized that such a court would be meant solely to safeguard human rights and would not be directed against any country.
145.	International terrorism is a challenge to us all. Only by joint action shall we be able to overcome it.
146.	Effective measures against the taking of hostages are among the indispensable instruments for the protection of human rights. It was this consideration that prompted me three years ago to propose to the Assembly a convention against the taking of hostages.  That proposal met with support from the General Assembly. We are now all gratified that the Ad Hoc Committee appointed to elaborate a convention has completed its draft. I hope that this session of the General Assembly will adopt it.
147.	The future of the world has its beginning in man's consciousness, a consciousness that is today imbued with belief in the inalienable rights of the individual and the right of nations to self-determination. The will of the individual and the will of nations to assert those rights are the prime movers of our time. It is not possible to halt them, not even by force. In this certainty, the aim must be to work with determination and by peaceful means for the world-wide assertion of human rights and the right of self-determination.
148.	All men must be enabled to live in peace, free from fear, free from hunger, and free from want.﻿The sole aim of our General Assembly is to serve peace, and yet session after session here we note the consequences of disaster. To us, as leaders, one year means a great deal of diplomatic activity. But for some peoples one year means a great deal of suffering. There are 1 million refugees and 250,000 victims of war, and some 15 of our Member States are embroiled in armed conflicts. 
86.	However, serious and distressing though these conflicts may be none of them has so far jeopardized the global peace that the world has known since 1945. It is an inadequate peace to be sure, but it is peace just the same. Without it, all efforts towards progress would be destroyed in the general calamity. This peace is not based on terror and immobility. Despite its shortcomings and its failures, our world has made more progress during the final third of this century than it did during the three preceding centuries. I shall take just three examples. The old nations of Europe have been able to forget their age-old conflicts and to join together in a process of reconciliation; that vast country China, which had so long been kept aside, has taken its rightful place once more in the community of nations; and, lastly, more than 100 States have become independent and are now able to make their voices heard in this forum, which has truly become a world forum.
87.	These examples prove mankind's ability to change. They are evidence of the fact that catastrophes are not inevitable as long as human will is exerted.
88.	The community of nations has been able to demonstrate its unanimity on one point, a negative point to be sure but one that will henceforth be a fact of history, I am referring to the avoidance of a world war for more than 30 years. Why not go even further now, and express that unanimity in a positive manner by uniting our efforts against the other threats to peace?
89.	Thirty years without a general war: we have shown that that is possible. Thirty, years to ensure the survival of humanity: that is the very concrete problem that faces us, because between now and the year 2000 there will be another 2 billion human beings to feed — 2 billion. In 1925, that was the entire world population.
90.	If a world divided into antagonistic blocs quarrels over limited resources instead of uniting to develop them, living in interdependence will pose a threat. Instead, the world should organize its interdependence into solidarity so as to enable it to achieve greater security and genuine organization, which are the three components of true peace.
91.	That is why I shall discuss these three points in turn: first, a world of greater solidarity, one that will succeed in settling for the benefit of everyone the two problems on which the future of each of our peoples depends—poverty and energy; secondly, a more secure world that will undertake disarmament; and, thirdly, a better organized and a more human world, in which, alongside an Organization such as ours, whose role can only grow, the new kinds of regional solidarity will become organized.
92.	Concerning a world of greater solidarity, without for one moment forgetting the moral duty that gives solidarity its full significance, I intend to show that solidarity is also essential for the survival of mankind, for in fact we shall survive only if we resolve two problems—poverty and energy. Poverty is the failure of progress and hence the failure of us all. Energy is the key to progress and therefore an imperative common to us all.
93.	It is difficult to describe the scourge of poverty without lapsing into abstract figures and the demagoguery of sentimental platitudes. And yet we have to acknowledge an obvious fact that our minds reject: poverty is not on the decline. Development has succeeded in keeping it in check, but not in reducing it. The poorest regions are becoming poorer still. A half billion souls are going hungry. At least a half billion can neither read nor write. More than 1 billion have access neither to drinkable water nor to basic medical care. Poverty has not relinquished its hold. It scoffs at the modern world. It is no longer the humble, silent poverty that once escorted mankind throughout its history and all over the globe. It has borrowed from the modern world its violence, its clamour and its great surges. The poverty of shanty towns, the poverty of homeless people, the poverty of frustration that is at least as great as hunger—that is the face of the world, and we must not avert our eyes from it.
94.	We must, on the contrary, confront this poverty, and together we must all declare war on it on several fronts. Concerning the food front, a major rural development effort at the national and international levels must take up where the 'green revolution'' of the 1960s left off so as to improve the growth rate of agricultural production, especially in low-income countries in Asia and Africa. In the field of unemployment, a massive drive to create productive jobs—550 million between now and the year 2000, according to the World Bank, is crucial to the battle against poverty. In the matter of financing, all countries have a stake in preventing the constraints of financing from halting the progress happily already under way towards world economic integration. Now, the debts of the developing countries have more than doubled since 1974 and at this point debt-servicing costs are increasing faster than the debts themselves. France will therefore support measures designed to augment the financing capacities of the IMF regarding balance-of-payments adjustments, in the hope that the action taken will be specifically directed to the needs of the most impoverished countries. France also advocates greater efforts on behalf of those countries in the area of public development aid. I should like to recall that France has cancelled the debts owed to it by some countries.
95.	All countries should contribute to this aid— which, by the way, does not exempt us from giving our help to other developing countries—in particular by opening their borders to manufactured products from the most deprived countries; by allowing them access to natural resources, especially those from the sea; and, lastly, by increasing the volume of multilateral aid. France for its part has decided to double its contribution to UNDP between now and 1981, with an increase of more than 50 percent this year.
96.	As to energy, the anguish of tomorrow's world will arise from the sudden changes which we now see threatening us: the population explosion and the scarcity of resources, which would jeopardize growth and therefore the increase needed in employment. There will be neither growth nor new jobs without more energy, even if the advancement of technology and organization were to make growth possible at a rate faster than that of the increase in energy needs.
97.	True, and we all know this full well, countries in the different categories do not have the same interests or make the same analyses of this energy problem. To solve it, let us begin by understanding one another and accepting the validity of our respective concerns. 
98.	The producer countries are legitimately concerned with preparing for their future development and therefore with securing the foundations of their future growth in a prosperous economic climate by managing carefully their non-renewable resources and maintaining the value of their assets.
99.	The industrialized countries, for whom oil is still a basic resource, want the volume and price of supplies to remain stable, so that they can guarantee the growth, which, whatever happens, is necessary to the world economic balance.
100.	The developing countries that do not produce oil, and especially the most impoverished ones, are in a paradoxical position: they feel the effects of tensions in the oil market more severely than others, even though the place they occupy in that market is small. Nevertheless, their economies are more seriously affected by increases in oil prices.
101.	We must, I affirm, understand each other and move closer to each other's positions. There is nothing impossible about the quest for coherence among the policies of the three categories of country. Only that quest can help us to pass from the interdependence to which we are subject, to an organized solidarity.
102.	Let me say unequivocally that it is up to the industrialized countries to take the initiative in instituting stricter policies, because it is they who are the largest consumers. The decisions taken in Tokyo last June were a major turning-point. I emphasize that they were based on an initiative of the European Economic Community, which thereby in the circumstances demonstrated its sense of economic responsibility at the world level. The pledges made there to set ceilings on oil imports are significant in two important ways.
103.	On the one hand, they would break the link be-tween the pursuit of economic growth by the industrialized countries and the growth of oil imports. Sustained but sober growth on the part of the industrialized countries will henceforth be fuelled by energy sources other than oil.
104.	On the other hand, these pledges indicate that the oil energy so indispensable to the developing countries will be available for their use.
105.	France, for its part, has committed itself to a policy of conservation of energy and development of new energy sources that will enable it, I assure you; to achieve the goals it has set itself.
106.	I am confident that the oil-producing countries recognize the importance of this major change. Once the industrialized countries actually set out on the path of controlling their energy imports, the producer countries will be able to take into consideration the effects which their decisions have on the world economy, as they manage their resources. Any breakdown in supply, any reassessment of the price levels reached to date, would have disastrous consequences for the world economy.
107.	But oil is not solely the concern of the oil- producing and industrialized countries. In the interests of solidarity, the new energy needs of the developing countries must be met. To that end, a world programme of investment is indispensable. France supports the World Bank's plans in that regard, but feels that they should be further expanded. France is already making a substantial effort to provide technical assistance in regard to oil.
108.	Finally, we must work together more closely to ensure that the decisions made by the different parties are consistent. The 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy will assuredly bring progress in an area as yet largely unexplored, but one that is of capital importance for the future.
109.	We must do more. In this regard, France has taken note with interest of the proposal made by the Group of 77 to start new, comprehensive talks within the framework of the United Nations.
110.	Concerning a world of greater solidarity, and, at the same time, a more secure world, let us not deceive ourselves. To reduce the poverty of the poorest and to overcome the energy crisis, a conceited effort is needed. This will not be readily agreed to and will not produce results except in a climate of security and trust. When suspicion, mistrust and fear reign, we immediately see hallowed self-interests placed first, before all other considerations. When armed conflicts break out, the work of several years is reduced to nothing in a few days.
111.	We shall build a world of greater solidarity only if we work together to make it more secure.
112.	 That is why France sets such great value on the progress of detente and has made it one of the major and permanent lines of its policy. It welcomes, in this respect, the favourable development of its relations with the Soviet Union and with the other socialist countries in Europe, especially Poland.
113.	In Europe, detente has not only made it possible to defuse the most visible causes of confrontation. It has paved the way for dialogue and co-operation. It has made, and is continuing to make, an essential contribution to world peace.
114.	I mention the progress of detente, not to encourage complacency and passiveness, but rather to urge new efforts to expand detente and make its effects felt more deeply. Detente has probably been a contributing factor in containing flash-points all over the world, although it has not yet succeeded in dousing them completely. It has certainly put a brake on the excessive Build-up of arms, although it has not stopped it altogether.
115.	It is time for us to attack these two problems. The results achieved give us the means; they therefore also show us our duty.
116.	A review of the situations of crisis and tension that persist in the world shows that these fall into two categories. Some situations are linked to the process of decolonization, of which they are an anachronistic survival. This is the case with Namibia and Rhodesia. Others result from military faits accomplis and should 
be neither endorsed by the peoples concerned nor recognized by the international community. I refer to the Middle East and to South-East Asia. However, in all these instances, the crisis situation can be attributed to the fact that deeply rooted realities are being ignored or misperceived; that needed changes—needed because they are natural and legitimate—are being opposed or blocked; and that in some quarters the mistaken conviction that 'might is right" still persists.
117.	In Namibia as in Rhodesia, the deep-seated reality is the legitimate aspiration of the peoples involved to accede to genuine and internationally recognized independence. In this respect, hopeful signs are beginning to emerge. It is up to us to encourage them. For this reason, France has welcomed the agreement reached at the Meeting of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Lusaka in August and places its hopes in the success of the talks that have opened in London under the aegis of the United Kingdom Government. For this reason also, in the case of Namibia France is participating actively—together with four other States and in close liaison with the Secretary- General of our Organization—in the five-Power initiative  with a view to achieving a solution for that territory that is consistent with the principles of our Charter.
118.	Turning to the Middle East, I come to a conflict that is quite different. It is as old as our Organization. Thirty years have elapsed, and with them how many hopes have gone unfulfilled and how many paths have been explored in vain in an effort to find the key to peace.
119.	My country makes no claim here to define a new framework for negotiation or to devise, in the wake of so many others, some new procedural skill. That is not where the problem lies. There has been too much passion and too much suffering for it to be possible to hope to be able to build peace on ambiguities.
120.	Here again, what is needed is recognition of the realities instead of escape from them, tackling the problems instead of evading them.
121.	The realities in this case are: the right of the Arab States to recover their territorial integrity; the right of the Palestinian people to a homeland; and the right of all the States in the area, the Arab States as well as the State of Israel, to live in peace within secure, recognized and guaranteed boundaries.
122.	These three realities form a whole. They cannot be dissociated without being forsworn; they are valid for all the parties concerned, including—as the nine countries members of the European Economic Com-munity have just stressed—the PLO.
123.	This presupposes that both sides at last make the effort to look the facts in the face; these two great peoples, the people of Israel and the Palestinian people, will not be able to postpone indefinitely the moment when they recognize one another. It will be necessary to enlarge the dialogue, to cease insisting on exclusive rights; all the protagonists must agree to talk to each other. Certain indications lead us to hope that the time
is approaching. France is following the situation attentively and will make every effort to see these signs multiplied, because they point towards the only real path of peace.
124.	In speaking of peace in this area, I also have in mind Lebanon, which has so many ties to my own country. In recent months, Lebanon has been the object of attacks whose repetitive and excessive nature prompted the Security Council to convene. France condemns these attacks that strike at the unity and independence, as well as the territorial integrity, of Lebanon, They affect the Force sent by the United Nations to the southern part of the country; they put in jeopardy the very existence of one of our Organization's Member States.
125.	Lastly, South-East Asia and, more specifically, the situation in Cambodia. Last year, at this very rostrum my predecessor stressed the grave dangers of the situation. The events of the past 12 months have unfortunately confirmed our fears.
126.	The oppression and bloodshed of an inhuman regime have been superseded by the tragedy of a foreign invasion. The Indo-Chinese peninsula has once again been thrust into a state of war.
127.	My Government asked at the time, together with others, for the withdrawal of the forces to the international boundaries they had crossed; I note that the withdrawal has not been general.
128.	France cannot acquiesce in Cambodia's becoming a prize in and an arena for a confrontation that dwarfs it and that is in fact utterly alien to it. Cambodia has the right, like any other State, to see its independence and integrity respected. Its people, whose very existence is threatened even as I speak, has the right to live and to determine its destiny as a sovereign nation in peace and friendship with all its neighbours by acquiring a Government representative of the different political tendencies in the country. The exercise of its rights is indispensable to the reconstruction of this ravaged country and to the safeguarding of peace in the region. It is not compatible with the presence of a foreign army on its soil.
129.	Flash-points ignite violence in the world, but it is the incredible build-up of arms that could at any moment transform a local explosion into one of cataclysmic proportions. If we want our world to be more secure, it is not enough to defuse the causes of violence. We still have to control the inordinate quantity of instruments of violence; in other words, we must aim for genuine disarmament.
130.	All of us here know how arduous the task is, and we are familiar with the consistent way in which technological progress and the complicated mesh of mistrust can thwart the aspirations of peoples and the intentions of Governments.
131.	France for its part is too old a nation to imagine that disarmament is easy. But it believes too much in the future of humanity to think disarmament is impossible. Rejecting illusion, which is misleading, and resignation, which leads to despair, France is convinced that concrete progress can be made, providing that these three conditions are fulfilled: clarity and realism in objectives; continuity in action; imagination in initiatives.
132.	The President of the French Republic sought to meet the first of these conditions when he came here last year to set forth the main lines of the new approach France is proposing. 
133.	First, there is the right of each State to security. This right is the corollary, in disarmament terms, of what is, in the context of detente, the right of each State in sovereignty to decide on its internal options and its international alliances.
134.	Secondly, there is the idea that disarmament is first and foremost a universal problem: no State, no group of States, may arrogate to itself the right to determine the rules unilaterally and for all. The entire international community must share in the implementation, benefits and controls of disarmament.
135.	Finally, there is the need to bear in mind what I will call the "geography of security". The regional level would in fact be the easiest level at which to make concrete progress in this area.
136.	Once these principles have been accepted, they still must be put into practice, and this is where continuity of action enters the picture.
137.	Since the tenth special session was held in the spring of 1978, some progress has been made. We must not, however, relax our efforts.
138.	The new Committee on Disarmament, which together with others we helped to establish, has begun its work. The results of the first session show that broader and more equitable participation aid the progress of the discussion where bilateral debates might lead the talks to become bogged down. At this point we should take care not to disappoint the expectations that have been expressed. France for its part will work actively in the Committee in the hope of reaching concrete results at the next session, particularly in the area of chemical weapons.
139.	The United States and the Soviet Union have signed the second SALT agreement.  France is well aware of the importance of the step that has recently been taken. It considers the agreement to be balanced as a whole and hopes that it will enter into force soon. The fact remains that even with this agreement we are still only at the preface to true disarmament. The level of nuclear weapons held by the two signatory Powers is not only high now, it is to go still higher in the next few years. The future negotiations, for which the second round of SALT has paved the way, will, I hope, bring this level down very substantially. As for France, it would take appropriate action on the basis of such reductions only if there were a change in the extent of the disparity persisting between those two arsenals and its own arsenal, which France keeps at its disposal to ensure the security and credibility of its deterrent.
140.	In Europe, finally, France has proposed the convening of a conference on disarmament. By linking confidence-building measures and effective disarmament, by making a distinction between arms that serve deterrence and security and those that might fuel threats and intimidation, by defining a cohesive and significant geographical framework, its proposal aims to take into account the specific facts of Europe's situation. The positive reactions that have been forthcoming from various quarters have strengthened our conviction that this approach corresponds both to a real need and to a real possibility, thus encouraging us to proceed.
141.	In a field as difficult as that of disarmament, determination needs the help of imagination.
142.	With a view to stimulating reflection and imagination, we proposed the founding of an international disarmament institute. At the tenth special session, we also advocated that the most modern technology be made available to the international community by proposing the establishment of an international satellite monitoring agency. In both cases, we would be mobilizing science and scientists for the cause of disarmament.
143.	To this same end I should like to announce today that France is proposing to organize an international symposium in Paris on the theme 'Science for disarmament' This symposium, which could serve as a kind of preface to the work of the institute, would seek to involve the scientific community more closely with disarmament by demanding an intellectual and moral contribution from it.
144.	A world of greater solidarity, a more secure world, but also a more organized world is what we seek.
145.	The world we live in, if we reflect upon it, has two essential characteristics: diversity and disparity. There is diversity in political regimes, philosophical and religious creeds and national traditions and cultures. The disparities lie in power, wealth and access to knowledge.
146.	Diversity brings people closer together because it encourages them to participate in dialogues and ex-changes. Disparities separate them, on the contrary, because they divide people and set them one against the other.
147.	How can we act to preserve the former and to eliminate the latter?
148.	Allow me, as a European, to draw upon my experience. Thirty years ago the nations of Europe were emerging from world conflict, drained and in ruins. Where they had once been among the most powerful and wealthy of nations, now they did not even have the resources needed to set themselves back on their feet.
149.	Thirty years have gone by. Now those same nations have regained their place in the world thanks to the aid they received, thanks to their own efforts, but thanks also to the close co-operation they forged among themselves. Without relinquishing their identities or compromising their independence, they have formed a Community which, by the very fact that it exists and that it has demonstrated its ability to act, today constitutes an essential element in international equilibrium.
150.	There may have been fear in some quarters that the Europe of six, and later nine, countries—and undoubtedly tomorrow of twelve—by organizing itself, would become inward-looking. The experience of what is now more than 20 years has shown the opposite: among groups of comparable size, the European Community is without a doubt the most open to the world. This applies equally to its trade, to its part in aid for development and to its contribution to solving major world problems. Nor is it an accident that detente, throughout the entire European continent, has advanced at the same pace as has the organization of Western Europe.
151.	By increasing their co-operation and strengthening their cohesion, the countries of Europe have not created a bloc. Quite the contrary; they have introduced a new type of regional grouping. Because this co-operation is founded on the natural affinities of history, geography, culture and human values, it protects diversity and helps to attenuate disparities.
152.	The case of Europe is significant, it seems to me, but it is not an isolated case and is becoming less and less unique. Everywhere we are witnessing the advance of regional solidarity. There is growing vitality at the level of continents and subcontinents in geographically oriented organizations such as the Organization of American States, the OAU, the Andean Group and the Association of South-East Asian Nations. The phenomenon is too widespread for it not to be a response to a universally felt need. In my opinion, it reflects an aspiration on the part of each of our nations to reconcile two fundamental requirements—the need to assert themselves without becoming isolated and the need to participate without becoming subservient.
153.	The pluralistic, multipolar world that this aspiration heralds will be different from the world of yesterday—profoundly so. The conviction of France is that it will be a better world. So long as there are only two camps, the gains of one will inevitably appear to be the losses of the other. The logic of their relationships is confrontation—the only possible compromise is the status quo, in other words, immobility. In contrast to this, the multiplication of poles allows for more flexibility in the general equilibrium. It encourages necessary changes and makes it easier to resolve local conflicts. The positive role played by the Organization of American States in the evolution of events in Nicaragua and the decisive assistance provided by the African States in achieving a peaceful solution of the problem of Chad are telling examples.
154.	The recent events in central Africa provide a new and clear illustration of this. It was the Africans themselves who, by the decisions made at the Kigali conference, substantiated and condemned the atrocities perpetrated. It was the former President of the Central African Republic, the Prime Minister in office and other leaders who took the initiative of liberating their country. France, which had suspended its aid as soon as the Committee of African Magistrates presented its conclusions, gave an affirmative response to the request made of it on the spot by the new authorities. Thus it was possible to eliminate a tyrannical rule without bloodshed.
155.	There need be no fear that the strengthening of these regional organizations is likely to infringe on either the individual identities of national sovereignties to which we are attached or the universal nature of the international community. Quite the opposite; it cannot fail to protect the one and to enrich the other.
156.	This can be seen quite clearly, even here within our Organization. The existence of regional groupings has never prevented us from examining the great questions of our time. Indeed, it has made such examination easier and more productive.
157.	It is indeed characteristic of regional organizations that there is no better way of affirming their identity than through dialogue and co-operation,
158.	It is in order to take into account this new dimension of today's world that France has renewed its interest in the Latin American continent and, on this subject, I should like to recall the two visits made by Mr. Giscard d'Estaing to Brazil and to Mexico respectively. It was with this same idea in mind, too, that the French Head of State put forward the concept of a "trialogue" between Europe, Africa and the Arab countries. By giving substance to this project, these three groups will not only underline the obvious complementaries that unite them; they will also place them at the service of progress and peace. They will help to construct the foundations of a more balanced, more open world, where the old temptations of hegemony will have made way for the call to solidarity.
159.	The world of greater solidarity, security and organization that France hopes to see and which it is working to bring into being will have meaning only if it serves mankind, its dignity and its rights.
160.	Owing to the universality of our Organization and to the legitimacy conferred upon it by the membership of almost all nations, it has in this respect a crucial role to play. Our Organization is the expression of the universal conscience and, at the same time, of the diversity of cultures. More than ever, the Charter is the indispensable reference that will allow us to live together better and to render more effective and more widespread the dignity of man that it proclaims and that is defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The dignity of man must be expressed through the equality of all. Together with the entire international community, we condemn regimes that are founded on racial discrimination, such as apartheid.
161.	The United Nations is a decisive safeguard for the peace of the world and for the dignity of the individual. It has shown this in a great many situations, whether by recalling the principles and spelling out the law or through its actions and calls for the assistance of States. In the tragedy of the South-East Asian refugees, for example, our Organization, by acting in accordance with its peaceful and humanitarian purpose, has fulfilled its unique role. France, as is well known, has given the Organization its full assistance. As a country of asylum and refuge, it has opened its doors wide to those who have been exiled and will continue to receive all those to whom it is able to offer a future commensurate with their hopes.
162.	The efforts of our Organization and of States to respond to urgent and desperate situations should not, however, make us forget the silent hope of millions of individuals imprisoned by poverty. No man, no leader, can ever rest easy so long as suffering, fear and contempt for the law reign on this earth. This is one battle that we should all wage together, regardless of our differences, for it is the battle for peace on earth.﻿This is the first time that I have had the honour of addressing the United Nations. But no one who has lived through the last 34 years can fail to have been conscious of the United Nations or to be aware of what it has achieved and of what it has yet to achieve.
219.	There were 51 founder Members of the United Nations. Now there are 152 Member States. Last week, we welcomed Saint Lucia, formerly a British Territory, as the one hundred and fifty-second Member. I congratulate the Government and people of Saint Lucia on their achievement of full independence. This near- tripling of the membership is largely due to the dissolution of the great colonial empires. The United Kingdom worked with, and not against, that trend. This month, we in my country have mourned the death of Lord Mountbatten, who was a pioneer of decolonization. Since last year's General Assembly, besides Saint Lucia, the Republic of Kiribati has achieved full nationhood. We look forward to Saint Vincent joining them on 27 October. It remains our policy to respect the wishes of the peoples of our few remaining dependent Territories. It is for them to determine their own future in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter. We shall therefore continue to give every support and encouragement to any of them who seek independence. When there are difficulties, we will do our best to overcome them. In particular, we want to bring Belize to secure independence as soon as possible.
220.	The dismantling of the British Empire has led us either to join or create two new institutions, the European Community, whose President spoke earlier on this afternoon—and whose remarks I warmly endorse—and the Commonwealth, an institution sometimes referred to as a talking shop. If you are looking for an example of how valuable a talking shop can be, you need go no further than the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries in Lusaka two months ago. Talk there led first to greater understanding between the countries concerned, and then to action to try to solve the problems of Rhodesia.
221.	During the last two weeks, the British Government has engaged in intensive negotiations on Rhodesia, and these negotiations are continuing. But I thought it right to come to New York to inform the General Assembly of the stage that we have now reached.
222.	I do not intend to go back over the history of the Rhodesian dispute, now some 14 years old, apportioning blame to this party or absolving that. I would like to emphasize at the outset one point: throughout the vicissitudes of the Rhodesian problem, Britain has never succumbed to the temptation to abandon its responsibilities towards that unhappy country, leaving majority and minority alike to endless war. The whole approach of the present British Government is indeed based on a determination to fulfil our responsibilities towards the people of Rhodesia.
223.	When my government came to power in May this year, we were confronted with a new situation, though there were also some depressingly familiar features. The reality of change for the better had been symbolized in the elections which had taken place in April of this year on the basis of the principle of "one man, one vote. “Those elections have had many critics, but the plain fact is that they have led to the emergence of a parliament and an administration, most of whose members belong to the majority community and which is led by a member of that community. This represented a substantial step forward towards the abandonment by the white community of its privileged position, and my Government was determined to build on that, so as to make a further effort to bring Rhodesia to legal independence in a context of wide international recognition and acceptance.
224.	But the Patriotic Front did not participate in the April elections, and the war continued. The constitution under which those elections took place was marred by certain deficiencies. But to decry and dismiss the elections would have been to discourage further change. There was a need for urgent and imaginative action to exploit the opportunity which had been created to achieve a settlement that would gain wide international acceptance and, we hoped, bring an end to the war. Past efforts to solve the Rhodesian dispute showed, however, that it was essential to proceed step by step to build a solid foundation for negotiations.
225.	We therefore immediately engaged in an extensive series of consultations with all the parties concerned in the conflict in order to identify the elements for a solution. We spoke to the leaders of the Commonwealth, of the front-line States, of the Patriotic Front, and of the Salisbury parties. We also remained in close touch with our other friends and allies and took account of their views. These consultations were invaluable, and formed a sound basis for our present approach to a settlement.
226.	From these consultations two main conclusions flowed. The first was a general recognition of the extent of the changes which had taken place in Rhodesia, despite the short-comings of the Salisbury constitution. The second was the unanimous conviction that there should now be a further attempt to involve all the parties to the conflict in an attempt to find a solution, and that any solution should emanate from Britain as the responsible Power.
227.	The next stage was the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries as Lusaka in August, and it was here that the foundation of our present approach to a solution was laid. In Lusaka our proposals for a settlement were discussed and endorsed by a very important cross-section of the world community, including three of the front-line States. I wish to pay a tribute to the Heads of Government present at Lusaka for the helpful and constructive attitude which they all displayed during our discussions on Rhodesia, and especially to the wise chairmanship of President Kaunda of Zambia, which made a huge contribution to the successful outcome. The essence of the Lusaka agreement on Rhodesia was the acceptance by the Commonwealth of the British Government's constitutional responsibility to grant legal independence to Rhodesia on the basis of genuine majority rule.
228.	In our negotiations with the Salisbury parties and the Patriotic Front, we have continued to be guided by the principles defined at Lusaka. Our first task has been to seek agreement on an independence constitution comparable with the constitutions on which we granted independence to other former British dependent territories. It would be idle to pretend that in the special historical circumstances of Rhodesia, such a task is proving easy. Compromise on both sides is essential. We have already secured from the Salisbury parties agreement in principle to British proposals on the constitution. This was a bold decision by Bishop Muzorewa's delegation.
229.	Significant progress on certain points has also been made in discussions with the leaders of the Patriotic Front. All parties must sustain their efforts to continue the momentum of the Conference if the gains so far made are not to be eroded. A heavy responsibility will lie on any who fail to respond to this opportunity to achieve for the people of Rhodesia a fair settlement which will bring international acceptance and an end to the war. Much difficult negotiation undoubtedly lies ahead before the foundations of an independent and democratic society," in which all the people of Rhodesia will be able to live in security and at peace with each other and with their neighbours, are laid. I do not underestimate the difficulties which remain to be overcome, but I dare to hope that the moment may not be too far away when the British Government and Parliament will be able to grant legal independence to Rhodesia on the basis of genuine majority rule. Many attempts to solve the Rhodesia problem have failed in the past. I hope that it may be our privilege before too long to welcome an independent Zimbabwe to this Assembly as a full member of the United Nations.
230.	Namibia is another Territory where we must try to find an internationally acceptable solution through free and fair elections and not through bloodshed. The five Western countries, in close consultation with the Secretary-General, are pressing on with the search for a solution which would open the way to the arrival of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group in Namibia. Discussions are now concentrated on the detailed arrangements, which will need to be carefully worked out with the parties concerned, for a demilitarized zone. The idea of such a zone was proposed by the late President Neto of Angola, whose death we all deeply mourn. Our aim is to achieve early and complete agreement so that a date can be fixed for a ceasefire and the beginning of the transition to independence. Given goodwill and flexibility on the part of all concerned, this goal should not be beyond our reach.
231.	Namibia and Zimbabwe-Rhodesia are the immediate issues in southern Africa. But in the longer term it is on South Africa that the stability of this troubled region will depend. We share the international community's distaste of apartheid. It is neither just nor workable. But will threats and isolation bring about the changes we all wish to see? We in the British Government doubt it. We believe that the better course is to accept that the Republic's plural society gives rise to unprecedented problems and to offer our help to the leaders of all races to work together to find just solutions. In this way we can all contribute towards peaceful change in South Africa. Otherwise the future promises only violence and misery for all the people of South Africa, whatever their race.
232.	In the Middle East, the British Government greatly welcomes what has so far been achieved through the process begun at Camp David. It is in the interests of all parties to explore fully the opening which was created there. We hope that these continuing negotiations will lead to transitional arrangements which will lighten the burden of occupation in the West Bank and Gaza and help to create a climate of confidence and co-operation in practical matters. But the ultimate goal must remain a comprehensive settlement, based on the effective application of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in all its parts. This involves the acceptance by all parties of Israel's right to live in peace with its neigh- ours within secure and recognized boundaries. And, equally, it requires the withdrawal of Israel from territories occupied in 1967.
233.	There is one area in which a broad international consensus has recognized that resolution 242 (1967) is incomplete—that is, in the handling of Palestinian rights. The resolution takes no account of the legitimate political rights of the Palestinians, which go well beyond their status as refugees. Nor does it take any account of the Palestinians ' belief that they are a separate people with a right to their homeland. This, I believe, is an area in which resolution 242 (1967) may be supplemented—not, I emphasize, replaced, amended or distorted, but supplemented—to meet this point.
234.	My Government believes that a settlement which does not command the broad assent of the Palestinian people cannot last. But if the Palestinians are to exercise the right to determine their own future as a people, this must be in the context of a negotiated peace settlement which guarantees Israel's right to a peaceful and permanent existence within secure borders. Only if both parties recognize the legitimate rights of each other will it be possible to achieve the durable peace which all the peoples of the Middle East so desperately need.
235.	In the meantime, it is our earnest hope that all parties will avoid doing or saying anything to make it harder to establish the minimum trust without which successful negotiations would be impossible. We call on the Israel Government to cease its policy of settlement in occupied territories. That Government's present policy prejudices the chance of progress in the autonomy talks and makes the achievement of a comprehensive settlement much more difficult. We deplore' its recent decision to allow Israeli citizens to buy land in the occupied territories. And moreover, while we understand the Israel Government's preoccupation with security, we urge it to refrain from its present policies in south Lebanon. These undermine the authority of the Lebanese Government and frustrate the efforts of UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate. In that context, I pay a tribute to the dedication and courage with which the officers and men of UNIFIL are carrying out their dangerous and difficult task.
236.	Another area of dangerous tensions is IndoChina, where suffering due to natural causes has been made worse by the regimes which took power in 1975. I refer first to the Vietnamese Government, which, as I said on 20 July at the Meeting on Refugees and Displaced Persons in South-East Asia, in Geneva, has driven so many people to flee its shores that the problem has become one of international concern. I was in Hong Kong in May. I saw there the misery of the people who had risked perilous journeys in unseaworthy craft to escape the tyranny in their own country. It is not an experience that I shall ever forget. Nor can I forget the tens of thousands of those unhappy people who were simply lost at sea. The Secretary-General chaired, with his customary skill, the Geneva Meeting, which my Prime Minister had suggested should be held. As a result, a start has been made to resettle the refugees who did not perish. Most of them came either to Hong Kong or to the ASEAN countries. My Government fully understands the problems which the refugee influx posed for those countries. But the problem is likely to remain until the Vietnamese Government stops bearing down harshly on elements of its population. Meanwhile, I hope that that Government will abide by the undertakings it gave in Geneva about future action.
237.	Yet the most serious problems in Indo-China are perhaps to be found in Cambodia. The years of suffering to which that unhappy country was subjected by the Pol Pot Government are well known. That regime s human rights record is among the worst of any country in the world. The then British Government was among the first to draw attention to it. Then the country was brutally invaded by the armed forces of one of its neighbours. Now it is prey to starvation while fighting continues with the occupying forces. Unless those on the spot allow large-scale relief operations to start soon, the people of Cambodia will face yet another catastrophe. Food must get to these people soon, and those who want to help should not be asked to pay a political price for being allowed to do so. I shall only say now that in the British Government's view the Cambodian people has the same right as any other to live in peace under a Government freely chosen by itself. Without a settlement in Cambodia, stability and peace in South-East Asia will not be possible.
238.	In Europe itself possible sources of tension remain. The maintenance of stable East-West relations remains a foremost priority for us and for our allies, most notably the United States. We welcome the signature by the United States and the Soviet Union earlier this year of a second Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms and hope that it will soon be ratified. That agreement is an example of the kind of detailed and verifiable arms control arrangement that is needed; mere talk of a desire for peace and co-operation is not enough.
239.	Meanwhile, the scale of the military build-up of the countries signatories of the Warsaw Treaty is a matter of serious and legitimate concern to all other European countries. So far the Warsaw Pact has shown little willingness to allay these concerns in any practical way, so we on the Western side have no alternative but to respond. Otherwise, the balance on which detente depends will be lost. Nor can we accept that detente should be a principle applied in Europe but ignored in the rest of the world. Detente, if it is to work anywhere, must work everywhere. The British Government is ready to work for greater confidence, stability and real co-operation. But this must be a two-way process, with give and take coming from both sides. It is certainly in that spirit that we shall approach the review session of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe to be held in Madrid next year.
240.	But work to reduce the threat of war must go wider than East-West relations. Above all we must avoid the spread of nuclear weapons, while at the same time permitting access to the benefits of peaceful nuclear energy. The 1968 Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons now has 111 parties. I much regret that it has not won universal adherence. I hope that further progress can be made before the Review Conference next August. If universal membership of the Treaty could be achieved, it would halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
241.	As members know, a comprehensive test-ban treaty is being negotiated between the United States, the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom. We still have difficult problems to overcome. But when the treaty is completed, it will, I hope, meet the objections of those who argue that the non-proliferation Treaty discriminates in favour of the nuclear-weapon States. The latter have also, of course, given the non-nuclear- weapon States various assurances that nuclear weapons will not be used against them.
242.	Progress is important, too, in the field of conventional arms control. For this reason my Government supports the work of the Committee on Disarmament. We shall continue to take the position that measures to curb the nuclear arms race must go hand in hand with measures to reduce conventional weapons.
243.	This year this Assembly's deliberations take place against the sombre background of tension in several different parts of the world. The economic background is grim too. The large and sudden increases in the price of oil this year have serious and damaging implications for the world economy. They will lead certainly to higher inflation and to balance-of-payments difficulties for very many countries. The oil-importing developing countries will be the hardest hit. But we are all affected.
244.	The world's reserves of oil are not limitless. We all need to do what we can to use them properly and to reduce our consumption of oil. The British Government stands by the recent decisions of the International Energy Agency, the European Community and the Tokyo Economic Summit. These should have an important impact on the oil market by reducing demand for oil and by encouraging the development of other sources of energy, new and renewable.
245.	But we cannot solve our problems by acting in isolation. In energy, almost more than anywhere else, the world is one world. There needs to be joint consideration of world energy problems and closer contacts between those who produce oil and those who import it, whether developed or developing countries. A number of proposals to this end have recently been made. We are certainly ready to consider all these proposals sympathetically in the hope that we can agree on the way ahead.
246.	Finally, I should like to say something very shortly about the North-South dialogue. At a time when both developed and developing countries are struggling to stave off the effects of recession, it is hardly surprising that progress should be slow. I have spoken of the dangers of rhetoric. In this field of international economic relations, the dangers of rhetoric are perhaps at their greatest. We must all guard against the creation of new bodies whose primary function is the exchange of rhetoric. The first step has to be a substantial improvement in the shape and state of the world economy. It is increased production, not increased words, which creates resources. And without increased production how can there be a transfer of resources from rich to poor, whether at home or overseas, through increased aid, trade and investment? So our first priority must be to bring about the right framework in which more resources can be produced.
247.	That is why my Government has taken steps to cut public expenditure right across the board. That is inevitable, if we are to put our economy in order and if we are to be able to help the less developed countries to achieve prosperity. We are no less concerned than others about the large proportion of the world's population that is unacceptably poor. Nor are we turning our backs on the North-South dialogue, despite its frustrations. On the contrary, we recognize that in an interdependent world Britain has a vital interest—both economic and moral—in bringing prosperity to the poorer nations. That is why we have made it abundantly plain that we are in favour of maintaining the open trading system and of increasing overseas investment. Indeed, to encourage the latter, my Government has introduced considerable relaxations in exchange control. Provided the climate is right, these relaxations should be of direct benefit to the developing countries. Increased trade and increased investment are contributions we can make now. In due course increased growth should make it possible to provide more aid. But there 
are no easy short-cuts. The road back to greater prosperity—for North and South—is unlikely to be either easy or short. It will be even harder if each country or grouping tries to make it separately.
248.	We are one world, bound to support each other if we are not to undergo greater hardships on our own. This is true of our search for prosperity and it is true of our search for peace and security. In both fields the United Nations provides an essential forum for discussion which can lead to useful action. The tasks of the 1980s are formidable and they face us all. We can overcome them, but only if we allow our common interests to bring us together and work out our solutions as one community.
﻿Mr. President, it is indeed an honour and a privilege to greet you on your unanimous election, because you bring to this high office not only your outstanding skills and rich experience, but also something of the idealism and high sense of morality that characterizes your country's role in international affairs.
25.	It is also no mere formality when I express our great appreciation for the leadership provided by Mr. Lievano of Colombia as President of the thirty-third session of the General Assembly. The zeal and ability he displayed in discharging his responsibilities has enhanced his reputation, as well as his country's prestige.
26.	In the exemplary dedication to duty and the practical wisdom of our Secretary-General, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, we have an assurance that the challenging tasks ahead will be met with faith and fortitude, vision and constructive statesmanship.
27.	Our family of nations has grown as Saint Lucia, our youngest and newest Member, has joined us. We wish the people of Saint Lucia prosperity and assure them of our goodwill and co-operation in the responsibilities awaiting them.
28.	India comes to this Assembly with the strength of a tradition which is more than 4,000 years old, dating from when our Vedic ancestors had the insight to declare; "the soil is my mother; I am the son of the earth". This was the germ of the concept of "one world", the unity of which was to be ensured by peace. This is why "peace, peace and peace" has been my country's constant invocation.
29.	I stand here today conscious of this rich heritage and of its reflection in the continuing national consensus which prevails in the pursuit of international objectives. Independent India's policies and attitudes to international problems show a continuity and consistency of which we are proud.
30.	Since the time, 31 years ago, when India's first Foreign Minister and Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, declared in this Assembly that "India adhered completely to the principles and purposes of the Charter'’, there has been in our expressions of support of the United Nations and its Charter every year a repetitive rhythm which should not be mistaken for ritual or formality. The United Nations unmistakably symbolizes the best balance between the right to independence and the compulsion to work together. It rep-resents a warning that we can survive only in good- neighbourliness. If international, problems have been aggravated at times during the 34-year career of this Organization, this is due to the fact that in our national perspectives we have overlooked the fact that we form one world and not 152 worlds of various sizes. Despite all the lessons of history, we are still bogged down in short-term problems and are still overlooking the fact that our long-term destinies are intertwined and must be safeguarded.
31.	If we look back over the decade of the 1970s, which are now drawing to a close, we find repeated confirmation of the Tact that the world's political problems arise from the short-term perspectives of many of the powerful-nation States which virtually distort the long-term imperatives. If we still see recalcitrant imperialism, malevolent or defiant racism, persistent habits of intervention, manipulation, domination and even aggression, this is because there are forces trying to stem the tide of history. So many world-wide and regional problems are the result of the obdurate refusal to accept the logic of coexistence and co-operation.
32.	This Assembly is meeting again after one more year and it can be seen that the world has been changing fast. The past year has not been more tranquil or less dangerous. The world continues to hang precariously between war and peace, development and stagnation, domination and justice. Many of the old myths have died,-but not the belief in them. The time when the world order could be maintained through the strength of military establishments is over. While many still see military power as supreme, its political consequences often mean that it cannot be used. No doubt there is a fleeting intellectual realization that things have changed, but this has not kept pace with the formulation of foreign policy by important countries.
33.	The days of an imperial role are gone; neither is there any scope for imperial management. Even the management of crises can no longer be left to a few great Powers, although they have an important responsibility. Countries may differ in power, wealth and beliefs, but the world community cannot be managed now without the voluntary participation and equitable involvement of the largest possible number of countries.
34.	It is also clear that the leverage of the weaker countries is a factor to be reckoned with in the emerging international order. Military power may have remained concentrated in a few hands, but popular power, if one may use that term, has become more widely dispersed. Recent events have again shown that, given will power and determination, even a small Power can hold a big Power at bay. The strength of the non-aligned movement is really the collective leverage exerted by the weaker countries on the global scene. This collective leverage, reflected in the demand for a new international economic order, is in essence a call for the democratization of world power.
35.	We are indeed in an era of increasing plurality. Just as the managerial revolution has replaced family management, the transformation of the world situation has brought about a diffusion of the power to shape and influence events. This requires a new awareness, a new approach and a new adjustment which would facilitate the evolution of a more just and equitable world order.
36.	May I underline in this context the growing revolutionary significance of a factor that has been emerging over the last two decades in the United Nations. The fact that well over 90 Members of the United Nations have joined the non-aligned movement has affected a quiet revolution in the functioning of the international organization. This constitutes a guarantee against the misuse of the United Nations or for that matter, of any intergovernmental organization.
37.	The fundamental problems of May arise from not accepting the natural and the inevitable. We have seen resistance and delay in the process of decolonization and the fulfilment of the will of all peoples for freedom and national emancipation. Even today, this important historical process is not complete. The war in VietNam arose from attempts to frustrate the national aspirations of the Vietnamese. We failed to recognize, and perhaps we still often deny in action if not in affirmation, the fact that each nation has the right to choose its own pattern or political system for social and economic fulfilment. Today, we see the vindication of the notion implicit in the first principles of the United Nations Charter: that differing ideological and socio-economic systems have to coexist. As an Indian, I cannot but recall that the principles of coexistence were first enunciated in the middle of the 1950s and enshrined ill the Declaration adopted by the African-Asian Conference, held at Bandung in 1955.
38.	Detente was enthusiastically acclaimed by some, much wished for by many. But in its realization we find that the effects of the cold-war years have been effaced neither in the functioning of this Organization nor in the various regions of the world. There is even a danger of detente’s becoming a facade behind which the role of the Organization stands reduced in the priorities of the great Powers and, paradoxically, regional wars and conflicts also flourish.
39.	Surely, if detente means the mere normalization of bilateral relations among the great Powers, then the vast majority of members of the international community will have little interest in it. Though normalization among great Powers is essential, an honest detente has to be global and universal and this indeed is our goal.
40.	It would also be wrong to assume that the process of even this limited detente is irreversible. The stalemate in the ratification of the treaty resulting from the second round of SALT negotiations, the deepening crisis in West Asia, the hardening of attitudes in relation to southern Africa, the polarized postures in Southeast Asia and the disturbing trend towards the formation of destabilizing political combinations are ominous portents.
41.	Consequently, reinforcing the fabric of peace must remain the primary concern in our discussions. Progress on disarmament in all its various aspects has to be seen as the touchstone of our commitment to peace. Lasting world peace can stand only on the foundation of effective disarmament.
42.	We must remind ourselves that the United Nations was established to save "succeeding generations from the scourge of war." For as long as nuclear stockpiles exist in the world, there is a definite threat of a nuclear holocaust. Nuclear war is possible through accident, miscalculation, misperception and impulsive or irrational behaviour under tension. The most urgent task facing humanity today is to delegitimize nuclear weapons, to dismantle the hierarchical international order that supports the present military system and to replace it by an alternative security system based on peaceful coexistence and the acceptance in practice of the equal sovereignty of all nations and of die right of each nation to choose its national and international policies.
43.	The tenth special session of the United Nations General Assembly, devoted to disarmament, laid down a programme of action for nuclear disarmament. That programme consisted of steps for freezing the present nuclear arms race and for initiating reductions leading to the eventual elimination of all existing stockpiles of such weapons. It is a matter of deep regret that, despite the consensus behind that programme, there has been no progress towards its implementation. We are particularly concerned to note that the draft of the comprehensive test-ban treaty is not yet ready and the negotiations continue at a glacial pace. We strongly urge that the draft of the treaty be finalized without further delay.
44.	We welcome second SALT treaty. But it is only a beginning—though an important beginning, which must be formalized and implemented so that the world may move further towards real nuclear disarmament. At the same time we cannot but note with regret that that treaty does not incorporate any measure for the reduction of nuclear arsenals and that the growing and deadly sophistication of nuclear weaponry presents an ever greater danger to mankind.
45.	Much is being said, and rightly, about the problem of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 1 think it would be pertinent to remember that it was India that brought this issue to the attention of the United Nations when, in 1964, it specifically asked for the inclusion in the agenda of an item entitled "Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons".  Our approach was based on the premise, born of bitter historical experience, that both horizontal and vertical proliferation was integral parts of the problem which needed to be dealt with as a whole. The General Assembly accepted this concept and resolution 2028 (XX) stated that:
' 'The treaty should embody an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear and non-nuclear Powers".
46.	Unfortunately the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons concluded in 1968 deliberately sought to alter this concept. It addressed itself only to the aspect of horizontal proliferation, and if the Treaty has become an unworkable document, it is only because of this narrow and illogical approach. The protagonists have been trying to buttress their position by cartel- type arrangements and further discriminatory measures, such as the establishment of the so-called "London Club" of nuclear suppliers and the attempted imposition of full-scope safeguards, on the peaceful nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States, something that the nuclear-weapon States are themselves not prepared to accept.
47.	In a world where we now grapple with the task of evolving the methodology of a new international economic and political order based on justice and equity, it would be nothing short of anachronism for some Powers to play the role of barons and overlords in a system of nuclear feudalism. Such an attitude tends to make nonsense of national independence, equality of nations and the very concept of peaceful coexistence that is at the heart of the United Nations. 
48.	It may be recalled that during the special session on disarmament held last year, India took two significant initiatives—one seeking the non-use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances,  and the other calling for a suspension of nuclear-weapons testing pending a complete ban.8 We are gratified at the endorsement that the Assembly at its thirty-third session gave to those initiatives. We would urge the nuclear-weapon States on whom the primary responsibility lies to take meaningful steps in this direction.
49.	One further initiative I have in mind is the dissemination of public knowledge and through it the creation of enhanced awareness and popular will against the use of nuclear weapons. Efforts to build world public opinion would assist the Governments concerned to turn away from the path of nuclear competition in the direction of practical measures for avoiding nuclear war. The United Nations has achieved significant success in the past in helping to rouse the conscience of mankind on a number of humanitarian issues, through a variety of special observances. Would it not be appropriate that this vital question, on which depends the future and fate of man himself, should receive similar attention? It is only fitting that the second Disarmament Decade should begin next year with measures aimed at mobilizing world opinion for international co-operative action to consolidate world peace. The year 1980 could be the commencement year for laying the foundations for eliminating for ever the danger of nuclear war.
50.	If I have spoken at length on nuclear disarmament, it is because of the overwhelming fact that nuclear weapons, with their mind-boggling destructive capacity and their increasing degree of "overkill", constitute the greatest danger to mankind.
51.	The relationship between disarmament and development has been stressed by many earlier speakers, and I need not dwell upon it at any great length. The point has often been made that the total annual world military expenditure, now exceeding $400 billion, is equivalent to half the combined gross domestic product of all the third-world countries. It exceeds the global government expenditure on education and is more than twice the expenditure on public health services. In a world seriously afflicted by an energy crisis, by inflation, unemployment, mass poverty and so forth, it is surely criminal that our dwindling resources should be expended in this extravagant fashion for military purposes. In this, the International Year of the Child, is it not revolting that one Trident submarine costs as much as would be needed for the schooling of 16 million children in developing countries? What is the legacy we shall be leaving for our children if we continue in the present insane manner in the name of safeguarding security?
52.	Another problem that threatens civilized existence is the criminal combination of racist policies and colonial ambition that adds up to apartheid. A minority regime continues to violate openly and flagrantly the resolutions, decisions and sanctions of the United Nations and to subject the majority of the South African people to extreme forms of degradation, repression and torture. This situation is a reflection of the barrenness of our ritualistic reiteration of opposition to apartheid without our being able to ensure effective and comprehensive action against it. We have to mobilize the entire world community, without exception, if the opposition to this outrage is to be credible and effective. We should like to reaffirm our continued support for the measures to implement mandatory economic sanctions against South Africa. We also reiterate strongly our opposition to the economic and military collaboration—including nuclear collaboration—between certain Western countries and other States with South Africa.
53.	In Namibia, the action of the General Assembly and the Security Council over the last decade and beyond constitutes a history of lost opportunities. This continuing inefficacy casts serious doubts on the prospects for success of the United Nations plan for Namibia.  SWAPO, for its part, has displayed a consistent willingness to accept United Nations-supervised elections for the transition to majority rule and independence in Namibia. As long as South Africa continues its illegal presence inside Namibia, a just and peaceful change-over would be well-nigh impossible. My delegation fully supports the adoption by the Security Council of concrete measures to compel South Africa to end its illegal occupation of Namibia.
54.	In Zimbabwe, the liberation struggle continues at great cost in human suffering and ominous portents of escalation. The Rhodesia Constitutional Conference currently considering the problem of the transfer of power to the majority oscillates between hope and des-pair. We had welcomed the Lusaka agreement and had cautioned that its implementation should be a matter of time- bound urgency. We hope that a constitution acceptable to the Patriotic Front will be evolved in the Conference.
55.	In West Asia, developments in relations between certain States should not obscure consideration of the deteriorating situation in the occupied Arab territories in southern Lebanon.
56.	India believes that nothing but a comprehensive solution of the problem will bring about peace in the area. Central to this settlement is the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable rights, including the right to establish an independent State in their own homeland; the total and unconditional Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories, including the Holy City of Jerusalem; and, finally, the right of all States in the region, including Arab Palestine, to live within secure borders. Full and equal participation of the PLO in any peace negotiations is a sine qua non for a final settlement. The growing threat to international peace and security resulting from Israeli policies and partial solutions can no longer be ignored, The continued Israeli acts of aggression in Lebanon also bear testimony to the Israelis' belligerent intentions.
57.	It is also painful to note that Cyprus continues to suffer foreign occupation of a sizeable part of its territory. We welcome the 10-point agreement reached in May 1979 and we urge the parties concerned to recognize each other's legitimate rights and interests and to display a spirit of mutual accommodation. Let us hope that the talks will lead to a just and peaceful resolution of the problems between the two communities, within the framework of the unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence and non-alignment of Cyprus.
58.	The South Asian region, earlier plagued by war and dissension, is now freer from tensions. We have been able to respond to each other's interests and concerns in a spirit of accommodation. My country feels a sense of satisfaction at the resolution of some intractable problems. The improved environment provides scope for greater contacts and co-operation which will benefit the countries of the region. We rejoice that at last the entire subcontinent is now committed to the principles and policies of non-alignment and of peaceful coexistence. All this should augur well for peace and stability in the region. If, however, I advert to Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India, it is because there was reference to it by the foreign affairs adviser to the President of Pakistan in his statement to this Assembly on 1 October. We have repeatedly made it clear that United Nations resolutions have ceased to be relevant and the Simla Agreement holds the field. So the issue has to be bilaterally settled in accordance with the Simla Agreement.
59.	We are happy that in the region of South-East Asia, economic co-operation and efforts to establish a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality on the initiative of the Association of South-East Asian Nations have been making progress in spite of the many pressures operating in the area.
60.	We had thought that the retreat of foreign troops from Viet Nam over four years ago would usher in a new era of peace and co-operation in Indo-China and in the whole region of South-East Asia. That expectation was, unfortunately, short-lived. Foreign intervention and foreign involvement in Indo-China continued in new forms distorting the entire situation in that strategic area. Distrust and suspicion are rife in the region, as is the apprehension that great Powers may become involved. In consequence, the countries of Indo-China have not been allowed to settle down in peace to the reconstruction and development of their economies.
61.	The Sino-Viet Nam border remains tense, and there is no peace in Kampuchea as yet. We ardently hope that the tension between China and Viet Nam will not be allowed to escalate, and we believe that boundary questions and other problems between two great neighbouring Asian countries can and ought to be resolved through peaceful and friendly negotiations.
62. 	The brave people of Kampuchea, with whom we in India have age-old cultural ties, have been subjected to untold misery and deprivation. The present situation demands statesmanship from all parties, so that peace, stability, mutual confidence and co-operation may be restored, and so that respect for the personality and independence of every State can be strictly observed.
63.	There have been some indications that at least the humanitarian problems could be mitigated through goodwill and a constructive approach. We should like to congratulate the Secretary-General for the success of the United Nations-sponsored Geneva conference on the Indo-China refugees.  It is gratifying to note that since that conference the exodus of refugees has dropped to a trickle.
64.	The spectre of famine, however, looms large over Kampuchea. We welcome the recent understanding for extending international emergency relief and assistance. India would be ready to make its modest contribution in this regard.
65.	India is firmly committed to the creation of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean, as envisaged in the Declaration of the General Assembly. The increase, over the years, in great-Power military presence in the Indian Ocean and the further strengthening of military bases, such as Diego Garcia, are a matter of serious concern. On the most important issues pertaining to the implementation of the Declaration, the majority of the littoral and hinterland States were able to adopt a common position at the meeting held in New York in July this year.
66.	We invite the participation of all permanent members of the Security Council and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean with a view to convening a conference on the Indian Ocean.
67.	It was a disappointment for us when the negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United States for the reduction of their military presence in the Indian Ocean were abruptly suspended in March 1978. We welcome the agreement reached at the Vienna summit to resume the dialogue and urge early and meaningful negotiations.
68.	In the field of human rights, it is immensely important to realize that, in the ultimate analysis, individual human rights must rest on the foundation of collective human rights. National liberation creates the framework for the latter, and only after achieving it can one think of ensuring human rights for individuals. The stability of newly gained freedom is essential for ensuring socio-economic change and for the widening and deepening of the ambit of human rights. These need to be properly institutionalized, for only thus will there be a safeguard against their possible abuse, suppression or total eclipse.
69.	The present world economic order continues to follow the rule that to him who hath even more shall be given. The two United Nations Development Decades, one of the 1960s and the other of the 1970s, and a series of protracted negotiations, have proved sterile exercises, belying the hopes that had been raised that inequity between nations need not be an inexorable law and that, for reasons as much economic as ethical, the rich should assist the poor.
70.	We are now on the threshold of the third United Nations Development Decade, covering the 1980s, and of the special session of the United Nations which will be held next year. Despite the bleakness of past experience, we must not miss this opportunity to impart a momentum to the negotiations for establishing a new economic order. Among the vital requirements of such an order, is an international trading system that would be more responsive to the needs of developing countries. Multilateral trade negotiations portend nothing more than disappointment for the developing countries. Protectionism by advanced countries grows unabated and has assumed new forms. The fifth session of UNCTAD concluded in Manila without coming to grips with the issues that relate to the structure of the present economic order. The special session must therefore address itself squarely to the task of dealing with basic structural issues if it is to have any meaning. The current imbalance; the dependence and external vulnerability of the developing countries; the urgent need to make a perceptible dent in the worst aspects of mass poverty—these are a few of the issues that the developed countries need to look at from a fresh perspective. Without giving up existing commitments, they will have to conceive new forms of resource transfers, which can ensure that responsibility is shared and which are capable of leading us to greater common prosperity. Even though the main thrust towards development should come from the developing countries themselves, the developed world in its own enlightened self-interest must realize that its prosperity is best ensured if the world at large can meet its basic minimum requirements, thus forming a large and growing market for developed countries.
71.	The disparity in the dissemination of scientific knowledge and technological know-how in the world is one of the basic causes for the widening gap between the developed and developing nations. The United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development, recently concluded at Vienna, was successful in focusing attention on this question and in evolving an agreed plan of action at the international level.  We hope that the new Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development will be able to promote agreement on adequate and sustained measures for the transfer of technology to the developing countries.
72.	The developing countries expect to, and indeed must, participate fully in the world decision-making processes. Having abandoned, with the earlier decades, the framework that was formulated for appraising performance and ensuring joint responsibility of both the North and the South, we have yet to agree on a draft of the preamble of a new international development strategy. We run the risk of going to the special session marking the commencement of the third development decade without an agreed strategy, jeopardizing the outcome of the Decade itself.
73.	Similar mechanisms to promote international accountability are required in specific areas of multilateral economic functioning particularly within UNCTAD and UNIDO. One of the principal tasks at the forthcoming Third General Conference of UNIDO to be held in New Delhi in 1980 will be to equip the agency with an effective mechanism to examine and monitor the implications of the Lima target of 25 per cent of the world's manufacturing output as the share of developing countries.
74.	Finally , the developing countries must not forget the imperatives of collective self-reliance as a major component of the new international development strategy. In fact, it could well provide the special session in 1980 its principal theme. When meshed together, the unutilized complementarities and the surplus resources of developing countries give the developing countries enhanced bargaining power with the developed world,
75.	India has, at the recent Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which met in Havana, taken a number of initiatives in fostering collective self-reliance. We have, with Bangladesh, proposed the establishment of a food security system for developing countries. Though a developing country which has had to feed an immense population, we in India today are in a position to make a modest contribution to any agreed international system of food security that may be evolved. It is time that the world, and especially the advanced nations, realized that food security is even more important than military security in maintaining peace and stability in the world.
76.	Similarly, the Havana Conference approved the proposal to study the possibility of establishing a project development facility. We hope that the facility would become operational by the end of 1980. India, with extensive experience in technology relevant to developing countries, is willing to collaborate with others in setting up facilities for research and training in priority areas, geared specially to their needs. We would be glad to share our experience and welcome their participation.
77.	The policy guidelines on reinforcing mutual solidarity recently adopted in Havana are a welcome expression of the political will of the non-aligned and other developing countries to co-operate among themselves to meet their minimum needs and emergency requirements. The guidelines, which are not confined to oil, have wide implications of a long-term nature, since they cover all primary commodities and raw materials. It is our sincere hope that these policy guidelines will be expeditiously translated into concrete commitments.
78.	Another problem which has bedevilled the evolution of a just and equitable world economic order has been the energy problem. Half of India's total import bill, for instance, is now accounted for by oil imports and the latest round of price increases has further raised the burden by a crushing $1.4 billion per year. Even more critical has been the problem of securing minimum requirements of petroleum from the world market, where we have to compete with the affluent nations.
79.	I need hardly emphasize the enormous significance of energy in the context of developing economies, characterized as they are by limited substitution possibilities for priority uses such as transport, by the high capital intensity of alternative energy resources and by the problems inherent in reducing a level of consumption which is already at the bare and essential minimum. Clearly these countries are particularly vulnerable to the world oil situation. Is it not unconscionable that out of the total world consumption of 60 million barrels a day the United States, Europe, Japan and Canada should together consume 45 million? Or that in the year 2000 the per capita daily consumption of oil will be 62 barrels in North America, 32 for each European, 10 for those living in the oil-producing countries and only some 4 barrels for the rest.
80.	All the developing countries should have a right, indeed a special right, to secure a fair share in the world consumption of energy and other raw materials.
81.	In the ultimate analysis, the question involves the principle of equity. The core of the present resource crisis is the attempt by developed countries to pre-empt the bulk of the world's natural resources in order to maintain their current pattern of consumption and continue their existing life-styles. The disaster that profligate consumption is leading to calls for a change in fife-styles in developed countries. Such a change is also necessitated by the imbalance between material and spiritual growth that has prompted many in the West to turn to the philosophy of the Orient in their quest for inner peace and harmony. Echoing the present predicament of the mature industrial or post-industrial societies, T. S. Eliot spoke of " . . .the torment of desire unsatisfied and the greater torment of desire satisfied".
82.	The political, economic and social order in our world has to be refashioned not only with reference to ourselves but for the sake of the future of our children. Appropriately, the observance of the International Women's Year and the International Year of the Child has coincided with the efforts at promoting a new inter-national economic order. With the mother and the child at the core of our thoughts we obviously cannot concentrate on a political order based on power and exploitation and a development process which is myopic and inequitable. In fact, if the process is to begin with the child in the mother's womb, as it ought to, we have to work for the creation of a total environment which would ensure equality at birth to every child and provide for his development throughout the formative period. The symbolic significance of observing a particular year as dedicated to a particular cause can only find real meaning if the problem is considered in a larger perspective. Standing on the threshold of the 1980s, we shall have to begin the desired development process now.
83.	Is it not a pity that we assemble here year after year to do little more than patch up our petty quarrels and pay lip service to some lofty ideas and principles? It is time we ceased to concern ourselves merely with the past and the present and began to look to the future with the spirit of collective creativity which must be the hallmark of the United Nations system. The United Nations has to be not merely the engineer of truce but rather the architect of a new era—an era that could see the rise of the new man of the twenty-first century. To do this, we need to help the United Nations to extend the frontiers of its perception. The time to do so is now.﻿161.	Mr, President, please accept my congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly. We are confident that you will guide the work of the Assembly efficiently and fairly.
162.	I would also like to express our appreciation to the President of the last session of the General Assembly, Ambassador Lievano of Colombia.
163.	It is my pleasure to congratulate Saint Lucia on its independence and admission to the United Nations.
164.	As we reflect on the development of the United Nations throughout the past year, we find the spectacle far from encouraging. The fundamental obstacle to the Organization's work is the selectivity which has been forced upon it by an automatic majority of the membership, which is far from impartial and prefers expediency to principles. The United Nations specialized agencies have suffered badly from this. Organs like UNESCO, WHO, the ILO and others have been severely affected by heavy politicization which has influenced their functioning. Instead of dedicating themselves solely to their specific fields in the service of mankind, they have been reduced to forums of political one-sidedness.
165.	There must be a return to the United Nations Charter. Consultation and agreement should be restored to their primary place. In particular, the specialized agencies must abandon the dangerous path of politicization along which they have been dragged, so that they may devote themselves to the economic, social, humanitarian, scientific and technological tasks which they were set up to perform and which they perform so well when permitted to do so.
166.	There has been little improvement in the situation of the Jews in the Soviet Union during the past year. Even though the number of exit visas for Soviet Jews has increased recently, the gap between the number of Jews applying for exit visas and those granted them is growing, while an even larger number of Soviet Jews have been denied the fundamental right to emigrate—a right guaranteed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in the Helsinki Declaration. Those Jews who do insist on their rights are subjected to continued harassment by the authorities, to dismissal from their places of employment and, in some cases, to arrest and imprisonment. We have taken note of the fact that seven Jewish prisoners were released a few months ago. However, we are particularly concerned by the harsh prison sentences imposed on other Jews whose only crime is their desire to re-join their families in Israel—Iosif Begun, Boris Kalendarov, Iosif Mendelevich, Ida Nudel, Anatoly Shcharansky, Simon Shnirman, Vladimir Slepak, Aleksandr Vilic and Amner Zavurov. The Soviet Union should release these and other prisoners of conscience and permit everyone who seeks to emigrate to Israel and join his people and his family to do so.
167.	We cannot be silent in the face of the rising incitement against the State of Israel and the Jewish people, its religion, culture and national movement, as manifested day by day in the official Soviet media. In this regard, it must be noted that the Soviet authorities still do not permit Jews to practise their religion and culture. We appeal to the Soviet Union to allow Jewish religion and culture to be practised and expressed freely, and to put an end to anti-Jewish propaganda.
168.	We also deeply regret that the Government of Syria continues to violate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international conventions by refusing to permit its Jewish citizens to leave and to be reunited with their relatives living in other lands. We appeal to the Syrian Government to change this policy.
169.	The past year witnessed a historic break-through in the Middle East. In March, Israel and Egypt signed the first ever Israel-Arab peace treaty. President El-Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Begin of Israel concluded that Treaty after intense negotiations, which lasted a year and a half and which demanded great leadership and courage. Israel wishes to express its appreciation and gratitude to the United States of America and to its President, Mr. Jimmy Carter, personally for the vital role which they played in bringing about this historic achievement, which has created a new reality in our region.
170.	Let me recall here that Israel has throughout the first 30 years of its independence constantly extended its hand to its neighbours in the search for peace. This found expression on the very first day of the establishment of our State, in the Israel Declaration of Independence of 14 May 1948. Let me add specifically that as early as in the summer of 1967, very shortly after the six-day war, Israel had taken the initiative and offered to sign a treaty of peace with Egypt, declaring its readiness to withdraw from the Sinai and return it to Egyptian sovereignty in the context of a peace treaty. This Israeli proposal was rejected, and the answer given by Egypt at the time was: "No negotiation, no recognition and no peace with Israel: what was taken by force will be taken back by force." This year, however, has seen the beginning of a new era in the Middle East. After a generation of continued warfare, the realization of a dream begins.
171.	The Treaty of Peace, which, as stated in its preamble, is "an important step in the search for comprehensive peace in the area," has provided for a role in its implementation to be fulfilled by the United Nations. United Nations forces and observers were called upon to carry out functions in order to see that the peace treaty was fully implemented. Ironically and paradoxically, that initiative taken by some States Members of the United Nations in the cause of peace was rejected by the United Nations. The Security Council was exposed to the threat of a Soviet veto, and the mandate of UNEF was not renewed, so that the Security Council in effect disassociated itself from the first positive and major step in the great effort to relieve the Middle East from the dangers of war.
172.	Although our assumption and hope that the United Nations would assist in the implementation of the Treaty of Peace have been disappointed, we will proceed along the path of peace. The attitude of the United Nations will not damage the peace process; but it will, no doubt, lower the prestige and even the moral stature of the United Nations, one of whose basic principles and purposes is, as stated by the Charter, to "maintain international peace and security . . . and to bring about by peaceful means . . . settlement of international disputes. . . ''.
173.	As a result of the Treaty of Peace, the process of normalization in the relations between Egypt and Israel has already begun. We are confident that in the months ahead we shall make further progress in cementing new bonds of co-operation.
174.	The frequent visits and meetings of the leaders of both countries are also an expression of the common desire to promote understanding and closer personal relationships. The most recent—and most impressive—visit of President El-Sadat to Israel three weeks ago and the reception given him in the city of Haifa, where Jews and Arabs coexist in harmony and cooperation, indicated the deep feelings of all the population of Israel towards the era of peace and, we hope, left warm memories in the minds and hearts of our Egyptian guests.
175.	Over the past year the situation in Lebanon has become grave. The intervention of Syria has, in fact, plunged the northern part of that formerly prosperous country into a state of anarchy, and the Lebanese Government has become incapable of ruling and exercising its authority over all of its territory. The southern part of Lebanon has been, to a great extent, in the hands of the terrorist groups of the PLO, whose murderous activities have been a source of danger and harassment not only to Israel, but also to the Christian and Moslem Lebanese in that area.
176.	UNIFIL was established by Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978.
177.	Israel, having been compelled to act militarily against the PLO in southern Lebanon in a clear act of self-defence, agreed to withdraw its forces, provided that the new United Nations force would undertake to restore peace and security in the area and to assist the Government of Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective authority in the country.
178.	Unfortunately, the aim of restoring Lebanon's integrity has not been achieved, and the Lebanese Government is still incapable of exercising its sovereignty. PLO terrorist groups are still functioning all over Lebanon and, in quite a large number of cases, inside the area of United Nations units. In this region, which was free from any terrorist presence at the time of the Israeli withdrawal, there are now about 700 PLO terrorists, who are acting murderously through the lines of the United Nations Force against the people of Israel. The Force was supposed to act against this. The Secretary-General, in his initial report of 19 March 1978 spoke of the right of self-defence of the Force, including resistance by forceful means to attempts to prevent it from discharging its duties.
179.	In his report of 13 September 1978, the Secretary-General stated, among the guidelines and terms of reference of UNIFIL, that "uniformed or armed personnel and military equipment are not allowed to enter the UNIFIL area of operation"." However, there are too many cases in which the Force has in fact reconciled itself to the presence and activities of the terrorists in its own area. UNIFIL has not carried out its mandate and duties in this respect, despite the fact that its units have themselves suffered from terrorist activities and at least eight UNIFIL soldiers have been killed in these incidents. The presence and activities of the PLO terrorist groups in the region are in violation of the UNIFIL mandate, and it should be understood that Israel cannot be expected to sit back while terror is being unleashed against its population, no matter where in Lebanon these actions originate.
180- Once again it must be emphasized that terrorism could be virtually eliminated if certain countries ceased to provide arms, training and refuge to its practitioners. No cause can justify terrorism. The issue is, therefore, a fundamental one for the international community, and the struggle against terrorism should continue until terrorism has been brought to an end.
181.	The PLO, by its very nature and actions, is a terrorist organization. Its true character is reflected in its so-called' 'Covenant", which calls for the purging of the Zionist presence from Palestine. The same document denies the existence of the Jewish people and its unbroken historical ties with the land of Israel. It alleges that the establishment of the State of Israel is null and void and rejects outright any plans to settle the Middle East conflict by peaceful means.
182.	The PLO has not hesitated to try to translate its vicious doctrine into criminal deeds. It has conducted an unceasing campaign of terror aimed at the mass murder of innocent civilians in Israel. From June 1967 to date, over 640 people have been murdered and 3,300 others have been wounded in Israel by the PLO. It has also terrorized and intimidated Arabs prepared to negotiate peace with Israel, killing more than 350 Arabs and injuring almost 2,000 others.
183.	Given the PLO's character and aims, it was, in fact, recognized by the parties at Camp David that the PLO could not be a partner to the peace process. No country can or should be expected to negotiate with a party which denies its very existence, aims at its destruction, and uses terror against its civilian population. On the other hand, careful provision was made in the Camp David agreements to include Palestinian Arab residents of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District in the peace process.
184.	The Framework for Peace in the Middle East, Agreed at Camp David by the President of Egypt and the Prime Minister of Israel, and witnessed by the President of the United States of America, refers positively and constructively to Palestinian Arab rights, as well as to the rights and security interests of the other parties. It is based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which are the only agreed basis for peace negotiations in the Middle East. Any tampering with them can only gravely jeopardize the current peace process.
185.	This Framework agreement sees the solution of the question of the Palestinian Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District in terms of granting them full autonomy, for a transitional period of five years, before reaching an agreement on the final status of the area. For that reason, it was agreed to negotiate on a principle of self-government—exercised through an administrative council—for the Arab inhabitants of the areas in question.
186.	Moreover, in the preamble to this Framework, the signatories invited other parties to the Arab-Israel conflict to adhere to it as well. In the letter sent by the President of Egypt and the Prime Minister of Israel to President Carter on 26 March 1979—the date of the signing of the peace treaty—they invited the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to Join the negotiations.
187.	This Framework provides for negotiations on the transitional period of five years, and also for the subsequent negotiations on a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan, in which the location of the boundaries dividing the two countries will be agreed. The option of creating a third State between Israel and Jordan is, therefore, not considered in the Camp David agreements.
188.	Thus, the objective of the negotiations being held now, based on the Camp David Framework, is the provision of full autonomy for the inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and Gaza. The Israeli military government and its civilian administration will be withdrawn as soon as a self-governing authority has been freely elected by the inhabitants. This Framework also specifies measures that will be taken to assure the security of Israel and its neighbours.
189.	The only way to keep the process of peace going on is for us to adhere strictly to the Camp David agreements in their letter and spirit, and I should like to assure this Assembly that this is the policy of Israel.
190.	Before concluding, let me say a few words about Jerusalem, the eternal capital of Israel and of the Jewish people.
191.	Jerusalem has known many foreign rulers during the course of its long history, but none of them regarded it as their capital. Only the Jewish people has always maintained it as the sole centre of its national and spiritual life. For thousands of years, Jews have prayed daily for their return to Jerusalem and, for the past century and a half, Jerusalem has had a continuous and uninterrupted Jewish majority.
192.	Jerusalem cannot be divided again by barbed wire and there can be no return to the repeated shooting at our civilians and the barbaric desecration of the Jewish quarter of the City, the Holy Places and cemeteries, as happened before 1967, when the eastern part of Jerusalem was under the occupation of Jordan. It is relevant to recall that, in grave violation of the 1949 Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement; Jordan prevented Jews from having access to their Holy Places and cultural institutions and tried to eliminate systematically every trace of Jerusalem's Jewish past. By contrast, as a result of Israel's policy of free access to all Holy Places, millions of Moslem and Christian tourists and pilgrims—in addition to Jewish visitors—have come to Jerusalem since 1967, and have prayed and worshipped freely at its mosques and churches.
193.	Jerusalem is now a city of coexistence between Jews and Arabs. At the same time, the Government of Israel is and has always been conscious of the fact that Jerusalem is of deep concern also to other faiths, and that its religious and cultural sites are precious to Christians and Moslems, as well as to Jews. There should be completely free access to all the holy shrines by believers of all religions, without any exception, completely protected and guaranteed by the law of the country, and those holy shrines should be administered by the respective representatives of the religions concerned, without any interference.
194.	The choice before the United Nations is clear. This Organization, whose Charter enjoins it to support the cause of international peace and security, must not submit to the designs of those who reject peace. Let the United Nations give peace its full support. Let the Governments of Jordan, Syria and Lebanon and the representatives of the Palestinian Arabs residing in Judaea, Samaria and Gaza join the negotiations in order to achieve the noble goal of a real and durable comprehensive peace in our area.﻿As a member of the Commonwealth, New Zealand is pleased to welcome Saint Lucia to the United Nations and to offer its warmest congratulations to the representatives of Saint Lucia at this session of the General Assembly. We look forward to working with the delegation of Saint Lucia in furthering the purposes of this Organization.
248.	It is a pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, and other officers of the Assembly on your election. I should be grateful if you would convey my special greetings to Ambassador Salim, the President of this session. New Zealand values its special link with the United Republic of Tanzania. We work together in partnership, within the Commonwealth. We admire Tanzania's example of self-reliance in the struggle for social and economic progress. We admire the leadership Tanzania has given to the movement for self-determination not only in Africa but for all people. We New Zealanders value, in particular, the help Ambassador Salim, as Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, has given us as we have worked, loyally and consistently, to promote the principle of self-determination in the small island Territories of the South Pacific which have been associated with us.
249.	Ambassador Salim has had the opportunity of seeing how remote and isolated are the islands of the Pacific. New Zealand, too, is remote from the trouble- centres of the world. This geographical isolation, how-ever, has never cut us off from the impact of world events. This year we have followed with attention, and with concern, events in three areas of instability: the Middle East, southern Africa and South-East Asia. We have welcomed the political progress made in the Middle East, limited though that may have been. On the other hand, we have deplored the continued escalation of oil prices, for this has jeopardized efforts to establish a stable world economic order and damaged the economies of many countries. We have taken part, through the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries in Lusaka, in the efforts of the Commonwealth to break the impasse on Rhodesia. But our most direct concern, naturally enough, has been with the conflict that has taken place nearest to us. The calamitous events in Indo-China have caused us the gravest concern. There we have seen continued armed conflict. Vast numbers of people have been forced to move. Starvation and suffering are daily facts of life. Fighting goes on and may well spread. The already desperate food shortage threatens to get worse. The situation is little short of disastrous.
250.	My Government is deeply concerned by these developments. The conflict in Indo-China has polarized South-East Asia: a gulf of mistrust now divides the States of Indo-China and the members of ASEAN.
251.	New Zealand has close and friendly ties with the five countries that belong to ASEAN. We have welcomed the rapid progress they have made in developing their economies and improving the living standards of their peoples. It has been a remarkable achievement. ASEAN has emerged as a significant force in international affairs. It has been able to make a major contribution towards the stability of the But the longer the conflict continues, the greater the danger that the great Powers will once more involved and establish themselves in the area, the longer the fighting goes on in Kampuchea the more risk there is that it will spill over into Thailand. The conflict in Indo-China threatens to jeopardize not only the prosperity of the ASEAN countries but also their effectiveness as an influence for peace and stability in Southeast Asia.
252.	Two attempts have been made this year to resolve the conflict by force. Neither has succeeded, the conflict arises from deep-seated issues—ancient animosities, revived and stimulated by recent actions that have been aided and inflamed from outside IndoChina. Nationalism runs too high for any one party to impose its will on another by force. Peace will be restored only when the countries of the area—those in Indo-China and their neighbours, too—learn to respect one another's independence and territorial integrity, as they pledged to do when they joined the United Nations.
253.	There can be no justification for any government to send armed forces into another country against the will of its people. There is no justification for a government to drive out vast numbers of its own people to hazard their lives on the high seas. It has been abundantly demonstrated that government policies can stimulate, and can retard, the flow of refugees. If that desperate flow of people begins again, the world will know where the responsibility lies. If, however, it ends once and for all, the process of political negotiation can begin. If the withdrawal of forces can be brought about, the normalization of relations can be contemplated. The massive task of relief and rehabilitation for the suffering people of Indo-China can proceed without hindrance.
254.	New Zealand has always said that the most pressing need was to begin working towards a political settlement. That need is even more urgent today. Any settlement must be based on the fact that there are three separate countries in Indo-China, each with its own national tradition. These three countries must live closely together. In practice this means that there can be no peace until the independence of Kampuchea is assured and Kampuchea is prepared to co-operate with its neighbours.
255.	My Government accepts as logical the decision taken by the General Assembly on the question of Kampuchean credentials. That does not mean that we condone in any way the policies of the Pol Pot Government. That regime was tyrannical in the extreme. It was notorious for its cruelty and its utter disregard for the most basic human rights of its people. Nevertheless, it was the established Government of Kampuchea, and it was recognized by the international community. The same cannot be said of the regime headed by Heng Samrin. That regime was installed by foreign forces. It has failed to demonstrate its independence. The main aim of any political settlement must be to let the people of Kampuchea express themselves freely without the dominating presence of foreign troops. They must be able to decide their own future until those conditions exist my Government sees no justification for expelling the present representatives of Kampuchea or for accepting another delegation 
256.	Meanwhile, we face the practical problem of dealing with the human consequences of the continuing conflict. On one aspect of it the United Nations has already taken some effective action. The Meeting convened by the Secretary-General in Geneva in July succeeded in mobilizing greatly increased resources for the relief of refugees from Indo-China. My Government welcomed the Secretary-General's initiative. We are playing our part in the programme he has launched. We have also noted with satisfaction the decline in the flow of refugees since the Meeting. That showed that the Government of Viet Nam was accepting its responsibilities. We can hope, therefore, that there will be no resurgence of the tragedies we saw earlier this year.
257.	The most desperate human problem at this moment is in Kampuchea. Continual fighting, following the internal troubles of recent years, has uprooted a large part of the population. Food supplies have been severely disrupted. Before long, 10 per cent of the country's population may be starving. Famine would bring a new wave of desperate refugees who would flee to Thailand. The world must stop this disaster happening. Another great effort by the international community is essential. Food and medical supplies must be provided—and right away. New Zealand is ready to join in this new effort.
258.	We do not forget that in other regions there are also massive displacements of people. Some of these situations are of tragically long standing. Here, too, the search for negotiated solutions to the conflicts that have caused this human suffering must be a prime concern of this Assembly.
259.	In southern Africa there have been some promising developments. The most significant was the agreement reached by the Commonwealth Heads of Government at Lusaka last month. From this came the Rhodesia Constitutional Conference on Zimbabwe Rhodesia. My Prime Minister, to underline his support for the agreement reached at Lusaka, sent a message to all 24 delegates assembled in London for the conference. He said:
"The road to a peaceful settlement is now open to you. It is for you—each and all—to make your contribution to the final stage and to lead your country into independence, peace and stability. I do not minimise the difficulties that lie ahead of you. But I hope that you will keep in mind at all times that the fate of millions of your men, women and children, now and in the future, lies in your hands—and in your hands alone."
260.	New Zealand hopes that, through this Lusaka initiative, which underlines once more the value of the Commonwealth association, one area of southern Africa will at last reach peaceful and legal independence.
261.	My Government is also encouraged that the consultations which five Western Powers initiated, over two years ago, on Namibia have been resumed. A possibility now exists for the final, legal independence of the Namibian people.
262.	But if there are prospects for a peaceful solution to two of the problems of southern Africa, the third the intolerable system of apartheid, still exists unchecked in the Republic of South Africa. New Zealand joins with the rest of mankind in urging the Government of that unhappy country to move now to break down the barriers of apartheid— those barricades that deny the very essence of human rights and human dignity to the vast majority of its people. Apartheid nurtures the seeds of bitter and vicious conflict. If only for that reason— though it is only one of many—the Members of the United Nations cannot rest until the risk of this conflict has been eliminated.
263.	In his inaugural remarks the President called on this Assembly to pursue practical means, rather than to promote ever-increasing resolutions, in the search for solutions to the many problems which afflict the world today. Nowhere could his advice be better heeded than with respect to the situation in the Middle East. My Government sees as a significant advance the dramatic events of the past two years, which culminated in the Camp David agreements and the subsequent negotiations between Egypt and Israel. The current efforts of the leaders of these States must be given a chance to succeed. A critical dialogue has begun. The objective of the world community now should be to broaden that dialogue.
264.	My Government continues to believe that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) contains the essential element for a negotiated settlement. That resolution remains a central foundation, and it can be built on. It is now widely recognized that the search for a political solution in the Middle East must involve the participation of the Palestinian people. The rights of the Palestinians, including their right to self-determination and to establish an independent Palestinian State if they so desire, can no longer be ignored.
265.	The road to a negotiated, just and lasting solution in the Middle East will not be easy. It is critical therefore, that everyone concerned should eschew insensitive or provocative acts. We believe that the continued establishment of Israeli settlements in land occupied during the 1967 war is one such act. The recent outbreak of hostilities in southern Lebanon is another. My Government rejects the policy of pre-emptive strikes by Israel as strongly as it rejects any act which violates the territorial integrity of Israel. The road to peace is fragile. It should not be put at risk.
266.	The year 1979 could have been a watershed year for the international community in its continuing debate on global economic reform. The fifth session of UNC- TAD and the Tokyo round of the multilateral trade negotiations were major events which held great promise for a new break-through in North-South relations, but then ended inconclusively. The urgent task of this session of the Assembly will be to find a way of restoring momentum to the debate on the establishment of a New International Economic Order, for the international community faces pressing and dangerous economic problems. The economic "ripple-effects" of this year's sharp price rises in oil have become painfully obvious—to developed and developing countries alike. The outlook is for severe disruption to the process of global economic growth. Sluggish rates of economic growth will inhibit the continued development of enlarged "northern" markets for "southern" goods—and vice versa. Heavier foreign debt burdens for many countries seem inevitable. Inflation, unemployment, balance of payments disequilibrium and protectionism will feed upon global economic uncertainty. The pressing need to develop new energy sources will be set back financially—and therefore technically.
267.	No Government need imagine that it will be able to insulate its economy entirely from the effects of a spreading economic malaise. Developing countries— and all small economies, that rely on trade, including my own—will be especially vulnerable.
268.	In the face of these probabilities we can no longer afford the luxury of debating the possibility of new forms of global economic co-operation, structural adjustment and institutional reform. The time has come to put an end to the polemics and arid definitional disputes which have so far characterized the dialogue between North and South. Let us do so in the sure knowledge that if we do not master the forces of economic and social change, they will surely master us.
269.	New Zealand looks to this session of the General Assembly, and to the special session to be held in 1980, to bring a new sense of purpose to the unfinished task of formulating strategies for global economic management. We believe that the effectiveness of these strategies and the future well-being of the interdependent global economy will rest, to a very considerable degree, on the success of renewed efforts to find constructive solutions in two critical sectors—trade and energy.
270.	The explosion in world trade in the last quarter of a century has brought greater prosperity to many countries. We must ensure that this growth is maintained, based upon acknowledgement of the doctrine of comparative efficiency and a positive assault on the forces of protectionism. New Zealand cannot accept that there should be two sets of rules, one for the old industrial producers and another for the rest, that is, for the new industrial producers and for the agricultural producers. Agricultural protectionism is practised by almost all industrialized countries—to the disadvantage of their consumers and to the frustration of internationally efficient producers, such as New Zealand. That, we believe, is a denial of the responsibility of this generation to establish an efficient production base for feeding the next. This responsibility demands new approaches and positive adjustment policies based on the principles of free multilateral trade.
271.	We also have to learn to see energy issues in a new perspective. Experts predict that within the next 10 years the production capacity for our present oil- based energy system will have reached a ceiling. There will be further rises in the real price of oil and an absolute and increasing shortage in relation to total global import requirements. Therefore, there can be no argument: we must move to new energy systems. The challenge lies in how we manage the transitional period. The General Assembly has already risen to this challenge by deciding to convene in 1981 a United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy. New Zealand attaches the highest importance to this Conference. It intends to play its full part to ensure its success. While many important energy questions lie outside its purview, the Conference has the potential to make a significant contribution to identifying new energy systems that will benefit us all.
272.	In its short history this Organization has often taken the lead in promoting new goals for social justice, international peace and racial equality. Now it must define new standards for global economic co-operation. New Zealand sees this as an evolutionary process. Not all countries share this view. Yet, regardless of our individual prescriptions for the world's economic ills, I am sure we can all agree that this is the place, and now is the time, to give force to the concept of global economic interdependence which we have talked about for so long. What is needed now in the North-South dialogue is not resolutions, but resolution.
273.	We in New Zealand are conscious of the sense of disenchantment in the United Nations and in other international economic bodies with the use to which these existing mechanisms are put. We are ready to look with an open mind at proposals that may come forward for new mechanisms, or new methods of working, to help us find a way around the obstacles which at present inhibit our efforts to achieve a new order in international co-operation. The recent meeting of the Committee of the Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174 took an important initiative to this end. Such a proposal is an expression of faith in our collective capacity to control our economic destiny. We may from time to time lose faith in the machinery. We cannot afford to lose faith in the goals.
274.	Another major topic on the agenda of this Assembly is the problem of disarmament. There are some areas in the vast network of negotiations currently in progress where there is a clear and urgent need to bring the negotiations to a head and to reach new agreement.
275.	Foremost among these is the need to conclude a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty. The Pacific was for many years an arena for the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons. Underground tests are still being conducted in the South Pacific, and elsewhere, despite repeated calls for a halt by the overwhelming majority or the United Nations membership. Last year the General Assembly set a time-table for the conclusion of a treaty. To the regret of us all, that time-table has not been met. It was a reasonable time-table, given the very substantial agreement already apparent on the main provisions of such a treaty. The problems that still stand in the way of a treaty are described as technical. But as a contributor to the work of the ad hoc seismic group, formed to study some of the requirements of a system to monitor compliance with the treaty, we must frankly say that the problems in this area do not seem to us to justify further delay. The conclusion of a treaty is widely recognized as a key to preventing horizontal as well as vertical proliferation.
276.	We shall also support endeavours to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. We continue to attach primacy to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to universal adherence to it. Some States continue to stand aside. The balance of advantage under the Treaty appears to them to favour the nuclear-weapons States. They believe also that the nuclear-weapons States have not honoured the obligation they incurred under the Treaty to advance the control and limitation of their nuclear arsenals, and to facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Be that as it may, the pursuit of a nuclear option by any State not currently possessed of nuclear weapons must inevitably have the gravest implications for regional stability and global security. No nation will enhance its security by these means.
277.	How can the international community allay the fears that may lead a country to keep this nuclear option open? It can encourage and support efforts to accommodate differences within regions. At the global level more can be done. The nuclear-weapons States have been prepared to make unilateral declarations undertaking not to use or to threaten to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapons States. Each has, however, qualified the statement in a different way. Without minimizing the difficulties in the way of reconciling these statements, New Zealand would support further exploration of the ground for bringing these assurances together so as to give them a collective and ultimately binding force.
278.	New Zealand has welcomed, as a major step in the limitation of nuclear arsenals, the signature of the second SALT Treaty by the United States and the USSR. Like others, we hope it will soon be ratified. We look forward, also, to further rounds of negotiations that will lead not only to reductions in nuclear armament but to corresponding limitations in the conventional field. It is on the success of these efforts, and on the growing confidence that should come from such successes, that progress in other areas will rest. It would be a tragic irony if the acceptance of restrictions in one area led to pressures for enhanced capacity in others. Peoples everywhere legitimately expect that the process of reducing armaments will be made irreversible and that resources currently spent on defence will be redirected to reduce suffering and to advance human welfare.
279.	Finally, my Government wishes to pay a tribute to this Organization for its leadership in the field of human rights. In the International Covenants we have a mechanism for the genuine advancement of human rights. Last year in the general debate the Prime Minister of New Zealand expressed our intention to ratify both Covenants. We have done this, and the New Zealand Human Rights Commission has among its tasks that of overseeing their implementation. As a consequence, there have been distinct advances in positive action programmes to enhance the position of minorities, where this is necessary and to introduce new procedures and practices that will help women take their place in the full range of national life. The International Year of the Child has been the occasion of spontaneous action throughout the community to take heed of the needs of children.
280.	We have taken pride in our domestic record in the field of human rights, but we are not complacent. As our multiracial society develops, new perceptions gleaned in part from the international oversight which we have accepted as a party to the Covenants, impel us to further efforts to improve our performance.
281.	New Zealand wishes this Assembly well in its indispensable endeavours.﻿Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to this most responsible position and to express the conviction that your activities will contribute to a fruitful session of the United Nations General Assembly.
93.	In the Soviet Union, as elsewhere, we learned with great sadness the news of the demise of the President of the People's Republic of Angola, Agostinho Neto. Our memories of that great political leader of Africa, that tireless fighter for peace and friendship among peoples, will for ever remain in the hearts of the Soviet people.
94.	The current session of the United Nations General Assembly is the last one to be held in the 1970s. This gives us certain grounds not only for considering the topical issues of today but also for summing up some of the political results of the decade which is about to close and for casting a glance at the past. For the problems of today, as indeed the future itself, are more clearly seen against the background of what the past has to tell us about what action was successful and what was not.
95.	It is worthwhile to recall the circumstances which brought about the founding of the United Nations. The war was still raging and the sword of just retribution had not yet fallen on those who instigated it when the leaders of the major nations of the anti-Fascist coalition undertook a task which today still retains its vital importance: the setting up of a reliable barrier against another world tragedy. That task was indeed enshrined in the United Nations Charter as the main goal of this Organization. The effectiveness of the United Nations in maintaining international peace has been and remains the main yardstick in judging all its activities.
96.	Has the United Nations lived up to its mandate? There can be no simple answer to that question. Yet it should be recognized that it has done a lot of good for consolidating peace and promoting international cooperation. It is also evident that the United Nations could have done more than it has.
97.	We are all aware that the manner in which the States Members of the United Nations act in international affairs cannot be reduced to one common denominator. Here the amplitude between different policy trends is great: some have not yet abandoned their claims to dominate the rest and even to hegemony in the world arena; others, naturally, cannot and will not reconcile themselves to this.
98.	Some countries make every effort to put an end to the arms race and demonstrate a serious and responsible approach to this task; others, on the contrary, hurl ever more funds into that race and inflate their military budgets,
99.	In short, the United Nations, as the broadest international organization, shows up in the boldest relief the characteristic features of the world with all its contradictions and collisions and, at the same time, the growing hopes of the peoples for a peaceful future.
100.	The Soviet Union has never abandoned the belief in the possibility of building a solid edifice of peace. Our people and their Government take this as their basic premise and that there is weighty reason for this has been confirmed by the decade of the 1970s.
101.	At the beginning of the current decade there was a new lease on life, so to speak, through a series of treaties which have brought international relations in Europe in line with the realities of its post-war development. The first Soviet-American agreements on the limitation of strategic arms and the basic principles of relations between the USSR and the United States of America were also concluded at that time.
102.	Special mention should also be made of the historic Conference of the top leaders of 35 nations at Helsinki, which sealed in a document the evolution of Europe towards stronger security and co-operation. In that period, long and serious negotiations at the second round of SALT resulted in the Soviet-American Treaty, whose entry into force, one can say, the whole world is looking forward to.
103.	Indeed, all of us can say that the 1970s will hold an important place in history. These years have seen the positive trend in international affairs which was named "detente" becoming a broad process. Detente—and the Soviet Union stood at its cradle— express the aspirations of our entire nation and, we are sure, those of all peoples of the world.
104.	The attitude towards detente is the best indicator of any country's political intentions. In recent years many a good word has been said about detente. But even very good words in favour of detente are not enough; they must be buttressed by deeds, by the policies of States.
105.	There are still people in the world today who frown when they hear the word "detente"; their faces wrinkle like that of a hungry cat tasting a cucumber in a kitchen-garden.
106.	Take, for instance, the questions of renouncing the spread of enmity and hatred among nations and the prohibition of war propaganda. This is, we may say, a minimum for any State adhering to the policy of detente and desirous of promoting a healthy political climate in the world.
107.	As far back as 1947 the General Assembly adopted a resolution against the propaganda for another war. Over 30 years have elapsed since then, but who would undertake to assert today that such propaganda has been stopped? In many States it has not even been outlawed.
108.	The Soviet Union did that long ago. The provision stating that "war propaganda is banned in the USSR" is a formal part of our Constitution, the fundamental law of our State.
109.	On more than one occasion we have emphasized the urgency of this matter. Indeed, before the guns of the aggressors who unleashed the Second World War began to thunder, war propaganda had been in full swing for many years. Incessant calls had been made for the map of Europe and of the world to be carved up to suit the aggressors' designs. The Soviet Union mentions this fact because the forces that seek to condition people to think in terms of war and the arms build-up are still active.
110.	It is becoming a tradition in some countries to play out scenarios of military conflicts. "Look," they say, "that is how things are going to develop." And estimates are made of the casualties and the number of cities to be swept away. Tens or even hundreds of millions of lives are written off in those callous calculations.
111.	The ancient Greeks, and not they alone, left us wise myths whose beauty lies in glorifying what is human in man. It is not to the credit of our contemporaries that other myths are invented today which are designed to stupefy man with pessimism and to make him despair of the triumph of reason. They depict war as totally unavoidable.
112.	There is no doubt as to the purposes for which these and other myths are invented and the policies which they are designed to serve.
113.	What a huge number of films, books, articles and speeches of politicians and "quasi-politicians", all shot through with falsity and deception, are produced to make people believe the fictitious stories about the source of a threat to peace.
114.	One example is the campaign launched with regard to Cuba, in the course of which all sorts of falsehoods are being piled up concerning the policies of Cuba and the Soviet Union. But the truth is that this propaganda is totally without foundation in reality, and is indeed based on falsehoods. The Soviet Union and Cuba have already stated as much. Our advice on this score is simple: the artificiality of this entire question must be honestly admitted and the matter closed.
115.	The Soviet Union and other countries of the socialist community have never threatened anybody, nor are they doing so now. A society which is confident of its creative forces and abilities needs no war. It needs peace. These words have been inscribed on the banner of our foreign policy ever since the days of Lenin.
116.	The policy of peace and friendship among peoples, the policy of peaceful coexistence of States with different social systems, has invariably been expressed in the decisions of the congresses of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. This policy course will be followed unswervingly in the future- as well. 
117.	Naturally, the USSR and its Warsaw Treaty allies cannot fail to take into account the fact that some States are continuing their military preparations and stepping them up. In these circumstances the USSR and its allies are compelled to look after their security. At the same time our approach in this matter can be described as follows: "The defence potential of the Soviet Union", as L.I. Brezhnev has pointed out, ' 'must be at a level that would deter anyone from attempting to disrupt our peaceful life. A course aimed not at achieving superiority in weapons, but at reducing armaments and easing military confrontation—such is our policy."
118.	He who trusts this policy will never be deceived. The USSR and the socialist countries can always be relied upon in the struggle for peace, disarmament and detente and for the freedom and independence of peoples. Those countries have common ideals and are guided by common goals. Shoulder to shoulder, their peoples are working hard in the grandiose effort of construction.
119.	Indeed the whole world knows how many proposals, and what kind of proposals, have been submitted by the socialist States to other countries, first of all in the United Nations, with the aim of deepening the process of easing tensions in the world, of broadening peaceful co-operation among States, and of strengthening international security.
120.	The countries making up the socialist community co-ordinate their policies for the sake of universal peace, the security of their own peoples and the peoples of other countries. This was again confirmed with new vigour by the fruitful results of the latest series of meetings held by L.I. Brezhnev with top Party and State leaders of socialist countries which took place in the Crimea last summer.
121.	I feel that our opinion will not differ from that of most participants in this session if I say that a comparison of the United Nations Charter provisions with what is going on in the sphere of military activities in some countries reveals a glaring contradiction. Although those States affixed their signatures to the United Nations Charter and its peaceful purposes and principles, they are nevertheless doing everything to see that stockpiled mountains of weapons grow.
122.	In the meantime, the world has long since crossed the line beyond which the arms race has become sheer madness. We urge all States Members of the United Nations to counter this madness with common sense and the will to strengthen mutual trust. For its part, the USSR, together with other countries, will continue to work consistently to stop the arms race, to start dismantling the war machine part by part and to reduce the military arsenals of States down to general and complete disarmament.
123.	Here at the United Nations and at various forums where the disarmament problem is under discussion, there is certainly no dearth of proposals that are well considered and based on the principle of equality and equal security. There are proposals relating both to weapons of mass destruction and to conventional weapons. We are still seized with the question of the reduction of military budgets.
124.	There has been no small number of major initiatives directed towards a general improvement of the political climate in the world, including the proposal for a world treaty on the non-use of force in international relations. In our view, not a single State that sincerely strives for peace and good relations with other countries could possibly object to such a treaty.
125.	There are also initiatives concerning various regions of the world. I should like to point, in particular, to the idea of the States bordering on the Indian Ocean that this ocean be turned into a zone of peace, an idea which is supported by the majority of the countries Members of the United Nations. The Soviet Union is certainly in favour of implementing this idea. It is actively working for an early resumption of the Soviet- American talks on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in the Indian Ocean, talks which were interrupted through no fault of ours. An appropriate agreement on that subject would undoubtedly give this idea a more tangible shape, and this would have a favourable impact on the entire international situation.
126.	Yet, on the whole, one has to note with concern that all or almost all proposals for ending the arms race and for disarmament as a rule encounter opposition on the part of a number of States. They frequently get bogged down in the quagmire of debate. And it takes tremendous efforts to bring them up to the stage of decision-making, though such decisions do not yet ensure real disarmament even in limited areas.
127.	A considerable period of time has already elapsed since the question was raised about reaching an agreement on ending the production of all types of nuclear weapons and the gradual reduction of their stockpiles until they have been completely liquidated. In our days there is no more burning problem than that of removing the threat of nuclear war. Every reasonable person understands this. And it cannot be effectively solved without stopping the assembly line producing an incessant flow of weapons of monstrous destructive power—nuclear warheads, bombs and shells.
128.	As we have repeatedly stated, the Soviet Union is prepared to discuss this fundamental problem together with other countries, and it is proposing that specific negotiations be initiated. All the nuclear Powers without exception are in duty bound to take part in them.
129.	It is sometimes said that ending the production of nuclear weapons and their liquidation are too difficult a task. But can this be a reason for not starting the search for ways and means to resolve the problem? We are sure that reaching an appropriate agreement is not beyond the realm of possibility if States, and first of all the nuclear States, adopt a responsible approach.
130.	The complex of questions relating to nuclear weapons includes the ensuring of guarantees of the security of non-nuclear States and the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of States where there are no such weapons at present.
131.	The General Assembly has already adopted resolutions of principle on these matters. It is now necessary to embody them in binding international agreements. 
132 In our view, further efforts should be made to strengthen the regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The responsibility for this lies upon all States. We hope that the forthcoming Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will be crowned with positive results. This Conference will be held soon.
133.	Negotiations on a number of essential aspects of disarmament are already in progress, and on some they have been going on for a long time. I should like to single out a couple of questions whose solution could, in our view, be found in the not-too-distant future.
134.	Progress has been achieved in the negotiations between the Soviet Union, the United States and the United Kingdom on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests. We would expect that no complicating elements will be introduced in the negotiations by our partners. But, unfortunately, these complications are being introduced even today.
135.	In the course of Soviet-American consultations, basic elements of an agreement banning radiological weapons have been worked out. If work on the agreement is not impeded artificially, it can be speedily prepared for signature. This means that, following the can on bacteriological weapons, one more type of weapon of mass destruction will be prohibited.
136.	The file of constructive proposals on various aspects of the disarmament problem is impressive and proper use should be made of it. This offers broad opportunities for action by the United Nations, which, at its tenth special session, devoted to disarmament, adopted a programme which on the whole is a good one. A United Nations resolution should not merely remain on paper. For the time being, however, it is but a paper, though a well-written one.
137.	The signing of the Soviet-American Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms is convincing proof that, given goodwill and readiness to take into account each other's legitimate interests, it is possible to achieve agreements on the most difficult questions. The Treaty builds a bridge to the further limitation and reduction of strategic weapons. It also contains great potential for exerting a positive influence on other negotiations on the limitations of the arms race and on disarmament.
138.	It can be stated without exaggeration that a major step has been taken for the USSR, the United States of America and the entire world. It is quite understandable, therefore, that, one after another, the representatives of States speaking from this rostrum speak out in favour of that Treaty.
139.	The strengthening of universal peace is inseparable from ensuring security in Europe. The situation on the European continent is not merely a part of the general picture of the world situation: today, as in the past, it has a profound impact on the course of international developments.
140.	Since the historic moment when it raised the banner of a new social system, our country has been pursuing a consistent course towards creating conditions of reliable peace in Europe. Everything we have accomplished in the name of that goal is an open book, and we are proud of its every page.
141.	Of course, we are far from underestimating the contributions made by other States. We give their due to the countries that took part in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, which was crowned by the adoption of the Final Act. That document provides guidelines for further efforts to deepen the process of detente in Europe.
142.	Today the basis for the peaceful co-operation of States on the European continent is more solid than it was yesterday. Favourable changes have taken place in relations between socialist and capitalist countries in Europe.
143.	Soviet-French co-operation is on the rise. There is a considerable degree of mutual understanding and agreement on major issues of European and world politics, and accordingly there is a possibility for the further development of fruitful co-operation.
144.	The development of our relations with the Federal Republic of Germany has been following a positive trend. Both sides appreciate the mutual advantages of what has been achieved, recognizing that a good deal could yet be accomplished in the future. I should like to express the hope that there will be no move on the part of the Federal Republic of Germany that would reduce such possibilities for the future or that would run counter to the peaceful line in Europe and to the easing of international tensions.
145.	We are interested in the consistent development of Soviet-British relations. We are hopeful that there is a desire for this in the United Kingdom, too.
146.	We have good relations with Italy. The assets accumulated in these relations must be multiplied.
147.	I should like to note the genuine and traditional good-neighbourly relations between the USSR and Finland. We appreciate all the good achievements that have been made in our relations with other Scandinavian countries.
148.	A positive shift is taking place in our relations with Spain.
149.	The development of our ties with the rest of Western Europe is also a source of satisfaction.
150.	On the whole, both in the field of bilateral relations with States having a different social system and in other fields, the Soviet Union is following the course charted by the Helsinki Conference.
151.	The roots that political detente has taken on European soil cannot, however, be viable unless practical measures are taken in the field of military detente. In this regard, great prospects have been opened up by the proposals contained in the Declaration of the Political Advisory Committee of the Warsaw Treaty Organization adopted last November, and in the May communique of the Committee of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of that Organization.
152.	First of all, I wish to refer to the initiative concerning the conclusion between the European States participants in the Helsinki Conference of a treaty on the non-first use of either nuclear or conventional weapons against each other, the intent of which is self- evident.
153.	Unfortunately, our Western partners have not yet shown themselves ready to engage in talks on this problem. Nevertheless, we expect that a sober approach and a sense of responsibility will prompt them to react positively to our proposal.
154.	The socialist countries are still waiting for a response to yet another important initiative of theirs— concerning the convening, at a political level and with the participation of all European countries as well as the United States and Canada, of a conference on strengthening confidence among States, easing military confrontation and the subsequent thinning out of armed forces and armaments in Europe, and their reduction. Each of those countries could make its own contribution to the work of that conference.
155.	In the opinion of the Soviet Union, substantial work is needed on a bilateral as well as a multilateral basis to ensure the success of both the conference on military detente on the European continent and the Madrid meeting to be held next year of representatives of the States participants in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe. Far from competing with each other, those two forums are complementary.
156.	As for the Madrid meeting, it should focus its attention on truly urgent issues of detente in Europe. No narrow selfish interests should be allowed to prevent this.
157.	Now a few words about the Vienna talks, the subject of which, as will be recalled, is the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. This is not a problem of significance to Europe alone. Our country invariably adopts constructive positions at those talks and puts forward initiatives which also take into account the legitimate interests of the Western partners. Only strict observance of the principle of undiminished security of either party would bring the Vienna talks to the road leading to agreement, and the sooner that happens the better.
158.	The review of problems relating to Europe would be incomplete if no reference were made to attempts undertaken from time to time by some countries to test the durability of the Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin.  This is contrary to the long-term interests which provided the basis for that agreement and which must serve as guidance for all States, particularly the parties to it.
159.	The root-cause of the complexities and contradictions of the international situation at the present day lies to no small extent in the fact that the existing sources of tensions and conflicts between States do not disappear and that now and then new ones keep springing up.
160.	There is more than one such source in Asia. It was only six months ago that aggression was committed against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. Practically the whole world branded the aggressors as such, but have appropriate conclusions been drawn from that event by all those who should have drawn them?
161.	This issue cannot be drowned in the artificially whipped up propaganda campaign concerning Indo- Chinese refugees, a campaign whose sharp edge is directed against Viet Nam. No, that edge should be turned in another direction, which is well known.
162.	It is also no secret who imposed and nurtured the bloodthirsty murderous regime of Pol Pot. Today that regime in Kampuchea has been done away with and there will be no return to the past. The legitimate representatives of the Kampuchean people must be given the opportunity to take the seat belonging to Kampuchea in the United Nations.
163.	The policy of some States that are intensifying their interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan is short-sighted—there is no other term for it. That country, which has chosen the road of progressive democratic transformation, comes out in favour of good relations with its neighbours and pursues an independent foreign policy, a policy of non-alignment. The Soviet Union, which has long-standing ties of friendship and good neighbourliness with Afghanistan, con-siders that this inadmissible interference must be stopped.
164.	With respect to such Middle East States as Turkey and Iran, not only have we common borders but we also maintain relations of traditional co-operation with them. We take a positive attitude to the steps which those and other Asian countries take to protect and strengthen their sovereignty, and we are willing to develop relations with them.
165.	We in the Soviet Union are satisfied with the friendly nature of relations between the USSR and India, that great Asian country with its consistently peaceful policy. The Soviet-Indian relationship is a major factor for stability and peace on the Asian continent.
166.	We wish to maintain, naturally on the basis of reciprocity, normal good relations with all States, whether in south or south-east Asia or in the Far East. This applies to Japan, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and other countries of those regions.
167.	Like all peace-loving peoples, the Soviet people are gravely concerned over the state of affairs in the Middle East—one of the "hottest" spots on earth, where now there emanates a serious threat to peace.
168.	The Middle East problem, if divested of what is immaterial, boils down to the following: either the con-sequences of the aggression against the Arab States and peoples are eliminated or the invaders will be rewarded by being allowed to appropriate lands that belong to others. A just settlement and the establishment of lasting peace in the Middle East require that Israel should end its occupation of all the Arab lands it seized in 1967; that the legitimate rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including the right to establish their own State, be safeguarded; and that the right of all States in the Middle East, including Israel, to independent existence under conditions of peace be effectively guaranteed.
169.	The separate deal between Egypt and Israel resolves nothing. It is nothing but a means designed to lull the vigilance of peoples. It is a way of piling up on a still greater scale explosive material capable of producing a new conflagration in the Middle East. Moreover, added to the tense political atmosphere in this and the adjacent areas, is the heavy smell of oil.
170.	It is high time that all States represented in the United Nations realized how vast is the tragedy of the Arab people of Palestine. What is the worth of declarations in defence of humanism and human rights— whether for refugees or not—if before the eyes of the entire world the inalienable rights of an entire people, driven from its land and deprived of a livelihood, are grossly trampled upon?
171.	The Soviet policy with respect to the Middle East problem is one of principle. We are in favour of a comprehensive and just settlement, of the establishment of durable peace in the Middle East, a region not far from our borders. The Soviet Union sides firmly with Arab peoples, who resolutely reject deals at the expense of their legitimate interests.
172.	By adopting in 1960 the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples—one of the most significant acts of the United Nations—the world community acknowledged the indisputable fact that the hour of colonialism had struck. Since then an overwhelming majority of peoples have cast off the yoke of colonialism. But humanity's conscience continues to revolt against the fact that the shackles of colonialism and racism have not yet been completely broken. And it is above all of southern Africa that we should be talking here.
173.	For many years now the peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia have been waging a selfless struggle for their freedom and independence. The Soviet Union is entirely on the side of their noble cause. We have raised and shall continue to raise our voice in their support, and we shall co-operate with those States, especially African States, which adhere to the positions of justice, of upholding the inalienable rights of those peoples. All kinds of combinations, no matter how superficially clever, which are aimed at preserving the domination of racists and colonialists with the help of hastily formed puppet regimes should be resolutely rejected.
174.	Is it possible to achieve a political settlement in southern Africa? Yes, it is possible and there are ways leading to it. But so far the racists and their stooges have replied with bullets to proposals that a choice be made in favour of a just and peaceful solution.
175.	The session of the General Assembly of the United Nations will be right if it clearly states its resolute support for the liberation struggle of the peoples of southern Africa and condemns attempts to drown this struggle in blood as a crime against humanity. It is a direct duty of the United Nations to make those who ignore the decisions of the United Nations on southern Africa respect them.
176.	The Soviet people are well aware of the contribution of the peoples of Latin America to the struggle for peace and national liberation. This contribution will be all the greater the more the stand of Latin American States in defending their independence is resolute and the less their policies are influenced from the outside. In this connexion, we note with satisfaction the growing authority of Latin America in international relations.
177.	In its approach to all continents, to all countries of the world, the Soviet Union does not apply different yardsticks when it comes to the sovereignty of States, the freedom of peoples and genuine human rights. One cannot hold aloft the Charter of the United Nations in one situation and hide it under the table in another. The provisions and principles of the Charter must be applied equally to any State and any people.
178.	The Soviet Union has repeatedly stressed, notably in the United Nations, the significance of the non-aligned movement and its peaceful orientation. We are confident that the non-aligned States will continue to make use of their entire political weight in the interests of peace, disarmament and detente. This confidence of ours is supported by the successful results of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which recently ended in Havana. This was an important forum and a major international event.
179.	What is needed in the first place to resolve any important international problem of a political, economic or other nature is an atmosphere of peace. And whether peace will be more durable or less stable depends to an important extent on the state of relations between the Soviet Union and the United States. That conclusion is objective and indisputable.
180.	The leadership of the Soviet Union makes no secret of its desire to have normal and, what is more, friendly relations with the United States. This only requires the observance of principles which have become well-established in international relations; and they are recorded, in particular, in the well-known Soviet-American documents—that is, the principles of peaceful coexistence between States and of non-interference in the affairs of others. We shall not allow anybody to meddle in our internal affairs. Concern for Soviet-American relations is a matter for both sides. It is only on this basis that the relations between the USSR and the United States can develop successfully.
181.	Our position was stated with exhaustive clarity and precision by L. I. Brezhnev in Vienna, in particular, in the course of his meeting with the President of the United States, Mr. Jimmy Carter. The meeting showed that, given the wish on both sides, the USSR and the United States are able to find mutually acceptable solutions and to co-operate in the interests of international detente and peace,
182.	L. I. Brezhnev has stated:
"There is no country or people in the world, in fact, with which the Soviet Union would not like to have good relations; there is no topical international problem to the solution of which the Soviet Union would not be willing to contribute; there is no source of danger of war in the removal of which by peaceful means the Soviet Union would not be interested." 
183.	In the succession of post-war developments, along with positive events there were also dangerous ones which gravely threatened the foundations of peace. A closer look at these developments would easily reveal that the evolution of the international situation largely depends upon the States which have the most powerful levers to influence it.
184.	When those levers are activated to attain objectives contrary to, or even openly defying, the United Nations Charter, conflict situations and international crises arise. The instigators of such events usually seek to whitewash themselves and, in that, they do not hesitate to pin all kinds of labels on others. That is a procedure that is, unfortunately, sometimes followed.
185.	One such tactic consists in juggling with the term "hegemonism", which in recent years has been increasingly used in international political practice. Although of recent origin, the term "hegemonism" denotes a phenomenon that is far from new. On the contrary, it has been known, so to speak, from time immemorial. It means striving for world domination, for domination over other countries and peoples.
186.	The Soviet attitude towards hegemonism and domination is clear. Since its very first days, the Soviet State has resolutely objected to anyone's being a hegemonist with others submitting to his will, and to any States' holding a position of domination over others.
187.	Twenty million human lives were sacrificed by our people to defeat Hitler's designs for world domination and to bury hegemonism in its Fascist attire. This figure alone is indicative of our score with hegemonism.
188.	Hegemonism is a direct antipode to the equality of States and peoples, an antipode to the ideal which the October Revolution proclaimed for the whole world and which the United Nations, as prescribed by its Charter, should promote in every possible way in international relations. Its manifestation in our day constitutes a serious obstacle to the process of detente to which there is not and cannot be any reasonable alternative.
189.	The time has come for all States Members of the United Nations to take an unambiguous position with regard to hegemonism—to condemn it and to block any claims to hegemony in world affairs. Its inadmissibility should be raised to the level of a principle that must be rigorously observed.
190.	Guided by all this, the Soviet Union is proposing the inclusion in the agenda of the current session of an important item entitled "Inadmissibility of the policy of hegemonism in international relations" and is submitting an appropriate draft resolution to be considered at the session.
191.	The purport of this draft resolution is that no States or groups of States should claim, under any circumstances or for any motives whatsoever, hegemony in regard to other States or groups of States.
192.	We are convinced that all those who approach the conduct of international affairs on the basis of equality and in the interests of detente and peace cannot oppose the adoption of such a draft resolution. It is to be hoped that the General Assembly will consider the draft with a high sense of responsibility.
193.	Following the General Assembly, the United Nations Security Council, with the five nuclear Powers as its , permanent members, could also express itself against hegemonism. It would be a good idea subsequently to couch the renunciation by States of a policy of hegemonism in all its manifestations in terms of a broad international agreement and to conclude such an agreement or treaty.
194.	In conducting its policy, our country scrupulously complies with the principles of the United Nations Charter and invariably pursues its purposes. We never lose sight of the fundamental basis of the activities of the world Organization, that is, concentration of its efforts in ensuring that the peoples can live in conditions of peace. The Soviet Union has consistently come out in favour of strengthening the United Nations, of no one's being allowed to erode it.
195.	The peoples will assess the results of the current session, like those of previous sessions, of the General Assembly primarily in terms of what it will have achieved to make people feel more secure. Hence, great responsibility rests with all States Members of the United Nations and with their representatives assembled in this hall.
196.	Everything positive that we can achieve today will help us in the 1980s to consolidate and to develop the successes of the 1970s. That in turn will largely determine the thoughts and feelings, the memories of the past and the faith in the future that mankind will take with it into the next millennium.
197.	We wish, and we shall do all in our power to ensure, that the work of the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly may culminate in the adoption of resolutions that will be commended by the peoples of the world.
﻿We meet in this General Assembly on the threshold of a new decade. It will be a time of complex challenge, a period in which, more than ever, co-operative endeavours among nations are a matter not only of idealism but also of direct self-interest.
39.	The decade now drawing to a close has been characterized by rapid, far-reaching and fundamental change. Awesome technological developments are all about us. The assertion of national independence has reshaped the political geography of our planet. Within nations we see an accelerating rise in individual economic, political and social expectations. The unrelenting hostility of the cold war has given way to a more complex relationship between East and West, with elements of both competition and co-operation. The simple notion of a bipolar world has become obsolete. Increasingly there is a profusion of different systems and allegiances and a diffusion of political and military power. The world economic order is also undergoing inexorable transformations. Many nations formerly among the disadvantaged are now achieving global economic power. Economic interdependence has become a daily reality for the citizens of every nation.
40.	These sweeping changes have for the most part worked in constructive directions, changing lives for the better and opening new possibilities for collective effort and creative diplomacy.
41.	But while these developments demonstrate that progress is possible, they by no means demonstrate that it is inevitable. I say this for two reasons.
42.	First, in a number of areas the pace of current progress is dwarfed by the scope of coming challenges. The next decade will decide whether we have the collective wisdom and the common will to surmount a series of imposing and interrelated problems which must be dealt with in a comprehensive manner.
43.	The need to develop new forms of energy will pose a continuing challenge. We have entered the difficult transition from a petroleum economy to one based on other forms of energy.
44.	Even without this added burden, we face an imposing task in providing for the basic needs of people and in narrowing the combustible disparity between wealth and despair. The food shortage facing developing countries, for example, was 12 million tons in 1975. It could be 70 to 85 million tons by 1990, unless productivity rises sharply.
45.	We must strike a decent balance between the burgeoning demands of more people for a better life and the inescapable reality of a fragile environment.
46.	Such prospects carry the seeds of future discord. As these seeds ripen, and the growth and spread of weapons continue, regional conflicts become all the more dangerous in their toll of lives and resources and in the heightened risk of wider confrontation.
47.	And despite our emergence from the days of unrelenting hostility, the East-West relationship can deteriorate dangerously whenever one side fails to respect the security interests of the other.
48.	Our ability to meet these tests depends on a second issue: will we confront such challenges together, and benefit together? Or will we let adversity divide us, and thus conquer?
49.	I must be frank and say that I am not sure what the answer will be.
50.	There are some reasons for encouragement. In recent years the nations here represented have found it easier, in many different forums, to talk with each other rather than at each other. East and West have entered into the broadest arms control agenda in history. The Soviet Union and the United States have negotiated significant limitations on strategic arms in a treaty that now awaits ratification. North and South have made progress on financial, trade and commodity issues—far more progress than has been acknowledged. Agreement has been reached on a sharp increase in the resources of IMF. Lending by the multilateral development banks has increased. Expanded trade opportunities have been opened by the recently concluded trade negotiations. We have moved ahead on other matters, such as international debt and a common fund for commodities. We should recognize such progress and build on it. We have taken steps as well towards the resolution of some deeply embedded regional disputes.
51.	But I am concerned that there are also factors at work which could reverse this co-operative trend. The severity of the problems we face could drive nations to the pursuit of their own separate advantage at the expense of international co-operation. In times of economic trouble, even relatively prosperous countries find it more difficult to look beyond their internal concerns to meet international needs. Indeed, it is a vivid lesson of history that hardship can breed short-sighted insularity. It can arouse instincts for self-preservation at the expense of others. In such times, the voices of economic nationalism will be raised in all our countries. We must resist them. We must resist, as well, the voices of international confrontation. In a number of international negotiations, political as well as economic, we have worked our way through to the toughest issues involved. We must not react now in frustration, and unleash a spiral of rhetoric which could deepen rather than resolve our divisions.
52.	The challenges of the 1980s can be met—if each of us here represented meets the responsibilities which we share.
53.	Our first responsibility is to persist in the search for peace, to reduce both the danger and the destructiveness of war. The future of two regions—the Middle East and southern Africa—depends on specific decisions that will be made in the coming months.
54.	We believe that the 26 March Treaty between Egypt and Israel has reduced the dangers inherent in the Arab-Israeli conflict and has laid the foundation for a settlement that can be both durable and just.
55.	But the dramatic achievement of peace between Israel and Egypt and the successful implementation of the first phases of the Treaty of peace have not obscured the necessity of moving toward peace between Israel and its other neighbours. Indeed it remains the resolute view of my Government that further progress towards an over-all peace is essential.
56.	We know that an ultimate settlement must address the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The Palestinian question must be resolved in all of its aspects.
57.	As the peace process continues to unfold, it is our deepest desire that representatives of the Palestinian people and the Governments of Jordan and Syria should join in this great quest. 
58.	This is consistent with—indeed it underscores— our unshakable commitment to Israel's security and well-being, now and in the future.
59.	None of the parties involved in this difficult negotiation has any illusions that resolving the Palestinian issue will be easy. But the United States is convinced that progress will be made towards that goal.
60.	Preserving the integrity of Lebanon is also critical to peace in the Middle East. There has been a cease-fire in southern Lebanon, the fragility of which is underscored by the events of today. We need not only a temporary cease-fire, but a broader truce. We will be working towards such a goal in our discussions with other interested Governments here at this Assembly. Lebanon has suffered all too much.
61.	The desire for peace is shared by all the peoples of the Middle East. We recognize that there are disagreements about how best to reach that common goal. We believe the course on which we are embarked is the right one, indeed the only one that has shown practical results. We call on all who genuinely seek peace to join in this endeavour.
62.	A step towards peace has been taken as well on the Rhodesian conflict. The parties are now engaged in negotiation towards a solution that could combine true majority rule with essential minority rights. The United Kingdom Government, the Commonwealth nations, and the parties themselves deserve great credit for this new step. The deepening agony of war could be ended by agreement on a fair constitution and new elections, as called for in the final communique issued by the Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, held at Lusaka from 1 to 7 August
63.	We have made substantial progress in Namibia. But obstacles remain. The contact group is working with the parties concerned to find ways to resolve the few outstanding issues. We do not underestimate the difficulties, but neither should any of us underestimate the opportunities that a settlement would bring for all of southern Africa.
64.	In most negotiations, we can best make progress by stages. A knot can never be untied from the inside. We must begin with the parts that we can grasp, and work our way through to the end of the problem.
65.	History will judge us severely if we let our opportunities for peace slip away. As negotiations proceed, the issues we address become progressively more difficult. But we must not let future fears or ambitions undermine the progress that has been made.
66.	As we work on these and other conflicts; let us also squarely face the fact that our planet is plagued by those who make war on innocents, as we saw just weeks ago in the tragic death of Lord Mountbatten. We must have greater international co-operation to combat the barbarous practices of the terrorist. The United States strongly supports the basic elements of the draft convention against the taking of hostages, the conclusion of this treaty will contribute to a growing consensus that terrorism will not be tolerated, regardless of the political cause its perpetrators claim to pursue.
67.	Finally, the requirement of peace carries with it an international responsibility to limit the spread and accumulation of arms. A particular obligation falls to the largest nuclear Powers—the United States and the Soviet Union—to contain the competition in strategic weapons. The treaty concluded after the second round of SALT can be a major step towards the fulfilment of that obligation.
68.	The goal of strategic stability will be further served if the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States are able to agree on a comprehensive ban, on nuclear tests. As the nuclear super-Powers seek the path towards mutual restraint, all nations must also recognize the direct threat to their security from the spread of nuclear weapons. Developments in recent years can bring new impetus to the non-proliferation effort—including progress in the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation—which can help us to find safer ways to develop nuclear energy for humanity; the strengthening of the IAEA safeguards; the substantial increase in the number of parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons; the entry into force of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), which now finally appears within grasp; and the pledge by a number of nuclear Powers, under specific circumstances, to refrain from the use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States.
69.	But there have also been serious setbacks- further demonstrations of intent to acquire nuclear weapons, in disregard of the inherent dangers for regional and international security. The Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to be held next year, will be a critical time for taking stock—and for redoubling our efforts to make progress on this urgent international priority.
70.	Beyond the search for peace, a second responsibility that we share is to be sensitive to the international consequences of our national economic decisions, and to resist the temptation to solve our economic problems at the expense of others.
71.	The imprudence of economic nationalism has been harshly demonstrated in the past. The world depression a half-century ago was spread, deepened and prolonged by a wave of protectionism. That memory has spurred us towards a new multilateral trade agreement intended to open markets and keep them open, even in a time of economic strain.
72.	Today, let me address one of those issues which most clearly reflects the direct connection between national decisions and global consequences. That issue is energy. In almost no area is the need for common action more apparent or more urgent. It is an issue which now threatens to divide us, economically and politically. In a future of greater scarcity, these divisions could weaken the fabric of international comity which this organisation embodies.
73.	All nations will suffer if all nations do not act responsibly in their consumption, of energy, in its pricing and in its production. Despite a difficult prognosis for our energy future, I believe the basis may exist for progress. 
74.	Until the 1970s modern industrial economies operated on two basic assumptions, which also governed relations between oil importers and exporters. These two assumptions were that oil is cheap, and that supplies are unlimited. Now all nations realize that these assumptions no longer hold.
75.	The commitments made by the major industrial countries at the Tokyo Economic Summit demonstrate this clearly. My Government is taking ambitious action to address the energy problem and is making efforts to exceed these commitments. President Carter has committed the United States not to import more than 8.2 million barrels of oil a day in 1979, and never to exceed the peak level of our imports reached in 1977. Total United States energy research and development this year is $3.2 billion. We are investing $528 million this year—and $600 million next year—in the development and use of solar energy. We are significantly expanding our development of synthetic fuels, to take advantage of the abundant coal and oil shale in our country.
76.	Much of this new energy technology will have application in other countries as well. We will seek to make it available to others under mutually satisfactory conditions. For we recognize that by helping others resolve their energy problems, we help resolve our own.
77.	Let me indicate some of the ways in which we are prepared to work with others to meet our common energy needs.
78.	We have joined other industrial nations in agreeing to establish a provisional international technology group which will recommend ways to broaden international participation in the commercial development of alternative fuels.
79.	I pledged last year that the United States would do more to mobilize its technical talents on behalf of the development of others. I am pleased to report that next month we will establish an Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation. This Institute will work for the goals set by the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development. It will help the people of developing nations to benefit from our technologies. The Institute's Policy Council will include experts from developing nations. Energy development will be among its highest priorities.
80.	We will participate actively in preparations for the 1981 United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy.
81.	At the recent Tokyo Economic Summit, the World Bank was invited to take the lead in coordinating our assistance to developing nations in the field of energy. We suggest that the World Bank bring together a group of experts to review the question of energy research, development and training in detail. Specifically, that group could evaluate the work of existing energy research and training centres, both national and international, in developing countries. In addition, it could recommend how current institutions could be strengthened and whether new multilateral ones should be created. We are supporting the expansion of the World Bank's programme for the exploration and development of mineral fuels. The Bank is also considering whether local programmes of development finance are adequate to support the rapid application of solar, small hydroelectric and other renewable energy technologies in developing nations.
82.	The Inter-American Development Bank has proposed creation of a facility to provide political risk insurance and loan guarantees for private investment in energy and minerals projects in its region. This could be an effective means of stimulating energy development there. We are willing to pursue with the Bank its initiative and work with other countries to develop an acceptable proposal.
83.	As the industrial countries make serious efforts to restrict oil demand, and to help the developing countries meet their energy challenges, the question increasingly becomes whether the oil-producing nations are prepared to stabilize prices, and, to the extent it is within their control, ensure adequate supplies. A failure to do so will continue to have harsh consequences for the world economy, especially the poorer nations.
84.	We understand the natural desire of oil-exporting nations to husband this valuable resource for future generations. And we accept the fact that oil prices must reflect not only the strength of demand, but also the long-term scarcity of supply—so long as scarcity is never contrived to manipulate price,
85.	But oil producers must understand that there is a limit to what the economies of the oil-consuming nations, and the global economy, can sustain.
86.	We must all proceed with a responsible recognition that our national energy decisions will have profound global effects—and will return either to haunt or to help their makers.
87.	A third common responsibility is an intensified commitment to help improve the lives of our fellow human beings—to provide the necessities of life, to afford the chance to progress, to assure a voice in decisions which will determine their future.
88.	We have made progress in the field of human rights, but we must do more. In the past year, some nations have taken steps to restore legal protections and democratic institutions. And we have seen the inauguration of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, the forceful call of the Organization of African Unity [OAU] for the creation of regional human rights institutions on the continent of Africa, and the activation of UNESCO's human rights procedures. The growing concern for human rights is undeniable. Yet the sad truth is that, even as we sit here today, men and women face torture, death and oppression for daring to exercise rights set forth in the Charter of this body three decades ago. Our joint challenge is to advance the aspirations of all peoples for human dignity.
89.	Our commitment must be to economic as well as political and social rights—for all are indispensable to human dignity. Improvements in economic well-being, opportunities for participation in the political process, and a growing sense of both economic and political equity can do much to defuse the grievances which can lead to national convulsions and international tensions.
90.	To meet this commitment to a better life for all peoples, we must each strive to move the North-South dialogue beyond grand themes and on to specific cases—to priority areas in which practical development goals can be met. Let me discuss in this connexion our efforts towards a goal we should adopt as a matter of simple humanity—that by the end of this century no person on this bountiful earth should have to go hungry.
91.	Last year, I noted that we must not be lulled by good weather and plentiful harvests into losing our sense of urgency. Since then, poor harvests in a number of countries have substantially increased the international demand for food. This situation underscores the need to accumulate adequate stocks to support world food security. I assure Members that the United States will do all it can to prevent a global food crisis. The American harvest this year will be of record size. We have removed all restrictions on wheat production for next year. We have established farmer-owned grain reserves which, through the accumulation and release of stocks, have helped stabilize supplies.
92.	An international wheat agreement still eludes our grasp. We should not abandon this goal. But we should move immediately to complete negotiations for a new food aid convention. The World Food Council has urged an agreement by mid-1980. We support that recommendation. In the meantime, we are already implementing the higher food aid pledge the convention would entail.
93.	At the same time, major emphasis must be placed on improving global food production. Over half of American direct development aid is now devoted to agriculture. We will continue working to improve the yields of major food crops, to preserve croplands and to expand research on ways to increase the production of traditional and new crops, especially those grown by poor farmers.
94.	These efforts have received effective support from the International Agricultural Research Centres. We support proposals to double the resources contributed to those centres and intend to increase our contribution. We hope additional countries will become contributors.
95.	We must be aware; however, that in the long run these efforts could be vitiated if the world's population growth is not slowed. Half the couples of child-bearing age still do not have adequate access to family planning services. We must strive to make family planning services—along with other elements of basic health care, adequate food supplies and clean water— available to all as rapidly as we can.
96.	And in the short run, we must be prepared to meet emergency needs wherever famine afflicts humanity or refugees seek haven—in Africa, in Latin America, in South-East Asia or elsewhere.
97.	The proposal made by Vice-President Mondaleat the Geneva Meeting for a refugee resettlement fund reflects our belief that the international community should deal on a global basis with a global and grave refugee crisis. We urge broad participation in this fund.
98.	Vigorous and large-scale international action is required to bring relief to the starving in Kampuchea, now facing one of the great human tragedies of modern times. Tens of thousands of sick and hungry Khmer are already pressing on Thailand's border. Hundreds of thousands may soon follow them. Even more widespread famine and disease are in prospect, especially in view of recent reports of intensified fighting. To avert unthinkable catastrophe» an international programme of humanitarian relief must be established in Kampuchea as soon as possible. International organizations must be able to bring a co-ordinated, massive and adequately monitored programme of emergency relief to all needy Khmer. We would endorse such an effort.
99.	The food crisis in Kampuchea promises both to multiply the flow of refugees and to take a terrible toil among those who cannot escape. The flood of refugees from Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea already has brought great suffering to hundreds of thousands of innocent people, as well as imposed heavy burdens on countries of first asylum.
100.	The international community has begun to respond. But humanitarian steps are not enough. The community of nations must make a more active effort to restore peace to the region and to resolve by non- military means the problems that developments in Indo-China have carried in their wake. They pose a threat to the stability of the region as a whole.
101.	I believe we can meet the challenges before us. But let us not misjudge their magnitude.
102.	Resolution of regional disputes and placing new limits on the instruments of war will require new acts of national and international will. The 1980s could portend a prolonged energy crisis. It could be a decade of widespread famine. Unless the swelling deficits of developing countries can be managed, many of their economies may stagnate and some could be threatened with collapse. Global problems like these require global solutions.
103.	This Assembly will decide whether to launch a new round of negotiations on economic co-operation for development. Let me state today that the United States would participate, in the Committee of the Whole Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174, in consultations to decide on the most effective way of conducting such negotiations.
104.	If new global negotiations are to succeed, the participants must be realistic about each other's political and economic capabilities. We must assign priority to those issues on which concrete results are possible, and we should avoid duplicating the work of existing institutions. In this way, the negotiations could help build a global consensus for action.
105.	Many of the issues I have addressed are already prominent on the agenda of the United Nations. The need for co-operation in addressing them requires that we continue to strengthen this institution. Financial, procedural and management reforms are urgently necessary. As a first step, we urge that the Secretary-General's recommendations, now adopted by this Assembly, be fully implemented.
106.	The urgency of the requirements I have described calls for something more on the part of all Members of the United Nations.
107.	The distinctions between North and South, like those between East and West, reflect differing interests. They have a role in defining the issues and in clarifying our choices. But we must commit ourselves to finding areas where our interests converge.
108.	Each of us has our special values to be nurtured, our particular goals to be served, and I do not suggest it can or should be otherwise. The United States believes in a world of diversity.
109.	But let us resolve—here, at this Assembly — to find in our common needs and common humanity a renewed dedication to the search for common ground.
