Mr. President, first of all allow me to extend warm congratulations to you on your being elected President of the thirty fifth session of the General Assembly. We believe that under your presidency the current session will achieve new successes in the noble cause of maintaining international peace and security.
81.	This year we are celebrating the thirty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 1514 (XV) containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. On this occasion we note with pleasure that four more countries—Zimbabwe, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Kiribati and Vanuatu—have joined the ranks of independent countries since last year. We warmly welcome the admission of Zimbabwe and of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations. It is our sincere hope that these newly independent countries will play an active role in international affairs and make their contributions to the cause of world peace and to the progress of mankind.
82.	The past year has witnessed encouraging progress in the struggle to win national liberation, defend state independence and safeguard world peace. The brilliant victory of the Zimbabwe people marks a significant turning point in the course of the African people's struggle to root out colonialist and racist domination in southern Africa. The just demand of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples for the recovery of their lost territories and the restoration to the Palestinian people of their national rights has won increasingly extensive support throughout the world. Irresistibly, the national democratic movement of the Latin American peoples continues to develop in depth. The peoples of Kampuchea and Afghanistan, holding high the sacred banner of safeguarding national independence and fighting heroically against brute force, have upset the smug calculations of foreign aggressors for a quick decision in the war and exacted an ever heavier price from them. In 1980 the United Nations, the Islamic Conference, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN], the Organization of African Unity [OAU] and the European Community have made a series of very important decisions on the major international issues of today, giving expression to the urgent desire of all peoples for world peace, security and justice. The unprecedentedly strong reaction to the Afghan incident shows that the struggle of the people of the whole world against hegemonism and for world peace has reached a new level.
83.	However, we cannot ignore the fact that world peace and the independence and security of States are still facing serious threats. The international situation is more tense and turbulent than before. The danger of war is growing. Relying on its vastly increased military strength, the Soviet Union has stepped up its pace of expansion. It has launched a blitzkrieg against Afghanistan and occupied the country by armed force. With Soviet backing, the Vietnamese authorities have not only refused to withdraw their forces from Kampuchea but have invaded the border areas of Thailand, making threats of war against the Southeast Asian countries. Thus the resolutions of the United Nations on Afghanistan and Kampuchea have been grossly trampled underfoot.
84.	Prior to the Afghan incident, the Soviet Union had normally carried out its military invasion or subversion of third world countries through its agents. But this time, in Afghanistan, it dropped the mask and sent troops to fight the battle itself. Through its propaganda machine it openly declared that "under the new historical conditions, the internationalist missions of the Soviet armed forces have broadened". In other words, the Soviet Union may, under the pretext of fulfilling its "internationalist obligations", carry out armed intervention in other countries at will. It even advanced a theory to justify aggression by stating that, in the Soviet Union, "a hostile Afghanistan is unacceptable, because there is a common border 2,200 kilometres long". This "doctrine" of allowing no hostile neighbours means that all the neighbours of the Soviet Union must show complete obedience. It is even more peremptory and aggressive in nature than the notorious doctrine of "limited sovereignty". Based on such logic, would it not be all right for Israel to hold on to the Arab territories it has occupied by force and commit further aggressions against the neighbouring Arab countries that are opposed to its expansionism? Would it not be all right too for the racist regime in South Africa to continue its illegal occupation of Namibia and even send troops for aggression against southern African countries that are opposed to racism? Clearly, in spreading these fallacies, the Soviet Union is trying both to defend its present aggressions and to create theoretical justifications for similar acts in the future. Whether in theory or in practice, the Afghan incident marks a new stage of development in the external expansion of the hegemonists.
85.	In sending troops to Afghanistan and supporting the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the Soviet Union aims not only to enslave those two countries but also to turn them into springboards for further expansion. Both incidents are important steps taken by the hegemonists in their policy of a southward drive. With the dispatch of troops to Afghanistan, the Soviet armed forces have pushed more than 600 kilometres southward to press against the northern and western parts of the Pakistani border and the eastern part of the Iranian border. Another step forward will take them to the Indian Ocean and the shores of the Gulf. By supporting the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the Soviet Union has strengthened its control over Viet Nam and moved into Cam Ranh bay, thereby advancing its military base in the Far East southward by more than 4,000 kilometres and pressing towards the Straits of Malacca. In driving south towards the Indian Ocean and along the Pacific Ocean, in coordination with its activities of expansion in the Red Sea and in the Horn of Africa, the Soviet Union aims to seize strategic sites in the vast area of crucial importance—from the Red Sea and the Arabian Peninsula in the west, through the Straits of Malacca in the middle and to the South China Sea in the east—encircle the oil fields in the Gulf and control key international sea lanes. In other words, while further threatening the whole Asia Pacific region, it intends to outflank western Europe and to hasten the completion of its global strategic deployment for world domination.
86.	Therefore, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and its support for the Vietnamese aggression in Kampuchea are certainly not "accidental" events, but premeditated acts; not "defensive" measures, but offensive and aggressive moves; not "local" problems, but major issues affecting the overall situation of the world. The threat they pose to world peace and the security of all countries is not "temporary". The hegemonists will never stop where they are. They will see how the wind blows and wait for an opportune moment to start new adventures in order to attain their strategic goals. In these circumstances, while the third world countries located along the route of the hegemonists' southward drive will no doubt bear the brunt of the attack, other countries, including the Western European countries and Japan, will also be facing gravest threats. Should the Soviet Union succeed in every step of its expansion and in its global strategic plan, it will be difficult for the world to avoid another holocaust.
87.	It is not without reason that, faced with the realities of intensified arms expansion and war preparations by the Soviet Union over the years and considering the change that has taken place and is going to take place in the global balance of military strength, many people have pointed to the mid1980s as a period of danger. This point of view is not devoid of foundation. That the 1980s opened with the Afghan incident was indeed a bad omen. The incident has further revealed the ambitions of the hegemonists and brought into relief their adventurous nature. Thus an alarm was sounded for the people of the world, awakening them to the fact that the international situation has now reached a crucial point. Faced with the war provocations by the hegemonists, the people of the world must promptly and decisively choose between a resolute counterblow or a steady retreat.
88.	We believe that the strategic offensive by the hegemonists should be countered with overall measures so that wherever they seek expansion, they will be held in check. It is not enough just to condemn and call for sanctions against the aggressors. We must also adopt effective measures to help the people of countries subjected to aggression, because in fighting for their national independence and liberty they are in fact struggling for international peace and security. Provided that the countries of the world strengthen their solidarity, coordinate their actions and persist in struggle, it is entirely possible to check the aggressive drive by the hegemonists, upset their global strategic plan and prevent their launching a new world war.
89.	But if we yield our positions one after another in the face of hegemonist onslaught, the hegemonists will become even more insatiable and unscrupulous in their expansion and aggression. In the end, we shall be backed against the wall with nothing but the choice between being forced into complete submission or being caught totally unprepared for a major war. The course of the Second World War has demonstrated to the full what a heavy price one has to pay for the failure to make the right choice in time. History does not simply repeat itself, but the lessons of the past are worth taking seriously.
90.	At present, the Soviet Union is playing the trick of "detente" with great fanfare in order to divert world attention and divide the anti-aggression forces. For some time it has been advocating "a summit meeting of leaders of States of all the regions of the world", making appeals to the parliaments and members of parliaments of various countries "to strengthen peace and detente", and so on and so forth. As a matter of fact, it has long been the established practice of the hegemonists to pursue aggression and expansion while trumpeting the slogan of "detente". Especially after massive aggression and expansion, they always strike a pose of defending peace and launch a big "detente" offensive. Was it not the Soviet Union which proposed in 1969, not long after its invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, that the question of so-called "strengthening international security" be considered by the United Nations General Assembly? Shortly after the Afghan incident, it was predicted that the Soviet Union would come forward with another round of the "detente" offensive. As it turned out, that was exactly what happened. The new item entitled "Urgent measure for reducing the war danger" proposed by Mr. Gromyko; the plenary meeting yesterday for consideration at the current session is precisely that kind of thing. The facts show that the armed aggression against Afghanistan being carried out by the Soviet Union constitutes in itself a grave threat to world peace. If the Soviet Union is really sincere about "reducing the war danger", is there any action more "urgent" and practical than the scrupulous implementation of General Assembly resolution ES6/2, endorsed by 104 countries, and the immediate and total withdrawal of its aggressor forces from Afghanistan?
91.	In the face of the current pressing international situation, the Chinese people are determined to keep up the struggle against hegemonism together with the peace-loving and justice upholding peoples all over the world. The Chinese Government will maintain its consistent foreign policy of peace and wishes to establish and develop State relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. But we are resolutely opposed to any act of hegemonism. We take this stand not merely for the sake of our own security but, more importantly, with a view to safeguarding the overall interests o world peace.
92.	The question of how to check the naked armed aggression in Afghanistan and Kampuchea must have priority over other issues on the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly.
93.	More than eight months have elapsed since the sixth emergency special session of the General Assembly adopted a resolution by 104 votes, calling for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan. However, the Afghan people continue to shed their blood because foreign aggressor troops are still engaged in the massacre, over 1 million Afghan refugees have been compelled to flee the country and the number continues to rise. While intensifying its repression of the Afghan patriots, the Soviet Union instructed the Kabul regime to put forward a so-called "seven point proposal" for the settlement of the Afghan question, advocating bilateral negotiations between the Kabul regime and Governments of neighbouring countries. The aim of the Soviet Union is to legitimize the Afghan regime it has installed through military intervention and to confuse the public so that the crux of the Afghan question would appear to be a matter of relations between Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, and not one of Soviet armed aggression. Such a proposal has of course met with universal opposition.
94.	Viet Nam has behaved exactly the same way in Kampuchea as the Soviet Union in Afghanistan. Disregarding General Assembly resolution 34/22, adopted by 91 votes, Viet Nam has not only persisted in its aggression against Kampuchea but also extended the flames of war to Kampuchea's neighbour, posing an increasingly serious threat to peace and stability in Southeast Asia.
95.	After the recent setback in its armed incursion into Thailand, Viet Nam, acting as the overlord in IndoChina, has dished up a so-called "four point proposal" for defusing the tension along the Thai Kampuchean border. While evading the question of the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea, the proposal calls for the establishment of a demilitarized zone along the Thai Kampuchean border and advocates negotiations between Thailand and the Heng Samrin regime. In essence, this is an attempt to force others to recognize the puppet regime in Kampuchea, installed and propped up by Viet Nam at bayonet point, and to divert attention from Vietnamese armed aggression, which is at the core of the Kampuchean issue.
96.	Thailand and other ASEAN countries have sternly rejected this unreasonable Vietnamese proposal. The Thai Government has sharply pointed out that the proposal represents "an attempt to legitimize the illegal presence of foreign forces in Kampuchea". Viet Nam has now sanctimoniously requested that the "Question of peace, stability and cooperation in Southeast Asia" be included in the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly. One cannot help asking: in Southeast Asia today, which country, in fact, has stationed its troops on foreign soil? Which country has tried to overthrow the Government of another country by means of armed aggression? Which country, after all, is sabotaging peace, stability and cooperation in the region?
97.	It is understandable that some countries hope to find a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions so as to ease international tension. China is in favour of a just and reasonable political settlement of the two questions. However, we are opposed to any political settlement based on the acceptance of the faits accomplis created by the aggressors. We should guard against their attempts to distract public attention in the name of seeking a political solution, and to turn negotiations for a political settlement into an endless debate so that they may buy time to step up their military actions and consolidate their gains from aggression. We should likewise guard against their attempt, in the course of a political solution, to exploit the desire of certain people in the world for momentary peace and security and to induce them to sacrifice the fundamental interests of the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples.
98.	The Afghan and Kampuchean incidents have the same characteristics. In the joint statement issued at Kuala Lumpur last March by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of ASEAN and the European Community, it was pointed out that the two incidents "have as a common denominator the imposition of will on small independent States by foreign Powers through the use of force in open violation of international law, thereby threatening international peace and security”. In the view of the Chinese delegation, a just and reasonable settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions requires that the following three basic principles be followed.
99.	First, the foreign aggressors must withdraw all their troops immediately and unconditionally from Afghanistan and Kampuchea in compliance with the relevant United Nations resolutions. This is a principle of key importance and the prerequisite of any settlement.
100.	Secondly, after the withdrawal of foreign troops, the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples should be free to decide their own destiny without any outside interference. In its resolution, the Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Islamabad from 17 to 22 May of this year, emphasized respect for "the Afghan people's inalienable right to decide their own form of government and to choose their economic, political and social system". Recently, the Government of Democratic Kampuchea stated that after the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea "the Kampuchean people may choose their own national government through a general election by free, direct or secret ballot, and, if necessary, under the supervision of the United Nations Secretary General or his representative". The Chinese Government supports the above propositions.
101.	Thirdly, Afghanistan and Kampuchea should be restored to their independent and nonaligned status.
102.	After the Afghan and Kampuchean questions are settled in accordance with the above three principles, China, in the interest of safeguarding the independence of these two countries and peace in Asia and the world, will be ready to join the other countries concerned in an international guarantee that the territory of Afghanistan or Kampuchea shall not be occupied or used to encroach on the independence and sovereignty of other countries in either region, nor shall there be any form of interference in the internal affairs of these two countries.
103.	At the current session the Assembly will also consider some other major international political and economic issues. We should act promptly, wisely and with farsightedness in our effort to find a just, reasonable and effective solution of these issues, not only on the merits of each case but also in consideration of their impact on the world situation as a whole.
104.	The Middle East question has been dragging on for several decades, gravely threatening regional and world peace and stability. At the seventh emergency special session of the General Assembly on the question of Palestine, held in July this year, speeches made by many representatives and the final resolution, adopted by 112 votes, expressed the demand of the people of the world for an early comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question. In this connexion, the declaration of the European Community issued at Venice on 13 June also has a positive significance in promoting a Middle East settlement. However, Israel has brazenly declared the above resolution "illegal", accelerated its plan of occupying Jerusalem and committed new aggression against Lebanon. This is an act of utter contempt for the international community and a direct challenge to the United Nations. Israel has been so intransigent and arrogant precisely because it feels secure in the knowledge that it has the backing of one superpower and that the other superpower, honey on lips and murder in heart, will not give genuine support to the Arab countries.
105.	The Chinese people strongly condemn Israel for its policy of aggression and expansion and for its dogged obstruction of a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question. We firmly support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. We favour the position of many countries that Israel should withdraw from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, that the Palestinian people should regain their national rights, including the rights to return to their homeland, exercise self-determination and establish their own State, and that all the Middle East countries should have the right to independence and existence. We have always held that the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], being the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, should participate as an interested party in a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
106.	The people of Zimbabwe has finally shaken off the yoke of colonialism and racism after protracted armed struggle. This has greatly changed the outlook of southern Africa and will undoubtedly expedite the great historical process of eradicating colonialism and racism from the entire African continent. After independence, the Zimbabwe Government has made creative efforts in handling racial relations at home. This will have a far-reaching impact on future developments in southern Africa. However, to this day the racist regime of South Africa still refuses to end its illegal rule over Namibia; what is more, it has further intensified its repression of the people of South Africa. This is intolerable. We firmly support the correct views of the frontline States on the question of southern Africa. Like Zimbabwe, Namibia should achieve genuine national independence in conformity with the aspirations of its people and on the basis of territorial integrity and national unification. Apartheid and the system of racial discrimination in South Africa should be completely abolished. The United Nations should make its due contribution to the termination of the colonial and racist rule in southern Africa.
107.	The developments on the Korean peninsula call for close attention. The military junta in South Korea is intensifying its Fascist dictatorship by every ruthless means. Recently, in defiance of world condemnation, this regime has brazenly pronounced a death sentence on the well-known democrat, Kim Dae Jung. All this has not only created new obstacles to the North South dialogue and the peaceful reunification of Korea, but has also added to the destabilizing factors in the Korean situation. A reasonable solution of the Korean question will be of major significance to the maintenance of peace in East Asia and the Pacific region. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has put forward a series of formulas and proposals for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and has worked tirelessly to this end. On its part, the international community should help to create favourable conditions for its realization. It is necessary to implement as soon as possible the relevant resolution of the General Assembly adopted five years ago by dissolving the "United Nations Command", withdrawing all the United States military forces and equipment from South Korea and converting the Korean armistice agreement into a peace agreement through negotiations between the parties concerned.
108.	We are deeply concerned over the recent military conflict between Iraq and Iran. We sincerely hope that the two parties will cease hostilities speedily and settle their disputes through peaceful negotiations so as not to be exploited by those harbouring ulterior motives.
109.	The current session, moreover, cannot shut its eyes to the stark economic situation prevailing in the world today. Most developing countries, poor in the first place, are now finding their economic situation deteriorating further. The disparity in wealth between North and South is in fact widening. An important reason for this is that, though politically independent, the third world countries are hampered by the old international economic order. This inequitable international economic order must be reformed if the economic development of the developing countries is to be promoted. The recently concluded eleventh special session of the General Assembly reached consensus on the international Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, which, to a certain degree, reflects the desire of the developing countries. However, on the question of global economic negotiations, the session has failed to achieve the progress it should have achieved. In this connexion, we hope that the current session will take a bigger step forward to make a good start in the global economic negotiations and guide them in the direction of strengthening economic cooperation between nations on the basis of equality and mutual benefit. The key to this hinges on the renewed efforts on the part of the developed countries, which would hardly be able to expand their own economies without economic ties and cooperation with the third world countries. What is more, the present international situation requires them to look farther ahead from a vantage point and approach the North South relations from an overall strategic perspective. Improvement in the economic situation of the third world and better North South economic relations will contribute not only to world economic stability and growth, but also to the cause of world peace and security.
110.	Thirty-five years have elapsed since the founding of the United Nations. During this period, the international Organization itself has undergone great changes. A large number of newly independent countries have become Members of the United Nations. This has so changed the composition of the Organization that it is better able to reflect the aspirations of the people of all countries to the maintenance of international peace, security and justice as well as their desire to promote economic development and social progress. Today, it is no longer possible for any big Power to control and manipulate the United Nations. The United Nations traversed a tortuous road before it became what it is today. This has not come about easily, but through the joint efforts of all countries and peoples that love peace and uphold justice.
111.	However, we must not fail to see that the United Nations is facing a grave challenge. It is expressly provided in the Charter that the primary task of the United Nations is to suppress acts of aggression. But actually a good number of correct resolutions adopted by the General Assembly for this purpose have been brazenly violated and undermined by certain Member States. The Charter clearly stipulates that all Members shall refrain in their international relations from the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State; yet, certain Member States have deliberately violated these provisions. Again, the Charter stipulates in explicit terms that international disputes must be settled in conformity with the principles of justice and international law; yet, certain Member States attempt to replace these principles by the law of the jungle and "recognition of faits accomplis created by aggression". The overwhelming majority of the Member States demands that the United Nations effectively fulfil the noble obligations placed on it by the Charter; yet, a tiny minority attempts to lead it onto the tracks of the League of Nations. This is an intense struggle, which can be won by the overwhelming majority of the Member States only if they persevere in opposing and suppressing by deeds as well as words, both inside and outside the United Nations, any violation of the United Nations Charter.
112.	This is the first session of the General Assembly in the 1980s. The coming decade will be a complicated and volatile decade, fraught with crises. Therefore, people have every reason to expect the current session to make a new contribution to opposing aggression, preventing war, safeguarding peace and promoting progress, so that a good start may be made in the work of the United Nations in the 1980s. We must not disappoint the people of the world. China is ready to work together with other Member States for the success of the current session and for the implementation of the purposes and principles of the United Nations as laid down in the Charter
﻿Mr. President, first of all I should like to congratulate you most sincerely on your election to the highest office in the United Nations and to commend you on your impressive inaugural address. Your election is for us a token of recognition of six years' constructive work as the Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations. We also feel that it can be seen as a recognition of the active participation of the Federal Republic of Germany in the world Organization. This participation is of great value to our policy, which is directed towards peace.
79.	I should like to express our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Salim, one of the great representatives of the African continent.
80.	I am also very pleased to be able to welcome Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as a new Member State of the world Organization.
81.	This first regular session of the General Assembly in the 1980s is dominated by anxious questions about the future of our world. We commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV) which contains the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. But the recollection of that Declaration also calls to mind the contrast between then and now. In 1960, newly independent African States became Members of the United Nations. At the same time, the economic development of the third world emerged as a task for the community of nations as a whole. By proclaiming the First United Nations Development Decade, the United Nations launched a great effort to cope with that task as well.
82.	At the beginning of the 1960s mankind was resolutely setting out for new horizons, and the rate of progress did indeed increase. The process of decolonization has almost been completed. The number of Members of the United Nations has increased from 100 in 1960 to 154 this year. A number of developing countries became new industrial countries or threshold countries. The per capita income of the third world rose at an annual rate of 3 per cent. And though this average rate may conceal the disparities between individual developing countries, it was an unprecedented growth which only few had thought attainable at the beginning of the 1960s.
83.	In 1966 the General Assembly adopted the two International Covenants on Human Rights  and, by specifically defining those rights, imbued them with a force which, despite all resistance, has begun to leave its impression on the lives of nations all over the globe.
84.	And, finally, as the 1960s drew to a close, the climate of cold war between East and West gave way to a newly emerging detente. To many it seemed that the time had already come for the States of the world acting as equal partners to concentrate on the great task of our age: the development of the third world.
85.	But now, on the threshold of the 1980s, it has become increasingly clear that the path towards this goal is paved with obstacles: the designs of power politics are threatening detente; there is the threat of a new arms race; unresolved conflicts weigh heavily on the third world and the quest for power creates new sources of crisis; and in the mid-1970s the world economy experienced its first grave setback since the war. Oil price explosions are having devastating effects on the industrialized countries and are plunging many oil importing third world countries into a development crisis.
86.	Is this the end of the endeavours for a world community of equal States initiated in 1945, with the foundation of the United Nations, and reaffirmed so impressively in 1960? Has the third world struggled for its independence, only to lose it in the face of new challenges? Is economic advancement in parts of the third world grinding to a halt? Will poverty be with us for ever?
87.	In view of these challenges it remains our historic task to establish a world of equal partners based on the right of nations to self-determination and on respect for the inalienable rights of the individual.
88.	The fundamental task is to secure—through an active policy for safeguarding peace—the political conditions for mankind's resumption of steady progress.
89.	What is required in the first place is to continue undiminished efforts to reduce tensions and foster cooperation between East and West. This policy, on a basis of equality, is of vital importance not only for peace between East and West but also for peace and peaceful economic development in the world as a whole. A policy for safeguarding peace is inconceivable without a general determination for detente and cooperation. Such determination cannot do away with the fundamental conflict inherent in contrasting values and political systems. But it can help to prevent avoidable conflicts and to keep unavoidable conflicts under control by means of diplomacy. It can also build bridges to span the gulf and promote cooperation for mutual benefit. Seen in this way, detente and cooperation constitute a realistic and long-term policy for peace.
90.	My country, firmly embedded in the European Community and the North Atlantic defence alliance, has from the outset been among the chief protagonists of detente in Europe. Acting on the basis of shared convictions of freedom and human dignity, these two communities have long been champions of freedom, stability, security and peace in the world. We firmly abide by the policy of detente and cooperation—aware that we share responsibility for peace and that the Germans who have to live in two separate States would be especially affected by a relapse into the cold war.
91.	The basic tenet of our policy continues to be to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination. We know that history is on our side.
92.	The Treaty on the Basis of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic" has established the conditions for cooperation which take account of the responsibility of Germans for peace and pave the way for improvements in the humanitarian sphere for all Germans. We are guided by the goals of this Treaty in our efforts to develop further, wherever possible, our cooperation with the German Democratic Republic.
93.	Federal Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and the Chairman of the State Council of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, have both expressed the view that never again should war originate on German soil.
94.	We want to play our part in keeping the situation in and around Berlin stable and peaceful. Berlin is the barometer of detente in Europe.
95.	Ten years ago the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union laid the foundation for the development of fruitful mutual relations. Chancellor Schmidt and I went to Moscow on 30 June and 1 July 1980; that visit was an expression of our will to maintain direct contacts in difficult times and to do everything to keep the way clear for a policy which we regard as long term. We consider the signal given by our visit, after months of stagnation, for the commencement of talks on medium range weapons to be an incentive to continue our efforts.
96.	We shall also maintain our efforts to develop cooperation with the Polish People's Republic and the other Eastern European countries.
97.	Furthermore, we attach great importance to the multilateral process of detente in Europe. At the Second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, soon to be held at Madrid, we shall discuss the implementation of all parts of the Final Act of Helsinki in all its parts, in a sincere and realistic manner, but we shall also talk about what remains to be done. We want to achieve even progress in all fields. The Conference should be neither a tribunal nor a forum for empty rhetoric.
98.	In the economic field we advocate an East West conference on energy, and in the field of human relations we urge the solution of humanitarian problems, the fostering of contacts .between people in the East and West and a wider exchange of information.
99.	Considering the importance which the Madrid Conference holds for the future, we hope that all participating States will, by their policies, make it possible to achieve progress.
100.	Disarmament is the great task of the 1980s. We must not be discouraged, despite all the disappointments and setbacks. We know that detente and cooperation between East and West can be lasting only if they are founded on military equilibrium. Seeking a position of superiority only serves to create instability and, hence, insecurity. Disarmament cannot, therefore, mean the preservation of superiority, but rather must mean a stronger commitment to disarm on the part of those in a position of superiority. In the field of armament and disarmament, all States must be judged solely by what they actually do. My country and its allies are striving to achieve equilibrium at the lowest possible level of armaments.
101.	The defence efforts of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] are determined exclusively by its own security requirements. The Federal Republic of Germany is not seeking superiority, nor are the other European members of the Western defence alliance, the United States of America or Canada.
102.	We are disturbed by the superiority in conventional weapons of the Warsaw Pact countries in central Europe, and we are particularly concerned about the rapid build-up of the Soviet Union's new SS20 medium range nuclear missiles, which are not trained solely on Western Europe. That arms build-up goes beyond the Soviet Union's own security needs. That is a fact which nobody can deny.
103.	Since it is our serious intention to achieve equilibrium at the lowest possible level of armaments, the Western defence alliance put before the Warsaw Pact countries, in December 1979, a comprehensive package of arms control and disarmament proposals.
104.	The Western defence alliance also linked its decision to modernize its nuclear systems to the offer of negotiations on limiting the medium range land based missiles of the two sides. It is now a question of getting those negotiations under way as quickly as possible.
105.	I am glad that the United States Secretary of State and the Soviet Minister for Foreign Affairs will be discussing here in New York tomorrow the commencement of the preparatory talks on this subject. I am also glad that the President of the United States has stated his intention to seek ratification of the SALT II agreement at the earliest possible date.
106.	The second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, to be held at Madrid, should decide on the establishment of a European conference on disarmament with the clear mandate to agree on confidence-building measures for the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Urals. Confidence is indivisible, also, in geographic terms. The achievement of concrete results at the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in central Europe can also help to stabilize the situation in all of Europe.
107.	Verifiable arms limitation and disarmament are among the primary objectives of German foreign policy. We pursue that objective in Europe and we pursue it worldwide.
108.	Success in arms control negotiations is dependent upon openness and sufficient information about military capabilities in the world. For that reason, we should like to see all nations disclose their military expenditures. In that connexion, the United Nations has worked out a matrix designed to make military budgets comparable. The Federal Republic of Germany, other Western States and third world countries have reported on their military expenditures on the basis of that matrix and given an example of its practical application.
109.	It is now necessary to encourage all countries to disclose their military expenditures according to that system.
110.	Just as in Europe, so also on a global scale confidence-building measures are necessary. In response to a suggestion for which we were responsible, the General Assembly last year appointed a working group to study the possibility of confidence-building measures in various regions and throughout the world. 
111.	One crucial task of our active policy for safeguarding peace is to frustrate all hegemonic aspirations. This must apply worldwide. Hegemonic policies and resultant military intervention destroy the right of nations to self-determination. The East West confrontation must not be transferred to the third world.
112.	In an interdependent world, one of the foundations of which is respect for the right to self-determination, interventionism is not a matter which concerns only those who intervene and their victims; it is a challenge to the entire community of nations. This is also the essence of the principle of the indivisibility of detente.
113.	The signatory States to the Helsinki Final Act expressly declared their intention not only to base their relations with one another on the principles embodied in the Final Act, which include the renunciation of force and respect for equality of rights and for the right of nations to self-determination, but also to conduct their relations with other States in the spirit of those principles.
114.	Accordingly, the Federal Republic of Germany and France, in their joint declaration of 5 February 1980, described as unacceptable the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan and stated clearly that detente would not be able to withstand another blow of that kind.
115.	The nonaligned movement is becoming an increasingly important force in international politics. The more all its members associate themselves with the aim of true non-alignment, the greater will be their contribution to stability in the world.
116.	The conflicts in the third world must also be resolved through negotiations.
117.	The agenda for this session of the General Assembly includes four major crisis areas: the Middle East, southern Africa, Afghanistan and Cambodia. To these must be added the Iraqi Iranian conflict, a source of great concern.
118.	In the Middle East, new obstacles have been piled up on the road to a comprehensive peace settlement. The positions of the parties concerned have hardened and tension has again built up to a dangerous level.
119.	The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, Mr. Thorn, who is currently presiding over the European Community, has explained the position of the nine member States on all aspects of the Middle East conflict. Together with our European partners, we shall do everything in our power to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The Palestinian people must be enabled to exercise fully its right to self-determination. That right must be implemented, just as much as the right to existence and security of all States in the region, including Israel.
120.	We are convinced that the Middle East problem can only be solved if all the parties concerned forgo exclusive territorial demands. There must be no "all or nothing" attitude. On none of the issues should one side confront the other with a fait accompli. That applies to settlements in the occupied territories, and it applies especially to Jerusalem, of whose importance for the three major religions we are particularly aware.
121.	A necessary step on the road to comprehensive peace is the renunciation of force or the threat of use of force by all the parties concerned. This is the only way to create in the area the climate of confidence that is indispensable to a settlement.
122.	Our intention to give a new impetus to the Euro Arab dialogue by adding a political dimension to it, and the continuing willingness of the Europeans to participate in international guarantees, indicate our determination to take our share of the responsibility for peace.
123.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany views with grave concern the armed confrontation which has flared up in the past few days between Iraq and Iran. We appeal to those involved not to add yet another conflict to those already existing in the Middle East, but rather to settle matters at the negotiating table. And we appeal to all States to exercise the greatest restraint so as to prevent the conflict from spreading. The United Nations must shoulder its responsibility for peace.
124.	In Africa, the year 1980 has brought crucial progress towards eliminating the remnants of colonialism.
125.	The people of Zimbabwe have exercised their right to self-determination through free elections under international supervision, and have obtained their independence. This shows that negotiated solutions to even the most difficult subjects are possible.
126.	In Namibia a solution will only be possible, in our view, if based on the United Nations plan for Namibia. Attempts to achieve an internal settlement would have no chance of bringing peace and freedom to the country; Zimbabwe has confirmed that. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) must now be implemented without delay.
127.	At the sixth emergency special session of the General Assembly, held from 10 to 14 January this year, the international community condemned by an overwhelming majority the armed intervention in Afghanistan and called for the immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of the foreign troops. It urged that the people of Afghanistan be enabled to determine their own form of government and choose their economic, political and social systems free from outside intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind whatsoever. This resolution must now finally be implemented.
128.	We welcome the endeavours of the Islamic and other third world States to find a political solution to the Afghanistan problem.
129.	It is also necessary to find a political solution to the crisis in Cambodia. Here, too, the United Nations has categorically called for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops. Here, too, it has demanded that the people of Cambodia be enabled to choose their own government by the democratic process—without outside intervention, subversion or coercion.
130.	The conflict must not now be carried even beyond Cambodia's borders. The people of my country are shocked by the terrible fate of the Cambodian people. My Government and the private relief organizations in my country will continue to render humanitarian assistance as best they can. I appeal to all responsible: open up all channels necessary to allow assistance to reach the starving people in all parts of Cambodia.
131.	We must tackle the problem of the world's refugees at its roots. It constitutes a growing challenge to our conscience, an increasing disregard for basic human rights and a growing threat to good neighbourly relations between States and to the international order as a whole.
132.	Today, all over the world, people are fleeing their home countries and seeking refuge in camps. Their number is estimated at about 15 million. Anyone who has visited a refugee camp is aware of the abject misery suffered by these millions.
133.	I refer to the mass exodus from Indochina, Afghanistan and Ethiopia, which has greatly aggravated the refugee problem. In Somalia 30 per cent of the population are refugees, according to government estimates. The development of that country threatens to collapse under this tremendous burden. In the border region between Thailand and Cambodia, refugee problems have led to an acute clanger of war. These examples indicate that the refugee problem has become a threat to peace in many parts of the third world and a threat to the political stability and economic development of the countries receiving the refugees.
134.	So far the United Nations has concentrated on the humanitarian task of mitigating the consequences of flight and expulsion. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has rendered an outstanding service in this field.
135.	We must increase further the humanitarian assistance for refugees and make it more effective. But we must also face up to the political task of counteracting the causes of their flight and expulsion. We must work together to avert new refugee flows. We must elaborate rules governing the conduct of States. We must prevent racially and ideologically undesired minorities from being forcibly expelled by their Governments or compelled to flee as a result of unbearable living conditions. This, too, is part today of a comprehensive and active policy for safeguarding peace. I therefore suggest that this session of the General Assembly include in its agenda a new and urgent item entitled "International cooperation to avert new refugee flows".
136.	Without development of the third world there can be no lasting and secure peace. Nor is peace in the world possible if the gap between the rich and the poor countries grows larger, if hunger and want in the developing countries spread further. What we need is accelerated economic development in the third world and the recovery of sustained growth in the industrial countries. Cooperation in the development effort is an indispensable part of a world order based on partnership.
137.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly that has just ended and at which I presented my Government's views unfortunately met only some of our expectations. Admittedly, agreement was reached on the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade. It was also agreed that the aid extended to the least developed countries must be stepped up considerably. This consensus is a good starting point for the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries to be held in 1981.
138.	The special session was not, however, able to complete the preparations for the global negotiations. It is precisely in view of the difficult world economic situation that my Government considers such negotiations important and urgently necessary. At the present session, therefore, a consensus must be attained on the procedure and the agenda for the negotiations so that they can start in January 1981 as planned. The Brandt Commission has presented an important document on North South issues.' We advocate a North South summit meeting, as recommended by the Brandt Commission. Such a meeting can give important impetus to the negotiations in the United Nations.
139.	Resolution 34/138 establishing the global negotiations relating to international economic cooperation for development, specified five main subjects: commodities, energy, trade, development, money and finance. In all of these fields we must recognize the common interests of industrialized and developing countries. We shall establish a new international economic order not by destroying the existing one but by developing it further. We must preserve free world trade as the driving force behind growth and development. We must solve the world's energy problems and thus safeguard the basis of economic growth and development. We must ensure a stable world monetary system and safeguard the effectiveness of the competent institutions. We must step up the flow of resources to the third world so as to accelerate development and thereby provide important stimuli for growth in the industrial countries and create new jobs there.
140.	Despite its adverse budgetary situation, the Federal Republic of Germany has, between 1977 and 1979—that is, within two years—doubled its official development assistance from 3.2 to 6.1 billion deutsche marks. In absolute terms, my country is therefore, together with France, the second largest donor country. Furthermore, its official development assistance amounts to 0.44 per cent of its gross national product and thus exceeds the average of the industrial countries.
141.	An indispensable part of the global negotiations is a comprehensive dialogue on energy between oil importing and oil exporting countries. The energy issue has now become so crucial and has such far-reaching effects on all other economic sectors that the aim of global negotiations would not be achievable without an energy dialogue.
142.	Successful cooperation for development in the new decade will also depend, to a decisive extent, on whether all countries participate to the best of their ability. Support for the development of the third world cannot be seen as the responsibility of the Western industrial countries alone. It is the responsibility of the entire international community, and everyone must shoulder his portion.
143.	Here 1 appeal particularly to the Communist industrial countries. In recent years their assistance has amounted to only about 0.1 per cent of their gross national product. Almost three quarters of that aid went to just two developing countries.
144.	The world's total arms expenditure will exceed $500 billion this year. Military spending is increasing everywhere— in the East and the West and not least in the third world. The success of development depends more and more also on whether it proves possible to halt the global arms race. What the world needs is not an arms race, but a race in the provision of aid for the developing countries.
145.	I consider it necessary to set up two registers in the United Nations. The first should record how much every industrial country spends per capita on armaments and how much on development assistance. The second register should cover worldwide exports and imports of weapons.
146.	We must not look on passively while arms expenditure is growing and while expenditure on development aid is lagging behind or even stagnating. We must not remain idle when weapons are poured into developing countries which need not guns but schools and hospitals, tractors and lathes.
147.	A world of partnership and an active peace policy call for worldwide respect for human rights. We know how far we still are from this great goal. We have witnessed, especially in recent years, a number of massive violations of human rights. The United Nations has introduced procedures and institutions with a view to promoting the effective implementation of human rights throughout the world. These procedures are still comparatively weak, although their effectiveness is increasing as evidenced by the work of the Human Rights Commission.
148.	It is now necessary to strengthen and develop the instruments of the United Nations for the protection of human rights. These instruments must include a United Nations court of justice for human rights.
149.	Nobody can overlook the appalling abuse in the imposition of the death penalty in many parts of the world. In his annual report, Secretary General Kurt Waldheim condemned the summary execution of individuals without regard for due process of law.
150.	Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights limits the death penalty. Today, 14 years after the signing of the Covenant, it is time to seek the abolition of that penalty. My Government will therefore propose a convention to eliminate capital punishment. This convention could be given the form of a second optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
151.	It is stated in the Constitution of my country that "Capital punishment shall be abolished". This important decision is the result of painful experiences in our recent past. We know that different historical developments, legal traditions and religious beliefs have prompted different attitudes towards the death penalty in other countries. But this should not make anyone less conscious of the frequent abuses in the imposition of capital punishment. Such abuses can only be eliminated by the total abolition of the death penalty.
152.	Our world is in a state of transition. It is moving towards a new order, the first truly global order in history to be founded on the concept of equality and partnership. The outlines of this new order are already discernible, even though reactionary trends are blurring the picture. I should like to emphasize two basic principles of the new order: the self-determination of all nations and the regional integration of equal States to form larger communities.
153.	Self-determination means the full development of each country's own potential and independent political, economic and cultural development. This aim must be realized today especially in the third world. There would be no genuine and sustained development in Africa, the Arab States, Latin America and Asia if these vast cultural regions merely tried to copy Western or Eastern industrialized countries. Development must build on a country's own culture and, with due respect for inalienable human rights, must use modern science and technology to enhance these cultural values.
154.	Anyone who opposes such independent development and seeks to impose alien, prefabricated concepts upon the third world acts against the interests of the developing countries and the world as a whole. The national, religious and cultural identity of nations must remain intact. Mankind needs a variety of cultures to prevent its creative forces from dwindling. To reject a pluralistic world and to force humanity under the yoke of a single ideology would be tantamount to halting progress.
155.	Regional integration is becoming increasingly important as a means of creating political and economic areas in all parts of the world which will ward off hegemonic designs by foreign Powers and permit the development of modern economies. The European Community provides a model of a regional grouping of States on a basis of equality, a union in which no one dominates. We consider the emergence of regional communities of States in all parts of the world, including Africa, Asia and Latin America one of the most important international developments.
156.	The European Community promotes this development wherever it can. It has already instituted special forms of cooperation with most of these groupings which provide forward-looking models for cooperation between industrialized and developing countries in a spirit of partnership.
157.	The increasing regional cooperation in the third world, the large groupings of the nonaligned countries and the Group of 77 is also developments of great consequence for our work in the United Nations. Without these groupings the political opinion forming process and agreement on solutions in the United Nations would today be almost unthinkable.
158.	It is clear that regional and interregional cooperation supplement and facilitate global cooperation, but do not replace it.
159.	The universal Organization of the United Nations will be more than ever the centre of a new world order based on equality and partnership. It is our task to strengthen it, to make it more effective and, above all, to make use of it for the good of the whole world and not merely to safeguard individual interests. This is a task which my country will help to accomplish to the best of its ability.
﻿In electing you Sir, to the presidency of the thirty-fifth session of our General Assembly, the United Nations wished to pay tribute to the great democracy of the Federal Republic of Germany and to Europe, of which it forms one of the pillars. The United Nations has conferred a distinction on a diplomat whose competence, experience and human qualities are appreciated by one and all. In the name of the friendship which unites our two nations and the trustful cooperation which they have established, allow me to say. Sir, how glad I am to see you presiding over the work of this Assembly.
161.	I should also like to express once again my gratitude to our Secretary General for the distinguished services he has constantly rendered to the United Nations, and for his skill, his authority and his talent.
162.	Finally, I am happy to greet the young State of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as it enters our Organization.
163.	Last year I began my address here by stating that in spite of the upheavals and dangers that had threatened it. The global peace of the world had been preserved for over 30 years. In addition to being a statement of fact, my words were also grounds for hope and an act of faith in the future.
164.	Why does this observation today appear almost unseemly? Why has the hope it brought us given way to a mute feeling of uneasiness?
165.	The reason is of course, the events taking place at this very moment on the Iranian border which, quite rightfully, are in our minds and deeply concern each and every one of us. But in reality—since the uneasiness reaches further back—it is above all because the world has witnessed a number of serious events over the past year, because disturbing trends have developed and, although world peace has not been broken, the confidence we placed in the soundness of its foundations has been shaken.
166.	In fact nothing, unless it be peace itself, is more important than that confidence. It is that confidence that has deteriorated. It is that confidence which must be restored; no task is more urgent.
167.	Never, perhaps, have our peoples and our States been more keenly aware of the solidarity of their destinies and the fragility of peace. Similarly, never before has it seemed so necessary to counter the blind workings of fate with clear-sighted analysis, courageous action and effective structures for international cooperation: a clear-sighted analysis in order to assess, without empty complacency, the gravity of the crises besetting us, and also to acknowledge that, directly or indirectly, those crises affect us all; courageous action in order to reject the dangerously simple recourse to force and to seek with determination the only solutions that are valid, namely, those of law and justice; lastly, effective structures for international cooperation in order to ensure that, at all levels of responsibility and organization within the international community, selfish interests and ideological preferences make way for the higher needs of peace.
168.	It is to this threefold aim of clear-sightedness, courage and cooperation that I have come here to make France's contribution.
169.	It would be both simplistic and incorrect to attribute the critical world situation to a single factor. The new element introduced into the situation by the current military confrontation between Iran and Iraq should be sufficient to remind us of this. We know well that whether longstanding or recent, political or economic, there are many causes of tension. We are aware that they are responsible for the proportions and gravity of the critical world situation. We should not, we cannot ignore any of them.
170.	The critical situation has taken on a very special significance since the intervention of the Soviet army in Afghanistan. The Afghan crisis is not simply an addition to other crises; it is of a different order of gravity and so are its implications, for three main reasons.
171.	Looking beyond the tragic suffering it is inflicting on 15 million Afghans, the crisis calls into question, first and foremost, respect for a fundamental and universal principle, namely, national independence, the right of a people to determine its own destiny. This cannot be concealed, however artfully the situation is presented.
172.	The issue is also the fate of a country and a region whose security and stability are essential to world equilibrium and peace.
173.	Lastly, the issue involves the conduct of one of the two Powers which alone have the means to start a global conflict and on which special obligations devolve by virtue of this fact.
174.	The crisis in Afghanistan also has other implications. One has only to look at its consequences in East West relations: the course of detente has changed for the worse and momentum has been lost; a shadow has fallen over the prospects of the Madrid Conference; efforts towards disarmament are at a standstill in some places and have been interrupted in others.
175.	It is pointless to think that the crisis in Afghanistan can be reduced to local or regional proportions. By degrees it has come to affect international relations as a whole. It has repercussions on other crises; it increases their dangers and makes them more difficult to resolve.
176.	I am thinking in the first place of the Middle East. The conflict which continues there and which is growing more acute is as old as our Organization itself. How many hopes have been disappointed over the past 30 years, how many paths explored that led nowhere? To limit myself to the last 12 months, how can one fail to note once again, with sadness, that in spite of the efforts made and even in spite of the progress accomplished, thanks to the evacuation of a large part of the Sinai, when it comes to fundamentals the end is far from being in sight.
177.	What is more, the unilateral and illegal decisions of the State of Israel, whether in regard to the West Bank or more recently to Jerusalem, are new impediments to the search for a peaceful settlement.
178.	Lastly, what can one say of the attacks on Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and on the mission and authority of the United Nations Force in that country? The friendship that links France to Lebanon and my country's role in UN IFIL make these actions all the more abhorrent to France.
179.	Is it conceivable to imagine the situation in that region of the world continuing without presenting the gravest dangers to peace?
180.	As regards Southeast Asia, last year we deplored the occupation of Cambodia by the Vietnamese army. This occupation continues. The Cambodian people have escaped annihilation only thanks to the massive humanitarian effort by the international community. The conflict of which they have been the unfortunate object has even recently threatened to spill over Cambodia's very borders.
181.	Concerning southern Africa, the satisfaction we feel at welcoming the presence of the delegation of an independent Zimbabwe to our Assembly should not blind us to the slow pace of progress in Namibia's decolonization nor to the obstacles still blocking its path. Moreover, it should not cause us to forget that in South Africa the system of apartheid maintains millions of human beings in a state that is an offence to human rights and to the dignity of Africa.
182.	I shah not dwell on the latest developments in the crisis between Iran and Iraq, except to say that it is vital to avoid interventions that might widen the conflict, to prevent interference in freedom of navigation in the Gulf, which is of worldwide importance, and lastly to foster the «;arch for a political solution. That is what France requests. That is what the European Community requests. That is what we expect of the consultations currently taking place on the initiative of our Secretary General.
183. Afghanistan, the Middle Fast. Cambodia, southern Africa, those major areas of crisis are by themselves sufficient to warrant the most serious concern.
184.	The picture would, however, be incomplete if I did not mention the formidable problem which forms the backdrop to them all, namely, the problem of hunger and development.
185.	The recent debates of the special session of the General Assembly on that subject are fresh in all our minds. They did not enable us to reach complete agreement. That was a serious disappointment. We must not resign ourselves to that setback, however. What is at stake is, indeed, far too important. It commits us all, morally, economically and politically.
186.	Hunger, poverty and underdevelopment do more than breed misery. They feed frustration and lead to despair. They are felt to be the worst injustices of all and are a permanent factor of instability.
187.	Such, then, is the state of the world. We should not be lulled by the comforting illusion that crises will take care of themselves and problems will be solved of their own accord. But we must not give way to discouragement either.
188.	Because there are, indeed, solutions to those problems. I should even venture to say that they are within our grasp. They are based on the principles that form the foundation of our international community. Those principles are embodied in our Charter. They give us the law as our rule, and dialogue and consultation as our methods.
189.	Law implies self-determination for peoples, independence and security for States, dignity and equality for mankind. Dialogue and consultation mean the refusal to accept unilateral action and the condemnation of recourse to force.
190.	In the light of current events, those time-honoured words, which we mistakenly view as worn out acquire an immediate practical value. They provide a much needed compass that can guide us through the turbulent waters the world has entered. That compass will show us that, despite differing circumstances in the four crises that, in the long term, weigh most heavily on international relations—I refer here to Afghanistan. Cambodia, the Middle Cast and Namibia—the same causes lead to the same effects, the same obstacles stand in the way of the same goals, the same problems call for the same solution.
191.	In Afghanistan the goal is the right of the Afghan people freely to determine its own future. What are the obstacles? The first is the intervention of a foreign army; the second is the temptation to turn that country into a stake or a threat. The first obstacle must be removed and the second avoided. The two things must go hand in hand. So the States that are in a position to influence Afghanistan's destiny by virtue of their close proximity or power must agree to eliminate those two obstacles. If they pledge to respect Afghanistan's sovereignty, if they cease trying to bring it into their zone of influence and. more importantly, if they refrain from introducing military forces into that country on maintaining them there, that will be enough to restore to the people of Afghanistan their freedom and independence, to give equilibrium and calm to the region, and to give security and hope to the world.
192.	In Southeast Asia the goal is to lead ill-fated Cambodia out of the hopeless impasse in which it has been locked by a conflict that is beyond its control and foreign to it. The Khmer people did not escape the barbaric oppression of a bloodthirsty tyranny in order to submit to the protector-ship of someone else. That people is entitled, after all its tribulations, to live in freedom and stand on its own feet. The countries of the region are entitled to have among them a partner that wants to practise peace and friendship with all its neighbours. France has known that people long enough to realize that, left to itself, it would aspire to no more than that. The military occupation still has to end and an agreement has to be reached if Cambodia is to re-emerge free, peaceful and neutral. Providing those two conditions are met, the accumulation of physical and human ruin can be rebuilt and a lasting peace restored throughout Southeast Asia.
193.	As far as Namibia is concerned, no one can any longer dispute the fact that that country is entitled to accede to international sovereignty, or that the genuine independence it seeks can come only from the free choice of the peoples living there. To create the conditions to make that possible, here again, the obstacles standing in the way must be cleared. In this case, that means neutralizing those forces which, by their presence or their action, could unfairly influence the outcome of the national elections. The example of Zimbabwe shows that stability in southern Africa could only gain thereby.
194.	What is true in all those cases is also true of the Arab Israeli conflict. Complex though the many factors in that situation may be, the basic facts are still analogous. Two rights are in conflict in the territories now under military occupation—which occupation neither confers legitimacy nor provides a basis for peace: they are the State of Israel's right to security and the Palestinian people's right to self-determination. Neither can be affirmed by negating the other. Passionate and violent confrontation must be replaced by rational and fair reconciliation. It will then become clear that those rights, far from being incompatible, can become complementary, providing that the guarantee of one and the exercise of the other are equally ensured in the framework of an overall settlement based on withdrawal from the territories occupied since 1967 and the universal recognition of Israel's boundaries. The way must be paved for the indispensable negotiations in which all the interested parties, and therefore the Palestine Liberation Organization must necessarily participate.
195.	In every case, in view of the dangers raised by crises, there can be only one response: the rule of law, and not the rule of force, is the key to peace.
196.	That applies just as clearly to the threat weighing on the future of the world in the shape of underdevelopment which is persisting and in some cases, is growing worse.
197.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly, which was held in this same hall a few weeks ago, made no mistake about that subject. True, the session did not come to an agreement; but lei us at least give it credit for having emphasized the importance of the subject and for having pointed the way for us to proceed on the crucial subjects.
198.	While there was no formal adoption of a text, the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade won a consensus. Aims were defined, main lines mapped out and pledges made. There is no need for these to be modified. France, for its part, will uphold them firmly.
199.	Next, resolution S-11/4 which was adopted by the Assembly with regard to the least developed countries expressed a deep-rooted, widespread conviction. The new international economic order must operate to the benefit of all but primarily to that of the poorest and the most impoverished. This priority and the concrete measures it implies can no longer be forgotten. They will serve to guide France's actions.
200.	There remains a last obstacle before global negotiations can be opened and the balanced text proposed by the Chairman of the negotiating group provides us with the means to overcome it. My country, which within the framework of the European Community has consistently directed its efforts towards compromise, believes this text should be acceptable to all. It invites this General Assembly not to disband without arriving at the agreement that is indispensable on this point if global negotiations are to begin by 1981. Indeed, my country could not understand how procedural differences could prevent or delay what must constitute a major step in the construction of a new international economic order.
201.	The critical period we have entered calls for a longer term effort to strengthen the structures of international cooperation at all levels: first, the world level, then the level of East West relations and. lastly, the level of regional cooperation.
202.	The world level is pre-eminently the level on which, within the framework of our Organization, universal law is both defined and affirmed. All States are equally called upon to play a part in shaping that law. No State can escape its duties.
203.	That is why it is so important for the membership of our Organization to be enlarged by the entry of new States and why its activities benefit from their participation. In particular, that is win my country is glad to see China playing a more and more active role in the work of our Organization after having been for too long unjustly kept outside.
204.	The law we want to see become the norm must henceforth be a universal one.
205.	This law must be universal with regard to human rights, which it defines and protects and whose progress it untiringly ensures, That is also why the World Conference on the status of women, "held at Copenhagen, has evoked such a wide response in all quarters. That is also why so many countries, among them France, have taken and are continuing to take a stand—in spite of the friendship they continue to bear towards the Iranian people—against the violation of law constituted by the holding of American diplomats as hostages in Teheran. By liberating them, Iran will once again assume its place within the international community.
206.	This law is universal, also, with regard to defining a new international economic order and with regard to the question of disarmament. It applies even beyond the context of the global negotiations which, as 1 have already said, France firmly expects to see started in 1981, and the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea is a good and important example of this universality. On this subject, I should like to welcome and express the great hopes aroused by the progress that has recently been achieved in this area and that augurs well for a favourable conclusion in the near future. By the same token, France, which has pleaded more strongly than any other country for disarmament to become the concern of us all, is extremely pleased with the new impetus given to the work of the Committee on Disarmament at Geneva, from 5 February to 29 April and from 12 June to 9 August this year, and with the birth of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, which is now assured.
207.	Finally, the law is universal in the political area. False realism cannot make us accept as irreversible situations which have been created by force alone. When law is violated, silence acts as an accomplice. One cannot support the self-determination of peoples in one area and show indifference to it in another.
208.	Law, like peace, is indivisible. It would be a mistake to think it is powerless when it expresses itself through the unanimous voice of the international community. In this respect, the role of our Organization is one that cannot be replaced. Its effectiveness is in direct proportion to the support we give it.
209.	However important it may be to strengthen the structures of international order on a world level, we cannot forget that the relationship between Fast and West remains, in many respects, one of the key elements of that order.
210.	At this level the main factors hinge on two States, which are called superpowers precisely because they alone have the power to thrust the world headlong into general conflagration. These factors hinge first on their conduct and next on their relations with each other.
211.	As far as their conduct is concerned, my country is the friend and ally of one of them. Looking beyond ideological differences, it has with the other relations of cooperation which it values and hopes to be able to maintain and develop. In the past my country did not conceal its feelings about United States policy in Viet Nam. Today it is compelled to say that the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan is unacceptable; that no security considerations can justify such action and that it is essential, in the interests of everyone—and that includes the Soviet Union itself—to find a political solution to the crisis that is consistent with the legitimate aspirations of the Afghan people and the requirements of international peace.
212.	Next, as far as the relations between the two superpowers are concerned, it is in the first place up to those that possess the most formidable arsenals and are constantly striving to increase and perfect them to put an end to the arms race. Last year, the conclusion of the SALT II agreement offered some hope in this direction. Although this undoubtedly was not genuine disarmament, it at least constituted a beginning, and I said at the time that France recognized the importance of the step that had just been taken. Even though I understand the extent to which the international climate puts a strain on that agreement, I should like to repeat here that my country hopes to see it take effect as soon as possible.
213.	In addition to the world dimension and the East West dimension of international relations, there is increasingly nowadays a regional dimension.
214.	There are, of course, large continental organizations such as the Organization of American States and the Organization of African Unity, and they are constantly reaffirming their vitality and usefulness.
215.	But there are also other new associations which arc demonstrating their solidarity and taking common initiatives and actions on a more limited scale. The phenomenon is too widespread not to reflect a profound need. We may rest assured that these groupings, associations and communities will be the pillars of peace and the relay stations on the road to the development of the world of tomorrow. Many examples show that they have already begun to do just this and that the hope is already in the process of becoming a reality.
216.	We all remember that the so-called frontline States made an essential contribution to the decolonization of Rhodesia at its most delicate stage. We all remember the initiatives taken by the Islamic Conference and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN). I also have in mind the efforts made by a number of West African countries to help recreate the conditions needed for national reconciliation and civil peace in Chad. I should also like to pay a tribute to the appeal made recently by the President of the Republic of Djibouti for a truce and a negotiated settlement in the Horn of Africa.
217.	Lastly, in mentioning the role of the European Community, I should like to recall that France was one of its founding members. The nine member countries are not satisfied merely to cast a brotherly look towards those new associations. They have established direct contacts with several of them, with ASEAN in particular and the Andean Pact.  The nine Community members are preparing to take new initiatives. As a European community, they have long devoted the main part of their efforts to contributing to development. They will continue to do so. But their action is increasingly directed also towards detente and peace. They are less able than ever before to retreat into indifference or a wait and see attitude in the face of the increased dangers. They are no longer satisfied simply to make their voice heard. They have decided to make their presence felt. The mission that Mr. Thorn, current President of the nine members of the European Community, recently undertook to the Middle East on their behalf both implies and announces that decision.
218.	Periods of crisis are not the time to stay on the sidelines or abdicate responsibility; they are, on the contrary, a time for responsibility and initiative. The State on whose behalf I speak is the first to be aware of this. France is committed to the free determination of peoples, both for itself and for others; it has shown this many times over the past 20 years. It respects the free choice of the peoples for which it has responsibility. It did so only recently by terminating, on the date arranged, the condominium it had administered with Great Britain in the New Hebrides. It would not allow this free choice to be dictated by others either. France would not allow predetermination to take the place of self-determination.
219.	France has experienced the oppression and the trials of war. It understands the suffering caused by violence, intolerance and poverty, and it opens its borders wide to refugees of all origins who seek asylum on its soil.
220.	France is party to no conflict and has claims against no one. But it knows the price of security and it is determined to pay it. Having formed many faithful friendships on five continents over the course of a long history, France is open to cooperation with everyone. But it will never compromise on its independence.
221.	Do not be surprised if France speaks in grave tones today. Conflicts are multiplying and becoming entrenched; international dialogue, when it is not actually interrupted, does not even manage to get started; and whether the subject is detente, disarmament or peace, it looks as if the world does not dare either to deny these principles or to advance them further.
222.	In concluding today on a note of warning and an appeal. France is remaining true to its tradition and its calling. France, like every other State, has national interests to protect, but it recognizes no higher interests than those of peace, justice and progress for mankind.
﻿Mr. President, may I first congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at this thirty-fifth session. You have taken on a task which demands many qualities, not least stamina, firmness and tact. It is a task for which your distinguished record at the United Nations has shown you to be well qualified. I offer you the best wishes of the British Government and of its representation at the United Nations in the weeks and months ahead.
2.	In so doing, I wish also to join those who have expressed their appreciation of the efficient and statesmanlike way in which your predecessor, Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania, conducted the business of the presidency over the past year.
3.	Since I last addressed this Assembly 12 months ago, many terrible things have happened in the world. There has been much cruel and cynical defiance of the principles on which our Charter is based. It would be difficult to say that the world is a safer, more prosperous or happier place today than it was a year ago. Indeed, within the last few days the emergence of a fresh conflict in the Middle Eastern region has given us further cause for anxiety. The tasks confronting all of us remain formidable.
4.	But what has happened during the last 12 months has not all been bad. The great majority of the States Members of this Organization have observed the Charter. And things have happened to inspire us and to persuade us, if persuasion were needed, that conflicts can be resolved; that peaceful negotiations can uncover compromises on which warring parties can settle their differences; that perseverance, goodwill and realism, here at the United Nations and elsewhere, can end wars and save human lives.
5.	When I last addressed the Assembly, war was still raging in that country which is now called Zimbabwe and which, last 25 August, was welcomed as the one hundred and fifty-third Member State of this Organization. That conflict had been going on for 14years— some, I suppose would say longer. But long, complex and, at times, painful negotiations succeeded in finding a basis on which it could be ended and on which the people of Zimbabwe could be given the opportunity to decide for themselves how and by whom they should be governed. I should like to suggest that, as we enter this thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly, the example of Zimbabwe should inspire us to search all the harder for peaceful, practical and realistic— and I cannot emphasize the last adjective too much— solutions to the major problems that confront the world today.
6.	Before briefly surveying those problems, I should like to say a word about the eleventh special session, devoted to development and to international economic cooperation that has just ended. The United Kingdom supported that collective attempt to set a framework for development over the next decade. It was a positive act that accorded well with the ideals of our Charter. Britain accepts, as we all do, that many developing countries face immense social and economic problems. A common effort is essential to ensure that the world economic system evolves to meet the needs of all. But, in making that effort, we must not weaken the foundation of the world's trading, monetary and financial system which has been built up gradually over the years and which has seen an increase in world prosperity unprecedented in human history.
7.	I am glad that the special session was able to agree on an International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade and on a resolution concerning the least developed countries . I am disappointed that it proved impossible to reach agreement on procedures for global negotiations. But discussions will continue during this General Assembly. We shall work for a successful launch of the global negotiations on a generally acceptable basis.
8.	Meanwhile, I should point out that, despite our own domestic economic problems, the aid programme of my own country is substantial. It is the fifth largest among the aid programmes of the industrialized countries and the seventh highest as a percentage of gross national product. But aid is only one factor in the development process. Private investment and private flows are also essential. In 1978, for example, net private flows from the United Kingdom to developing countries amounted to $8.7 billion, or 2.8 per cent of our gross national product. Trade too is vital. In 1979, 18 per cent of Britain's total imports came from developing countries. They were worth $19 billion, or 4.6 per cent of our gross national product. In addition, we continue to work with our partners in Europe to increase aid, trade and investment for the benefit of developing countries. For example, through the Second ACPEEC Convention of Lome signed at Lome on 31 October 1979, the European Community has given to 59 countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific guaranteed access to our markets for an assured quota of their products. That Convention has also provided and does provide aid and. technical cooperation on a very large scale.
9.	I should now like to refer to some of the major conflicts which are on the agenda of this session and to offer some ideas, which I promise will be brief, about how, in the view of the United Kingdom Government, progress can be made towards peaceful solutions.
10.	The Middle East conflict is, above all, one which, in our view, cries out for negotiations leading to a peaceful solution. The violence has gone on far too long. Negotiations are bound to be a lengthy and complex process, and they can hardly succeed unless a calmer atmosphere can be created than that which prevails today. Britain appeals again to all concerned to refrain from inflammatory acts and statements. Such restraint would be a major contribution to the attainment of the goal of peace.
11.	The British Government welcomes the news that the leaders of Egypt, Israel and the United States are to meet again before long. In the meantime Europe has not been inactive. Britain and its partners in the European Community committed themselves to search for common ground and to gain acceptance of the principles set out by their Heads of Government in the declaration which they issued at Venice on 13 June this year. We believe that these principles, and only these principles, can form the basis for a just and lasting settlement.
12.	I said earlier that the great majority of States Members of the Organization had been faithful to the Charter. I wish I could say "all". We are pledged to respect the sovereignty of others. We are pledged to refrain from the threat or use of force in international relations. Nine months ago both of those principles were violated by a country which is a permanent member of the Security Council. I refer, of course, to the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union. One hundred and four Member States voted in this Assembly to condemn it. Nine months later, no end to the conflict is in sight. One million Afghans have sought refuge outside their own country. Tens of thousands of Soviet troops remain there; but they have failed to subjugate the people of Afghanistan. Here, too, let there be a political solution—a solution which will remove Soviet forces from Afghanistan restore to the people of that country their sovereignty and their independence and enable them to choose for themselves how they shall be governed.
13.	The occupation of Afghanistan is not the only violation of the United Nations Charter that we have seen in Southwest Asia in the past 12 months. The detention of the American hostages in Iran is another. International law and common humanity require their immediate release. I take this occasion to remind the Iranian authorities of their obligation under international law to protect the rights of all foreigners residing in their country. I am, of course, especially concerned for those British subjects who are at present detained in Iran and to whom my country's representatives have been denied any access.
14.	Speaking of violations of the Charter, the United Nations surely cannot ignore the grave situation that has developed in the past 48 hours between two Member States. Judging by what they themselves have announced, Iran and Iraq are now in a state of undeclared war. I share the view and the fear expressed yesterday by the Secretary General that this conflict could have serious and unpredictable consequences and I echo his call for the utmost restraint, for an end to the fighting and for a negotiated settlement. This surely is no more than the United Nations has a right to expect from two of its Members. Therefore I welcome the fact that, on the Secretary General’s initiative, the Security Council will be meeting in informal consultations here this afternoon.
15.	Acts of terrorism against diplomatic and consular premises and staff have increased alarmingly in recent years. They threaten the basic fabric of international relations. It is our common duty and our common interest to condemn such acts and to ensure that international terrorism, whatever form it may take, is never allowed to achieve its objective. The British Government is glad that this session's agenda includes proposals to enhance the safety of diplomatic and consular representatives.
16.	An increasingly worrying phenomenon in recent years has been the mass exodus of refugees from their own countries. When the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was set up as a "temporary" organization nearly 30 years ago, there were 1.2 million refugees in the world, mainly in Europe; there are now nearly 16 million refugees and displaced persons, principally in Africa and Asia—three decades of achievement by the international community. We cannot undo the tragedies that have occurred, but it is not too late to remedy their consequences.
17.	Let us take just one case, that of Cambodia. That country is a picture of the human misery that results if the Charter of the United Nations is not respected. The Vietnamese invasion and occupation of Cambodia have created tension and conflict in Southeast Asia. The stand taken by the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN] has my Government's full support. We believe that there must be a political solution but that there cannot be such a solution without the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Cambodia. That must be the first aim of any negotiations.
18.	Meanwhile, the United Nations is doing what it can to alleviate the plight of the people of Cambodia and of the refugees. I pay a tribute to the efforts of the United Nations agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross [ICRC] and the many nongovernmental organizations which have mounted the relief programme in Cambodia, often in conditions of personal danger. By the end of this year, the joint UNICEF/ICRC operation alone will have spent some $500 million, or $100 for each Cambodian. But there are limits to what we can achieve by humanitarian means. So long as there is no political solution, so long will the suffering continue.
19.	Another area of tragic armed conflict is Namibia. Here too a political solution must be found by negotiation. But, unlike the position in the other area, here there already exists a plan approved by the Security Council and negotiations are already well advanced. The British Government remains firm in the belief that the United Nations plan provides the only sure route to a peaceful and democratic settlement with general international recognition. We shall continue to work with the Secretary General and the African States most closely involved to achieve the long overdue agreement on implementation of this plan.
20.	I have already referred to Zimbabwe's advance to independence and to membership in the United Nations. That has given my Government great satisfaction, which 1 know is shared by every Member of this Organization. But this new Member of our Organization needs more from us than congratulations. It needs substantial aid to rebuild its economy from the ravages of civil war. My own Government has pledged $180 million of aid to Zimbabwe over the next three years. We have cancelled $53 million of official debt and rescheduled the remainder on favourable terms.
21.	Although a number of other offers of assistance have been made, I do not believe that the international community as a whole has yet done enough to put Zimbabwe back on its feet. The damage resulting from years of isolation and of war is enormous. The expectations raised by the peace settlement are high. An international effort to underpin the political and economic stability of Zimbabwe during its first few years as an independent State could secure its future prosperity and enable it to play an influential part in Africa. I believe it to be of the highest importance that such an effort should be forthcoming in the months ahead.
22.	As regards South Africa, the British Government's view is clear. We consider apartheid to be morally indefensible and politically unworkable. But if change is to come peacefully in South Africa, it will have to be a step-by-step process. We shall not achieve change, peaceful change, by increasing South Africa's isolation, or by ostracism, or by threats. We cannot know how fast changes will come to South Africa, but there are voices inside the country calling for change and we should not ignore them. What the United Nations can and must do is to continue to remind South Africa that apartheid is a system repugnant to all Members of the Organization and incompatible with its ideals and those of the international community as a whole.
23.	I should like to turn now to the efforts which are being made to deal with the larger and more general threats to international security.
24.	Mr. President, a few days ago you made an eloquent appeal for new efforts to halt the arms race. As you reminded us, the hopes attached to the Disarmament Decade of the 1970s were cruelly disappointed: global military expenditure continued to grow and arsenals of weapons multiplied. This is a field in which there are no short cuts. In arms control, above all, realism is called for. A comprehensive and step-by-step programme of attainable measures covering both nuclear and conventional weapons is the only realistic approach. Declaratory measures are of very little value; what matters is concrete results. The British Government will continue to work for agreements based on balanced and verifiable agreements. As we do so, we shall remind those with whom we negotiate that in military matters the key to building confidence between nations often lies in a readiness to publish information on such matters as budgets and force levels. The more is known, the less is feared; the more is concealed, the more is suspect.
25.	Arms control agreements depend on the existence of a climate of trust; they cannot create it. That too is a matter of realism. Arms control must go hand in hand with security. This hard fact is reflected in the outcome of the Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.  I know that progress in negotiations on nuclear disarmament has been slow, and that is frustrating. But I see no reason why our common interest in preventing nuclear proliferation should be diminished in any way. The British Government remains fully committed to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and is playing a full part in the search for solutions to the outstanding problems and for a renewed consensus.
26.	We remain committed to the undertakings we gave in 1975 under the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.  We believe that the Conference process can and should play a valuable role in the management of international relations in Europe. But popular faith in this process has been shaken by the actions of the Soviet Union, not least its invasion of Afghanistan, which violated at a stroke all the principles of the Final Act. We approach the second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, due to begin at Madrid in November, determined, first, to conduct a thoroughgoing review of the way in which the Final Act has been implemented and, secondly, to examine proposals for its future development.
27.	It should be clear from what I have said that the British Government continues to believe that the United Nations has an important role to play in the search for political solutions to the many problems that we all face. But if the Organization is to play that role, we must pay due regard to its structure and its management. We must be careful not to tamper with its institutions in such a way as to impair their ability to perform the functions assigned to them by the Charter.
28.	The Organization must set itself the highest standards of good management and economy. Here, obviously much depends on individuals. The United Nations is fortunate to have in its Secretary General someone who justly enjoys the respect of all Members and who in his tenure of office has set the highest standards. We must ensure that efficiency, competence and integrity remain the prime considerations in every appointment to the Secretariat. We must exercise restraint over the proliferation of meetings, which often only consume money and effort with no hope of practical results. We must make the best use of the institutions we have. And, at a time of worldwide economic difficulty, we must eliminate wasteful expenditure and curb the constant expansion of the Organization's budget. If new programmes are to be set up, we must find room for them by first identifying and then bringing to an end other programmes which are now obsolete or of little value.
29.	It is easy to expect too much of the United Nation, and it is too easy to decry its achievements. The United Nations provides the forum where ideals and realities come face to face. Our Charter embodies the ideals to which we should continue to aspire. The world supplies the yardstick by which to measure our progress. Our task is simple but gigantic: to seek year by year to bring the reality closer to the ideal.

﻿I extend to Mr. von Wechmar the warm felicitations of my delegation on his unanimous election to the presidency of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly. His nomination to that high office is a tribute to his personal qualities as an experienced and skilful diplomat. It is also fitting testimony to the dedication of his great country to the ideals of the United Nations, and his opening address amply demonstrated his personal devotion to the fundamental principles and purposes of the Charter. I wish him every success in his challenging assignment and pledge my delegation's full support in his endeavours.
138.	It is a matter of particular satisfaction for me to place on record the sincere appreciation of my delegation for the outstanding work performed by his predecessor, Mr. Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania. His presidency of the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session, as well as of the three special sessions during the past 12 months, was indeed an eventful one. The patience, skill, sincerity and unfailing courtesy displayed by him will long be remembered in the annals of the General Assembly.
139.	It is a pleasure for me to greet once again our distinguished Secretary-General. We admire the way in which he has been discharging the onerous and delicate responsibilities which the complexities of the international situation impose upon him. His travels and efforts straddling the globe, covering points of crisis and explosive situations, have helped defuse tension in our troubled world.
140.	I already had the opportunity at the eleventh special session to extend my congratulations to the freedom-loving people of Zimbabwe on the achievement of their hard-won independence and their membership in the United Nations. I should like once again to welcome Zimbabwe to our midst and to wish it all success in its exciting and difficult task of nation-building.
141.	It also gives me great pleasure to extend our warm and sincere felicitations to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, which has now become the one hundred and fifty- fourth Member of the Organization. We rejoice with them in their hour of triumph and joy and trust that their aspirations to a better and brighter future will be amply fulfilled in the years to come. India looks forward to establishing mutually beneficial relations with the new nation.
142.	The Indian delegation participates in this General Assembly in the context of a transformed domestic political perspective. India has had another general election since the General Assembly met last year. The people of India appraised the challenges that they had faced, reassessed the nature and quality of leadership required to meet them and massively reaffirmed their conviction in the leadership of Prime Minister Mrs. Indira Gandhi.
143.	The new Government in India is engaged in the difficult and enormous task of national reconstruction and regeneration of a pluralistic multilingual, multi-religious and diverse society, and this by democratic means. Intractable though our problems may seem, our national efforts to resolve them since our independence have borne results to a great extent. This has imbued our people with a sense of confidence and inspired them to the objective that India shall emerge as a strong, self-reliant and modern nation.
144.	It is also an abiding conviction of my Government and my people that India's future stability and development depends on the success of the international community in creating a world order characterized by durable peace. There is a national consensus, therefore, on the content and objectives of India's foreign policy. There is unanimity of opinion in India about the relevance of the principles of non-alignment and the imperative need for friendship towards all nations based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence.
145.	Developments during the past year have not been such as to bring credit to the international community as a whole. The collective behaviour of nation-States in recent months has only deepened the sense of insecurity and distrust in the world. New and ever more ominous strategic doctrines are being propounded, bringing the world closer to the cataclysmic outbreak of an all-out nuclear conflagration. The scientific genius of mankind is being exploited for the perverted purpose of manufacturing means of destruction, perhaps in the search for the "ultimate weapon" which, it is believed, I think quite erroneously, would enable one or the other group of States to impose its will on the others. Increasing recourse is being made to might in a manner which has threatened the national independence and integrity of small and medium States. The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States has been observed more in breach in a variety of ways, covert and overt. All means are considered legitimate in the pursuit of the objective of expanding spheres of influence. International economic relations continue to be marked by inequity, selfishness and short-sightedness, particularly by those who possess the means to bring about a change and to start the process to usher in a New International Economic Order. The wisdom which was evident last year when certain significant decisions were taken in the sphere of the North- South dialogue seems to have lost some of its momentum this year.
146.	Living as we do in this small and increasingly interdependent world, no one can completely escape responsibility for the current atmosphere of gloom, fear, frustration and diffidence. But the primary responsibility must rest with those who literally possess the power of life and death over all of us and who do not hesitate to wield that power, without caring too much for the consequences of their action. A few powerful nations are claiming and blatantly exercising what they consider their right to cause destabilization in any place and at any time and with any means of their choosing. It is obvious that the weak and poor nations cannot look upon this unenviable lot of theirs with equanimity. They have, therefore, to be eternally vigilant if they are to survive, if they are to preserve and promote the well- being of their peoples and if they are not to become pawns in the game of great-Power manipulation. They have to speak up on behalf of their mute millions, assert that they have no intention of acquiescing in the dangerous activity of big- Power brinkmanship and that they do not wish to face annihilation either by the deliberate design of callous Powers or by accidental errors of mindless machines.
147.	It is in this context that the policy of non-alignment assumes greater validity. Non-alignment is the embodiment of the aspirations of the vast majority of nations and peoples to protect their existence, their freedom, honour and dignity. The non-aligned movement is not directed against one or the other bloc. Over the decades it has come to represent a positive force—a force of life and not of death—in international relations which is now recognized even by those who had at one time ridiculed it. At the same time, the non- aligned movement has had to pass through certain vicissitudes. The general atmosphere of doubt and recrimination seems to have contaminated the movement to some extent. Internal problems within the movement have tended to affect its unity. We have to examine these problems closely and devise ways and means of ensuring the unity and continued effectiveness of the movement. While reserving these tasks for discussion at the forums of the non-aligned movement itself, I shall only express my confidence that, both by positive determination and by sheer necessity, non- alignment shall be restored to its original concept and sweep when it was devised to deal with global issues of detente, disarmament, decolonization and development.
148.	There is an organic relationship between these four issues. Progress in any one of them would help create the proper atmosphere for forward movement in the others. By the same token, setback in one leads to increasing difficulty in the others. The present international situation vividly illustrates their interrelationship. The collapse of detente has led to stalemate in disarmament negotiations and absurd increases in defence expenditures which, in turn, have prevented the developed nations from achieving what was expected of them in international economic co-operation and development or, at any rate, tended to provide them with an alibi for falling far short of expectations.
149.	It is a matter of considerable anguish to my delegation that the continent of Asia, which has given the world all its major religions and served as the main cultural pathfinder over several millennia, is at present the scene of most of the conflicts and much of the suffering caused by these conflicts—West Asia, South-West Asia and South-East Asia. The Indian subcontinent, I am happy to say, has been free from conflict for some years now, and it is my earnest hope and the constant endeavour of my Government to see genuinely peaceful and co-operative relations continue to develop in this area.
150.	In West Asia, the threat of a conflagration will continue to persist so long as the Palestinian problem is treated as a refugee problem and as long as the commitment of the United Nations to establish an independent State for the Palestinians in their homeland remains unfulfilled. Far from heeding the call of the United Nations to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories, Israel has unabashedly colonized Arab lands and illegally annexed the Holy City of Jerusalem in total disregard of its sacred heritage. I firmly believe, as I said a few weeks ago during the seventh emergency special session,  that a comprehensive solution to the problem of West Asia entails the following elements: the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State; the total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from all Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem; and the guarantee of the right of all States in the region, including Arab Palestine, to live within secure and recognized borders. A peaceful solution cannot be attained without the full and equal participation of the PLO, the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people, in any negotiations. Experience has shown that attempts at partial solutions without the participation of the PLO have neither succeeded nor contributed to peace in the region.
151.	The people and Government of India are saddened by the recent and continuing conflict between Iran and Iraq, two close neighbours of ours. Our cultural and economic ties with the peoples of the two countries are as old as history itself. Since our independence in 1947 those ties have become even closer and acquired new dimensions.
152.	Iran and Iraq are both developing countries, as in India. We cannot but express regret that the conflict will inevitably lead to retarding the process of economic and social development which is so vital to the needs of the peoples of the two countries. At the same time the conflict weakens the solidarity of the non-aligned and developing countries. We therefore urge Iran and Iraq to settle their differences peacefully, in accordance with the principles and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
153.	The developments in Afghanistan have been engaging the serious attention of the Government of India. India has historical and traditional ties with the people of Afghanistan. We are deeply concerned and vitally interested in the security, independence, stability and tranquillity of our friendly neighbour. Over the past months the Government of India has been in touch with the countries of the subcontinent, as well as other countries, in order to prevent the aggravation of these dangers and heightening of tension.
154.	We have consistently emphasized the inadmissibility of the use of force in international relations or intervention or interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States. It is also our firm belief that only by upholding the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States can peace and stability be preserved in the area. Observance of those principles would not prejudice the legitimate security interests of any State and, in fact, would go a long way towards safeguarding them. What is required is a dialogue among the parties concerned, without pre-conditions, so that the contours of a political settlement, acceptable to all, can emerge. I am satisfied that such a dialogue is possible, since most of the difficulties are essentially notional and at best technical and non-substantive. If the countries of the region are left in peace to work out their own destiny, without the competitive attention of great Powers, that will permit them to embark on relationships based on mutuality and a developing trust in bilateral negotiations as the best means of settling outstanding problems.
155.	India's relations with Kampuchea go back several centuries. Indeed, the temples of Angkor Wat bear testimony to the close interconnections between the cultures of our two countries. The gentle and peace-loving people of Kampuchea have suffered very greatly through no fault of their own. The world will not forget nor condone the calculated and heinous crimes perpetrated in the recent past by a cruel regime against the innocent and defenceless people of Kampuchea. It is a great irony that, while emphatic references are being made time and again to human rights, the first and foremost right of the Kampuchean people, namely, the right to live, has been glossed over conveniently. Politically motivated callousness seems to have crossed all limits when it is realized that remnants of the very same despotic regime are representing, as it were, their own victims of Kampuchea in this Assembly.
156.	The countries of Indo-China have been subjected to conflict, destabilization and war for far too long and should be allowed now to concentrate on the development of their economies and societies. The Government of India has decided to establish diplomatic relations with the Government headed by President Heng Samrin. This is an expression as much of the overwhelming majority of public- opinion within India as of our general policy of recognizing the reality of the political situation inside Kampuchea.
157.	We value highly our relations with countries of ASEAN and believe that the development of our relations with all our neighbours in South-East Asia will enable us to assist in the solution of the problems that confront them at the present time.
158.	Every objective analyst of the situations in South-West and South-East Asia must be convinced by now that extreme positions have not helped ease tensions in either region; on the other hand, they have only hardened attitudes and prolonged the sufferings of the concerned peoples. India's approach is based on the conviction that the search for a solution in both cases lies in political means and not through military force.
159.	There should be no illusion that India is seeking merely momentary peace. As we have repeatedly stated, we are against the presence of foreign troops or foreign bases in any country. But if we desire to move towards finding a positive solution, what is required is an assiduous and continued effort to devise suitable package solutions which take care of the concerns of all and succeed in eliminating outside intervention and interference. Willingness in this regard on the part of the concerned, howsoever partial, should be taken advantage of for furthering a solution and not being spurned out of hand. If only the efforts of influential countries had been bent in this direction, these problems would, I am sure, have already been well on the way to satisfactory solution. That has been India's approach, and I am glad to say that it has over the months begun to receive at least grudging approval by many. In this connection, I should like to make special mention of the beginning of a dialogue between Viet Nam and Thailand, with the good offices of the Secretary-General. This is the right direction, and I hope it will proceed to ultimate success in that region as well as elsewhere.
160.	The Indian Ocean has become over the past decade and a half the arena of increasing great-Power confrontation. The stresses and strains of their relationships have often been reflected in the corresponding arithmetic of their military presence there. That the littoral and hinterland States have expressed their unified and determined opposition to such military presence and called for its elimination in the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace in resolution 2832 (XXVI) is a fact of history which is often sought to be conveniently ignored.
161.	The current uncertainties in the political and security climate in the Indian Ocean as well as its environs, as evidenced by the frantic efforts to develop the Diego Garcia base, further underline the urgency of addressing ourselves to this central preoccupation. Both in the recently enlarged Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean, where we have welcomed the participation of the great Powers and major maritime users, and at the Conference on the Indian Ocean, to be convened during 1981 in Sri Lanka, India will clearly identify the key concern of the littoral and hinterland States in securing the effective implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. We are firmly committed to the convening of the Conference in 1981 in Sri Lanka and expect that the decision of the present session of the Assembly will contribute to that goal.
162.	On 1 October 1980 the President of Pakistan in his statement before the General Assembly [18th meeting] referred to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India. That reference, attacking as it does the territorial integrity of India, was unfortunate. Three times in 24 years Pakistan attempted to detach the State of Jammu and Kashmir from India by the use of force. It received a befitting response on each of the three occasions. In 1972, India and Pakistan signed the Simla Agreement, which provides for the settlement of all issues between the two countries through bilateral negotiations. But since 1977 Pakistan has repeatedly raised the issue of Jammu and Kashmir at the United Nations and other international forums. References are made to relevant United Nations resolutions on the subject, quite forgetting the fact that those resolutions have become irrelevant because of the action of Pakistan itself. In the face of such references, I am constrained to wonder whether Pakistan's adherence to the Simla Agreement has undergone a change. There is a clear contradiction between the expressed desire of Pakistan to normalize relations with India in accordance with the Simla Agreement and its pronouncements in various forums which attempt to set the clock back. India's stand, on the other hand, has remained constant, and we continue to be prepared to settle all matters with Pakistan through bilateral channels.
163.	There is an old Indian metaphor likening the world to a frog resting in the shadow of a cobra's hood. Such is the plight of peace in our age. The question of the relationship between ethics and power in international politics has long engaged the attention of both the philosopher and the practitioner of foreign policy in the nation State. Our principal concern in this nuclear age is, however, that the leadership of the most powerful nations of the world should consider not only the political appositeness of their foreign policy prescriptions but their consequences for the very survival of the world. We run the risk today of being carried on the wings of a collective paranoia. The situation calls for restraint and responsible behaviour so as to bring the world away from the edge of a nuclear catastrophe.
164.	Yet, judging by the current climate of international relations, the shadows of such a catastrophe have become darker. Not only have the expectations of the first Disarmament Decade, and especially those of the tenth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, been belied, but there has been a staggering, almost quantum leap in world military expenditure, which today totals nearly $US 500 billion. Familiar arguments of "deterrence" and doctrines of "balance of terror" are adduced to justify the continued escalation in the build-up of nuclear weaponry. New doctrines of limited nuclear war are being postulated which, by making nuclear war credible, increase the risk of such a war and even give it a semblance of respectability.
165.	All too often we are reminded of the dangers of an accidental nuclear holocaust being triggered off by human or technological error or by computer malfunction. The very existence of such weapons makes the possibility of system failures resulting in outright catastrophe frighteningly real. Over the years India has consistently argued that the only effective guarantee against the use, threat of use or accidental use of nuclear weapons is the total elimination of such weapons. Their use has been declared a crime against humanity and contrary to the Charter of the United Nations. Pending, however, the total elimination of nuclear weapons, all States possessing nuclear weapons should give a binding commitment not to use them under any circumstances.
166.	India is firmly of the view that, like the Geneva Protocol of 1925, which completely forbids the use of biological and chemical weapons, a convention on the total prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would be a most desirable objective which should be pursued energetically by the international community.
167.	We understand that the United States and the USSR are scheduled to resume shortly their dialogue on some aspects of the question of curbing the arms race. This is a welcome development.
168.	We have noted the proposals put forward by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union on urgent measures for reducing the danger of war. My delegation will give those proposals its most serious consideration.
169.	It is pertinent to recall that it was India which first brought the problem of the proliferation of nuclear weapons to the attention of the United Nations in 1964 by inscribing in the agenda an item entitled "Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons". Our approach was based on the premise that both horizontal and vertical proliferation were integral parts of a problem which had to be dealt with as a whole. This concept was endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution 2028 (XX), which declared, inter alia, that any treaty "should embody an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear and non-nuclear Powers".
170.	Unfortunately, this concept was deliberately altered in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, concluded in 1968. If the Treaty has become an unworkable document, it is only because it has adopted the narrow and illogical approach of addressing itself only to the question of horizontal proliferation. The conclusion of cartel-type arrangements, the attempts to impose full-scope safeguards and discriminatory constraints on the peaceful nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States are all aimed at perpetuating a kind of nuclear feudalism which is unrealistic, illogical and unacceptable.
171.	India is opposed to nuclear weapons. On the other hand, the Government of India is firmly committed to the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. We would oppose any moves or measures which are discriminatory in nature and which come in the way of our programmes to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The question of non- proliferation of nuclear weapons should not be confused with the right of all States to develop, acquire and use nuclear energy and to determine their peaceful nuclear programmes in accordance with their national priorities, needs and interests.
172.	As we prepare to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the United Nations can legitimately be proud of its record of achievements in the field of decolonization. Except for a few pockets where colonialism and racism are desperately fighting the forces of nationalism, the world today is free from colonial domination and exploitation. While the independence of Zimbabwe and Vanuatu was first and foremost the result of the freedom struggle of their peoples, the contribution made by the United Nations has been significant.
173.	We were hopeful that the independence of neighbouring Zimbabwe would set an example for a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia. The United Nations plan for Namibia contained in Security Council resolution 435 (1978) had established a framework for the early independence of Namibia. Its acceptance by the parties concerned had marked a step in the right direction. But the racist South African regime has continued its dilatory tactics by raising extraneous issues and by questioning the very impartiality of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. We should certainly support every effort for a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia which would be to the satisfaction of the people of Namibia. However, we regret to note that even the most recent communication, dated 22 September 1980, received by the Secretary-General from the South African Government does not indicate that South Africa has any intention to implement the United Nations plan. The only means left to the United Nations in the present situation is for the Security Council to impose mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, so as to compel South Africa to abide by the wish of the international community. Meanwhile the Member States should continue to provide moral and material support to SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the people of Namibia, in its struggle for national liberation.
174.	Permit me to refer briefly to the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, which concluded its ninth session at Geneva recently. The Conference has been in session since 1973 and before that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction had reviewed the law of the sea and done preparatory work for about six years. During that long period, understanding was reached on a number of significant issues, including a 12-mile territorial sea, a 200-mile exclusive economic zone, limits of the continental shelf, a regime for marine environment and marine scientific research, and a regime and international machinery for the exploration and exploitation of the international sea-bed area and its resources, which have been recognized and acknowledged by all States as the common heritage of mankind.
175.	We note with satisfaction that the Conference was able at its last session to make progress on some more critical questions and we hope it will successfully conclude its work of finalizing a comprehensive convention on the law of the sea in the near future.
176.	The year 1980 marked the mid-point of the United Nations Decade for Women. Considerable progress has been made during the first half of the Decade in focusing the attention of Governments and peoples on the need for improving the status of women. Women in India have traditionally enjoyed pride of place in our society. Long before the International Women's Year and the Decade for Women, the Indian people had enacted into law equality of women in all respects. That was no accident, for it flows from the best traditions of our history and culture, and in particular of our struggle for independence, when men and women together accepted sacrifices and rejoiced in the dawn of freedom, I hope that the Programme of Action adopted at Copenhagen" will provide the guidance and framework for action-oriented programmes to work towards the implementation of the objectives of the Decade through the United Nations and other international forums.
177.	The year 1981 will be the International Year of Disabled Persons. There is a vast segment of mankind, estimated to be around 400 million, which, being handicapped in one way or another, is unable to live with the dignity which is the right of all human beings. The bulk of those unfortunate beings is in the developing countries. We in India intend to reinforce our efforts in the rehabilitation of the disabled and, more important, in the prevention of disability. We have already taken several steps, including the establishment of a National Committee, in preparation for the International Year of Disabled Persons.
178.	We have just emerged from the frustrating processes of the eleventh special session and the agonizing memory of its disappointing ending is still fresh in our minds. However constructively one may try to look at the outcome of the special session, one is unable to escape the conclusion that the failure was not so much because of the complexity of the task but because of the absence of political will and the incomprehensible stubbornness of a few—to be precise, just three States Members of this Organization. In their incessant quest for an orderly and co-operative approach towards a new international economic order, the developing countries were persuaded to accept a compromise text on procedures for the global negotiations. That was the irreducible minimum for securing a process that would have provided hope of finding solutions to the critical problems facing the world economy as a whole and the economies of the developing countries in particular. A vast majority of the affluent nations, whose fortunes are interlinked with the destiny of the developing world, also accepted the procedures worked out through extremely difficult negotiations during the special session. Not all of them could have found those procedures entirely satisfactory, but they responded to the imperative of interdependence and to the obligations implicit in it. And yet, in the final analysis, all those endeavours ended in total collapse and the international community was at the end left chasing the wisp of international co-operation and interdependence. It would be less than candid on my part not to affirm that those who prevented a consensus being reached must bear the entire responsibility for the failure of the special session.
179.	It would be appropriate to ask why the concept of interdependence does not seem to have received acceptance in practice, particularly in all developed countries. There is a view that the fact of interdependence either is not quite apparent or is not urgent enough to be taken into account in formulating current economic policies and decisions of developed countries. The dialogue as well as the argument based on interdependence, therefore, takes on a rather academic and unreal character and does not seem to carry conviction with the people of developed countries. That is the distinct impression one gets from their media, whatever the pronouncements of their political leadership. It is time that this hiatus in understanding was seriously taken note of.
180.	Of course the position is not the same in all developed countries or on all occasions in the same country. It would therefore not be correct to lump all developed countries together in that respect. There are distinct variations in the perceptions of the Governments and peoples of those countries and it would be both relevant and prudent to analyse them closely. The extent of the genuine realization of interdependence on the part of the Governments and peoples of the developed countries is the real measure of success which the North-South dialogue will achieve.
181.	Until three days back India was the Chairman of the Group of 77 in New York and, as such, articulated the aspirations of the developing countries. India will continue to endorse the stand taken by the Group of 77 as before and contribute its mite for the success of the global negotiations. The Group of 77 has taken a reasonable and balanced stand. We hope that in due course it will find a favourable response from developed countries, mainly through a process of appraisal of their own long-term interests, which can be achieved only through co-operation with developing countries. That process obviously needs a persuasive and positive effort on the part of all right-thinking and sober elements in both the developed and developing camps. The attitude of charity would be just as unreal and fallacious as the approach of obligatory expiation would be impracticable and counterproductive.
182.	The nature of the phenomenon that we witnessed at the eleventh special session is disturbing and its consequences ominous for the future of economic co-operation among nations. My delegation is concerned to hear arguments of domestic pressure inherent in a democratic set-up preventing adherence to or fulfilment of international covenants and agreements. Whether it is the law of the sea, where difficult negotiations over long years are promising to come to fruition soon, or multilateral trade negotiations on which agreement was reached last year at Tokyo, or other internationally binding agreements, their sanctity is being breached in the name of national compulsions and with increasing impunity. Is it very difficult, I ask the members of this Assembly, to infer from all this that a wilful departure is being made by those countries from the concept of inter-dependence and from the process of international co-operation?
183.	Thirty-three years ago, when we achieved our political independence, we deliberately chose the democratic path of government. Democracy to us became a way of life, permeating the intricate political process as well as the methodology of development. Like most other nations, we too faced the conflict between national sovereignty and international obligations implicit in our existence as a member of the world community. To the best of our ability and belief, we have never turned away from our international obligations, nor can we be accused of violating the sanctity of international agreements freely entered into by my country. Such a course often involved domestic sacrifices, but our democratic structure gave us sustenance and strength in remaining true to our international or multilateral obligations. It would be particularly unfortunate if the leadership of a democratic country were to plead helplessness in fulfilling valid international obligations on the ground of opposition in its legislature. This helplessness would, in fact, detract from the credibility of the democratic system itself in international relations. So those who are having recourse to this argument, for whatever reason or short-term exigency, are in reality undermining the validity of their own cherished system. My earnest appeal would be that this tendency be eschewed.
184.	So far as India is concerned, we are determined to continue our efforts to bring about an early resumption of the North-South dialogue. For our part, we would expect the few developed countries which have still not fully accepted the logic of global negotiations to join in the process that would make the resumption of the North-South dialogue possible. It is also my expectation that we should be able to see this movement in the course of the current session of the General Assembly so that the preparatory work for the launching of the global negotiations could be completed before the end of this year.
185.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly did manage to reach a consensus on the text of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, embodying the goals and objectives of an integrated process of economic and social development during the 1980s and the policy measures required to achieve those goals and objectives. It remains to be seen to what extent the commitments undertaken in the Strategy when it is adopted during this session, will represent unambiguous and unanimous agreements. This is true particularly in regard to official development assistance, industrial redeployment, international trade and monetary issues. Having said this, I would like to underline our satisfaction at the consensus that exists in regard to measures to meet the critical situation in the least developed countries.
186.	At this session the General Assembly is expected to consider and take appropriate action in regard to the suggestions made by the Secretary-General last July for overcoming the critical economic situation of many developing countries. We await the elaboration by the Secretary- General of his suggestions and trust that it will be possible for him to go into all relevant details, such as the feasibility of raising the amount required for additional assistance and operational arrangements for its disbursement among low- income countries most seriously affected by the current economic crisis.
187.	I should also like to refer to the policy measures for the most seriously affected countries that have been agreed to in the context of the International Development Strategy. The General Assembly resolution on the subject last year called upon the Secretary-General to submit an analytical report at the special session in 1980 and called upon all donor countries to consider in the meantime extending relief and assistance to the most seriously affected countries. While the special session was unable to consider the report of the Secretary-General in detail, the International Development Strategy does refer to agreed measures that will need to be urgently considered by the international community and this Assembly.
188.	Many years ago Jawaharlal Nehru, reflecting on the dilemma of his time over the futile attempts at disarmament, wrote:
"The real difficulty ... has been that there are two classes of countries—the satisfied Powers and the unsatisfied Powers, the dominant Powers and those that are suppressed, the Powers that want the present state of affairs to continue and those that want a change. Between the two there can be no stable equilibrium, just as there can be no real stability between a dominant class and a suppressed class .... Nothing proves the unreality and mockery of international politics today so much as the failure of all attempts at disarmament. Everybody talks of peace, and yet prepares for war."
189.	These words, written more than 40 years ago, have a ring of tragic prophecy. They are symptomatic not only of disarmament negotiations but of the entire gamut of international relations today. Sometimes, looking at great stretches of history, it is difficult to believe that the ideal of co-operation and working together for the common good has made much progress. And yet, if we are to avert a catastrophe, we should resolutely continue on the path of dialogue and co-operation and turn away from sterile polemics and confrontation. All of us perhaps perceive the danger and recognize the challenge, but the will to act has so far been sadly lacking. Let us, therefore, so readjust our sights and conduct our affairs that future generations may not condemn our times as yet another barren stretch in the history of man.
﻿Mr. President, at the outset I should like to express to you our congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly. Your vast experience and the outstanding qualities that you have exhibited in the realm of multilateral diplomacy ensure your ability to keep a firm grasp on the helm of the Assembly during this stormy period.
53.	Al the opening of this session a new State joined the ranks of the United Nations: Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. On behalf of the Government and people of Israel, I should like to welcome it to the Organization and wish it all prosperity and success as an independent and sovereign Stale.
54,	To my very grout regret, it is not possible to express satisfaction at the condition of the United Nations today, cither in general or from the specific perspective of my country. Indeed, it is questionable whether there remains much similarity or correlation between the noble ideals, principles and purposes which guided the founding fathers of the United Nations and the reality prevailing in the Organization today. The founders of this Organization saw in their vision a forum and a framework for the achievement and maintenance of peace between nations after the horrific experience of the Second World War, a horror which they had experienced at first hand.
55.	Perhaps the most cynical expression of the gap between the original vision and the reality prevailing in the United Nations today has been the refusal of this Organization, ostensibly dedicated to the peaceful settlement of disputes, to adopt and encourage the Camp David accords' and the subsequent Peace Treaty, which brought to an end decades of hostilities between Israel and Egypt and raised the possibility of expanding the peace process to embrace all of Israel's neighbours. This Organization, whose principal purpose is the promotion of peace among nations, has thus betrayed its own raison d'etre by rejecting an historic step towards peace and by playing into the hands of the enemies of peace, the rejectionists and the warmongers.
56. This unhappy phenomenon is not confined to the General Assembly. Out of the 18 debates which have been conducted thus far during 1980 in the Security Council, nine were devoted to subjects involving my country. Is there anyone who seriously believes that half of the world's international problems today are connected with Israel? We need only glance at a map of our region, the Middle East—which is just one region of the world—to sec that it is riddled from length to breadth with countless conflicts between States, between ethnic minorities and between different religious groups. Virtually all those conflicts have a history and a dynamic of their own, totally divorced from the Arab-Israeli conflict.
57. By way of illustration. I need only mention the situation in Afghanistan and. of course, the full-scale war between Iran and Iraq—a worrying outbreak of hostilities which has wide-ranging implications. That war between two States ruled by extremist, irresponsible and trigger-happy regimes threatens both regional and international security by putting at risk much of the world's regular supply of oil, That war, a struggle between two Moslem States, demolishes, in our opinion, the naive and groundless belief that the world's oil supply is dependent on a pro-Arab solution to the dispute between Israel and its neighbours. It has become all too clear that the solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict will not provide any miracle cure for the region as a whole or eliminate the many other grave conflicts raging in it. The ability of the United Nations to work for an end to the bloodshed in Iraq and Iran will be a yardstick of the Organization's ability to continue to fulfil its role for the encouragement and maintenance of peace.
58.	Important tasks have been allotted to the United Nations. Besides its role in the preservation of international peace and security, it also has a vital role to play in other spheres which require our earnest attention, in particular through the specialized agencies established for various purposes. But even the specialized agencies have been gravely compromised by the plague of politicization. Business-like debates and deliberations in them have become increasingly difficult—if not all but impossible to conduct—to the grave detriment not only of the agencies themselves but also of those whom they were set up to serve.
59.	While I am bound to express deep regret at the condition of the United Nations today. I must also express the hope that all Members of the Organization which share our concern and feelings of responsibility for its future will intensify their efforts both to bring the United Nations back to the ideals of its founders and to channel the specialized agencies back to their specific areas of concern.
60.	Among the subjects which have rightly been given a prominent place in the agenda of the United Nations are the state of the world's economy and the relations between the industrialized and the developing nations. The convening of the recent eleventh special session of the General Assembly attests to this fact. Israel took part in that special session with the intention of making a constructive contribution to its work. We therefore share the disappointment over the results of that event, which were not adequate. We sincerely hope that in the near future the efforts to have a constructive dialogue rather than confrontation will be resumed, so that those whose needs are greatest will not suffer the most.
61.	Despite our small size and limited resources, we have for decades devoted far greater efforts than might have been expected to assisting nations of the third world in the development of their economies and societies. Israel has shared freely the know-how which it has developed, as well as its experience as a small State in an arid and subtropical region, which has enabled us to make great strides over a period of a few short years.
62.	The problems encountered by Israel in the course of its social and economic development are similar to the problems facing much of the developing world today. Many of the solutions worked out in Israel can be applied directly by others. Despite the disappointments which my country has experienced, Israel continues to have deep sympathy for the struggle of the developing countries to ameliorate and advance the condition of their peoples and economies. Israel stands ready to continue to give of its know-how and to take a vigorous and constructive part in the efforts of the international community in the spheres of health, social services, agriculture, development of new and renewable sources of energy, and in every other sphere to which we can contribute.
63.	From this rostrum I should like to give expression to the anguish of our Jewish brothers in various parts of the globe. There is. it would seem, no end to the pain of the Jew in history. The suffering and persecution continue even today. And we, the people of Israel, feel responsible for the lot of every Jew who suffers anywhere.
64.	In the last year additional harsh limitations have been imposed on Jews who seek to leave the Soviet Union and emigrate to the State of Israel. Those restrictions conflict with the most basic human and national rights of peoples, and we are in duty bound to echo the cries of the Jews in the Soviet Union and appeal to the Government of that country to remove the restrictions and facilitate the immigration of Jews to Israel.
65.	We must also express anxiety over the condition of the tortured Jewish community in Syria, whose human rights are severely curtailed, and many of whom have been imprisoned and have had their property impounded. I would thus also appeal to the Government of Syria to respect the basic-human rights of its Jewish community, which it holds as hostages and which it prevents from leaving.
66.	The Jews of Iran have suffered painfully in recent months, and their situation is deteriorating from day to day. Many Jews have been thrown in gaol; others have been given the death sentence, in most cases on "charges" of contact with Israel. We know of the difficulties in dealing with the present regime in Iran, to which fundamental concepts of human rights and the norms of international relations seem foreign. But we hope that sight will not be lost of the situation of the Jews there who are perhaps among the most vulnerable of the minorities in that troubled land.
67.	Two years ago a development took place in the Middle East—a breakthrough which can appropriately be called historic. After serious negotiations between the parties, with the active and important participation of the United States, the Camp David framework and the subsequent Israeli-Egyptian Peace Treaty were signed by the leaders of the two countries and witnessed by the President of the United States. Israel made major concessions and took considerable risks by signing those agreements, l.et me cite only our withdrawal from the oilfields in Sinai, for there is no need for me to waste words on the significance and implications of that step in this day and age. Similarly I need only point to the strategic depth in Sinai which Israel has relinquished, as well as to the advanced air bases located in Sinai, the evacuation of which will be implemented in due course in accordance with the terms of the Peace Treaty.
68.	Israel believed that its concessions and sacrifices would be met with appreciation and understanding by the world community and that a long-awaited breakthrough would be achieved on the international scene. Not only has that not 06itte about, but many countries in the world have spared no effort to destroy that hard-won peace, and Israel continues to be the object of unending accusations and attacks.
69.	Nevertheless, the decision and determination of Israel remain firm to continue on the road to peace. Thus, in accordance with the Camp David framework, negotiations have taken place for the attainment of full autonomy for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judaea. Samaria and the Gaza District.
70.	Substantial progress has been achieved in these talks in certain fields, but the talks have, it is true, had their tips and downs and have even been suspended a number of times by Egypt. There is nothing exceptional or extraordinary about the difficulties encountered thus far in the progress of the talks. They reflect the complexities inherent in the subjects under discussion. The difficulties are familiar to any country which, at one time or another, has been engaged in complex negotiations involving multifaceted and long-standing problems.
71.	One area in which progress has been achieved in the negotiations is the modalities of the free elections to be held in the territories concerned. These procedures would make the proposed autonomy into one of the few—all too few— examples of free democratic process in the Middle East. Progress has also been achieved in the area of powers and responsibilities of the autonomy covering many aspects of the everyday life of the inhabitants of the territories in question.
72.	We certainly believe that autonomy can and must be established. All the parties to the Camp David framework are convinced that the process set out in that framework is the only one which is within the realm of the possible. All alternative suggestions for the solution of the problem at hand—ideas such as the holding of an international conference or the like—are devoid of real prospect or purpose. No one can really believe that the various elements in the Middle East which arc so much at odds with each other would attend a peace conference and achieve a positive outcome that would lead to a solution acceptable to all. Thus too the ideas entertained by the European Community, which do not take Israel's position into account, are only likely to encourage those who are opposed to peace.
73.	Those who genuinely seek peace should encourage the progress which has been achieved through the Camp David process. Let them also bear in mind and give due regard to the fact that, by proposing the idea of autonomy in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, Israel has taken on itself great risks for the sake of peace.
74.	We hope that the autonomy talks will be resumed in the near future. We also hope that the process of normalization of relations between Israel and Egypt will be intensified and will serve as the best possible proof and a living symbol of the fact that peace can and must take the place of war. The full significance of these peaceful relations should be grasped for what they are—and for what they may lead to—as the very corner-stone for peace in the region.
75. The leaders of Israel and Egypt have reiterated time and again their mutual commitment to the proposition that there will be no more war. Let us hope that the change which has come about in the Middle East with the signing of peace will be the opening for a positive and long-lasting transformation in the history of our conflict-ridden area. The strict adherence to the agreements by Israel, in accordance with their letter and spirit alike, is a guarantee of the continuation of the peace process. However, by itself it is not enough. We hope that all the others involved will act in the same way.
76. Much has been alleged against Israel in the name of the principle of self-determination for nations. We favour that concept, and we have proved that in the support that we extended to many States which have achieved their independence in our generation, in Africa, Asia and elsewhere. The Governments of those States and their peoples know that full well. But there is no connection between that principle and the perverted attempt to turn self-determination into the basis for the destruction of the Stale of Israel, as certain States are endeavouring to do. Anyone who is familiar with the ideology and the terminology of the murder organization that calls itself the PLO, as well as with the declarations of the various Arab rejectionist States, can see beyond all doubt that the term "self-determination", as they use it, is nothing more than a euphemism for the destruction of Israel.
77.	It should not be forgotten that the Palestinian Arabs have achieved their self-determination in Jordan, a State which is the Arab State in Palestine, by virtue of its history, territory, population, culture and all aspects of its national life. The establishment of a second Palestinian Arab Slate by distorting the principle of self-determination means the creation of an extremist and hostile base opposed to the very-existence of Israel. Hence we will not agree to a distorted form of self-determination, which in reality implies self-destruction for our ancient nation deeply rooted in its own land.
78.	The programme of autonomy which we have proposed for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, as accepted in principle in the Camp David frameworks, is the first practical proposal to be advanced to provide a dignified solution for the needs of the Arab population of those areas. It comes in place of all the empty declarations with which the Palestinian Arabs concerned have deluded themselves and have been deluded by other States and organizations over the years.
79.	One of the most vivid expressions of the rejection of all peace proposals by the Arab rejectionist States is to be seen in their unprecedented military build-up and in the armaments which they have received in recent years from the Soviet bloc or purchased from the United States and Western Europe. In the course of the last three years, orders for arms purchases by the larger Arab States have reached astronomic sums. The quantities of arms that were actually supplied have been equally staggering. There is no precedent for the amassing of arms on this scale in our region. Those arms are designated first and foremost for use against Israel. But the implications of that vast array of armaments ait not confined to my country alone. It also serves to inject war into the area at large.
80.	We call upon the United Nations to take due note of the military build-up by the Arab rejectionist States and to urge them to decrease their armament. For our part, we are prepared to lend a hand in any joint effort to bring about the limitation of arms in our region which is poised on top of a volcano.
81. I should like to address myself to another crucial aspect of disarmament. Israel has consistently supported resolutions of the General Assembly aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. This global problem, we believe, can best be solved by means of negotiated regional arrangements. Hence, since 1975, Israel has consistently advocated the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East on the Tlatelolco model. Israel believes that an international conference of all the Slates in the region and adjacent to our region should be held, leading to the conclusion of a formal, contractual, multilateral convention among all States of the region.
82.	We hope that in the course of this General Assembly, we shall find a suitable opportunity to give concrete expression to our views on this matter. In the meantime, I should like to reiterate my Government's position, which is that Israel will not be the first to introduce nuclear weapons into the Arab-Israeli dispute.
83.	In the last months, Jerusalem has been the object of attacks on Israel in various international forums. There has been much hypocrisy and cynicism in those attacks, For, truth to tell, never has the situation of the various religions represented in Jerusalem been better than that prevailing since the unification of the city by Israel in 1967. For 19 years, between 1948 and 1967, the eastern part of the city was under Jordanian occupation and barbed wire divided it in two. Places holy to the Jews were maliciously desecrated. Ancient synagogues and cemeteries were destroyed in a barbaric manner, and Jews were denied access to the Holy Places which are the spiritual life-blood of the Jewish people. It is not out of place to remark that the Moslem Arab citizens of Israel were also denied access to their Holy Places during that ignoble period. And where, I am bound to ask, was the voice of this Organization during that period".' Not once was it raised in condemnation of those illegal acts.
84.	On the other hand, since 1967. all—irrespective of religion and nationality—have been accorded free access to the city of Jerusalem and the possibility of worshipping at the Holy Places and shrines revered by them. Israel has assured the free and unfettered observance of the religious rites of all members of all faiths, who also administer their religious lives and their Holy Places without any outside interference. That is the truth well known to everyone who lives in Jerusalem and to everyone who has visited the city. There is no substance or basis to any claim to the contrary.
85.	There is no need for me to dwell at length on the bond between the Jewish people and Jerusalem. The Jewish people is the only people which has made Jerusalem its capital since it appeared as a nation on the stage of human history. Throughout the many years of exile inflicted on it. The Jewish people prayed three times a day, every day, for its restoration to Jerusalem.
86. For the last 150 years there has been a Jewish majority in Jerusalem. Whoever seeks to sever Jerusalem from Israel seeks to decapitate the Jewish people. We hope that nations that seek peace and know the reality which prevails in Jerusalem today will respect the city as the sovereign capital of Israel; a city which will not be divided again, in the same way as Israel respects the Holy Places of all religions and their freedoms in the city.
87.	I wish to conclude with a call in the spirit of the Prophets of Israel, who were a light and an inspiration for much of mankind. My call is for peace—peace which is at the very basis of the existence of the United Nations.
88.	We in Israel yearn for peace. We have done so since the first day of the restoration of our national sovereignty—in our Declaration of Independence, which was issued on the very day that the State of Israel was founded in 1948. In that Declaration, we extend the hand of peace and good neighbourliness to all the States around us and all their peoples. We have taken far-reaching steps and have made huge sacrifices for the sake of peace. But peace with Israel does not mean peace without Israel, or peace at its expense. Nor does it mean peace with a weak Israel deprived of its capital and with its wings clipped from the security and geostrategic viewpoints. With such an Israel peace will not be attained, because a weak Israel will be an object of unceasing attacks and destructive designs.
89.	I wish to call upon the Arab States which are our neighbours, and also upon the Palestinian Arabs living in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, to follow the dictates of reason and to join the peace process. I wish to call upon the other nations of the world to support this course and to prevail upon the Arab States to adopt it. The world at large, and not merely our region alone, will benefit from this.

﻿Sir, may I congratulate you on your election to the presidency. I know that, like your predecessor, Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania, you will carry out your responsibilities with firmness, courtesy and skill.
74.	As a Commonwealth member, New Zealand welcomes to the Assembly the delegations of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Zimbabwe. They bring, from different parts of the world, special perspectives which will help us all in considering the serious problems which face us.
75.	In welcoming these two new Members, we should not forget that other peoples are also moving rapidly towards independence. In our part of the world Vanuatu, in the most difficult circumstances, came to full nationhood. As a neighbour we were delighted to welcome the new Republic into the fellowship of the South Pacific Forum. We have watched with great sympathy the moves to greater autonomy by the island groups that make up the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. New Zealand's immediate partners, the people of Tokelau, are assuming increasing responsibility for the government of their tiny country.
76.	The South Pacific is coming to the end of a long period of constitutional change. Twenty years ago, when the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was adopted , New Zealand and Australia were the only independent countries in our region. Now there are some 13 independent or fully self-governing States. Some are represented here. In the course of time more will come, and the voice of the Pacific will be heard more insistently.
77.	As the United Nations has grown, its ways of doing business, as well as the scope of its activities, have changed. To some it seems a less effective, less purposeful Organization than it was. I know that this body is itself a reflection of the world around us—and that has been troubled enough. And yet it is difficult not to be pessimistic when we assess what has been achieved over the past year.
78.	Only last month the General Assembly met in special session to discuss development and economic issues. The session was convened against a background of mounting concern about the world economy. Every speaker at that session talked of the gravity of the present situation. Every speaker called for rapid change. Every speaker supported the launching of a new round of global economic negotiations.
79.	This was not mere rhetoric. During the past month I have spoken to many political leaders, especially from Asian and Pacific countries. It was crystal clear that all of us shared an overriding preoccupation with economic issues. Time and again I heard the same themes: terms of trade have deteriorated rapidly; inflation, most of it imported, is far too high; deficits are expanding at an unprecedented rate. The conventional answer—retrenchment—exacts a high economic price in terms of contraction of trade and stagnation of production. The political cost, not least in jobs lost and social disruption, is prohibitive. To cover their share of the total oil deficit, countries in our area have had to borrow heavily. For many of them, debt servicing burdens are already crippling. High interest rates and a good deal of nervousness on the part of the private banking system compound the problems of financing economic development in the face of the growing deficit problem.
80.	It is not surprising that Governments of developing countries—and quite a few in the more affluent world—are apprehensive, for tensions produced by economic forces induce political reactions.
81.	Yet at the recent eleventh special session the Assembly failed even to agree on procedures for carrying out the global negotiations, let alone to discuss an agenda. I can well understand the scepticism of those who ask whether the Assembly, or a derivative of it, is the best place in which to discuss complex international economic issues. I tend to agree with them. However, the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has shown that it is possible to resolve a wide and complicated range of such issues in a forum in which all Member States are represented. If we can draw some encouragement from that example, we should not forget how long the process has taken and how much had to be done outside the main meetings to develop a consensus about legitimate objectives and priorities. Above all, we should remember that the Conference on the Law of the Sea is succeeding because it organized its negotiations on the basis of actual situations and shared interests—not on the basis of political alignments and regional groupings. I must emphasize that we do not have a decade to make progress on the world's urgent economic problems. We now have less than one year.
82.	If we are to make similar progress on global economic issues, we must tackle them with new urgency. We shall have to accept that there is not going to be a revolutionary change of attitude on the part of the wealthy industrialized countries—whether of West or East. Progress will come gradually and probably most effectively by using the specialist bodies. A central forum may well—and should—give drive and coherence to those negotiations. However, let us not expect too much from it. It simply is not realistic to believe that some supranational forum can direct and determine the course of negotiations in bodies like IMF, GATT and FAO. It is for these specialized bodies to take the immediate steps that are so essential. Here again, progress has been much too slow.
83.	We could speed up the global negotiations more effectively if we were first to call together a more limited but broadly representative informal summit, as proposed by the Brandt Commission.  It may be that the outlines of a broad consensus on the way forward are more likely to emerge from such a meeting than from a gathering of 150 or more. That was the view of the regional Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, which I attended last month, at New Delhi. The Meeting of Finance Ministers of Commonwealth Countries in Bermuda was even more convinced of the need for action.
84.	What we discuss is at least as important as where we discuss it. It has concerned me that recent discussions in New York have become bogged down in proposals for an agenda which is all-encompassing and unselective. The consensus of the heads of Government and Finance Ministers I have listened to in the past month is that the international oil situation and its flow-on problems, especially in financing, is the major issue to be faced if the longer-term difficulties in the world economy and in the North-South dialogue are to be dealt with adequately.
85.	I do not want to be misunderstood by oil producers when I say that the central issue is to solve the problem of international balances of payments, particularly of developing countries. That means we must find an effective means of recycling the surpluses of the oil producers. I do not deny that oil was under-priced in the past. Nor am I suggesting that the large increase in oil prices since 1973 is the sole cause of the world's present economic woes. I am simply saying that this is a major and immediate problem which requires international action—now.
86.	Look at these facts. The forecast is that the combined deficit of developing countries over the next three years will be about $US 160 billion. There are only two possible ways of covering those deficits: one is through grant aid; the second is through borrowing, whether at commercial or concessional rates. Grant aid is not going to cover deficits of that size, even in the unlikely event that official development assistance performance improves dramatically. Whether the private banking system can cope is equally open to question. The previous round of recycling subjected it to considerable stress. In my view, greater involvement by international financial institutions and greater flexibility in their approach are now a necessity if global payments imbalances are not to widen, with grave economic consequences for us all.
87.	Institutions, no less than Governments, have to adapt to new circumstances. If they show no capacity to adjust, the pressures to set up new bodies to replace them will become irresistible. That is why at recent meetings New Zealand supported calls for IMF to play a much more positive and dynamic role in the recycling process in support of the private banking system. I am convinced that IMF has the skills and expertise which will enable it to respond to the needs of the world today.
88.	I believe that the decisions taken at the annual World Bank and IMF meetings last week in Washington bring those institutions closer to grappling with the recycling problem. New Zealand has continued to advocate the concept of symmetrical surveillance, so that the capacity of surplus countries and the needs of deficit countries can be matched. The adjustment burden is a problem for the international community operating through its public as well as its private institutions. The surplus nations must realize the serious difficulties which confront the oil-importing nations of the developing world. They must—and, I believe, will- acknowledge that their economic power can be used through increased commitments and guarantees for IMF in order to avert a series of national bankruptcies.
89.	The international community has the power and ingenuity to act quickly on critical economic issues. It must do so. If we are to bring new urgency and purpose to the economic negotiations of the Organization, then we have to ask ourselves whether a more functional negotiating format is called for. Does the group approach to negotiations still serve us well? On the evidence of those major United Nations economic conferences held during the past two years, I would have to say that I doubt it. The Brandt Commission reached a similar conclusion. Its report says:
"The process of reconciling differences within each group has often led to extreme positions driving out moderate ones: maximum demands elicit minimum offers." 
90.	But that is only one of the weaknesses of our present system. Another is that the specific interests of individual countries, or groups of countries, are often subordinated to the cause of group solidarity.
91.	The small island communities in the South Pacific are a case in point. Their economies are small and their resources limited. Dependent on a narrow range of exploitable commodities, highly sensitive to price fluctuations, handicapped by high transport costs and uncertain services to their main export markets, they are especially vulnerable to external influences which they cannot control. The fragility of their economies is increased by their isolation from each other and from neighbouring regions. No other factor so persistently hampers Pacific countries in the struggle to develop their resources and provide better lives for their people.
92.	Clearly, the island States of the Pacific have special needs, and the international community must be responsive to those needs. It is not just that they require development assistance, though that is essential. It is also a question of providing the mechanism by which small countries can express their concerns and get them dealt with effectively.
93.	It is not enough in the long run to label developing island countries as a separate category meriting special treatment. I believe that what those countries want, and what other countries in the so-called special categories want, too, is to take their place in the mainstream of international life. They do not want to be set apart for ever as societies which do not fit into some preconceived pattern. Regrettably, the international community seems to have settled for this option in drawing up an international development strategy for the 1980s.
94.	We in New Zealand have also suffered from the rigidities imposed by bloc diplomacy. Our specific economic circumstances and interests are obscured when the membership of the Organization is divided by shorthand expressions like "North" and "South", or labelled by groups.
95.	For years the world community has ignored the questions of food production and market access which are central to New Zealand's economic well-being. The group system of negotiation has effectively blocked our efforts to have these issues given greater priority. Now, it seems, they are beginning to receive due attention. There is a new awareness that it is all too easy to undermine the confidence of rural communities. No one knows this better than the developing countries which, during the past decade, have changed from being exporters to importers of food. More and more countries are coming to see that the double standards governing the international food trade have got to go. Unless that happens it will be an uphill battle to restore and sustain the confidence of farmers, and they are the people we look to if we are to feed the hungry of this world.
96.	In the struggle to overcome agricultural protectionism in the industrialized world, New Zealand's interests are essentially the same as those of the developing countries. With them, and with many others, we also have an interest in bringing about a more liberal trading system in all sectors. In the global negotiations, in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, in UNCTAD, in GATT we shall work to that end with all who want a fairer trading system. If we achieve that, we may then see that expansion of world economic growth rates which is an essential ingredient of political stability and security.
97.	In your opening address, Mr. President, you reminded us that the vision of the men who established the Organization was one of a world at peace. You rightly said that that could be achieved only if the United Nations was determined to apply those principles for which it stands: to promote the self-determination of all peoples; to protect the sovereign equality of nations, especially the weak and the small; to promote human rights and freedom,
98.	It is chastening to think how far we have to go before we can say we have reached those goals which, by our membership, we have all set ourselves. That is all too clear from the political as well as the economic tensions that rock the world today. The principles that the Organization was established to defend have been persistently defied.
99.	Afghanistan is one crisis area that calls out for a speedy and just solution. Earlier this year New Zealand joined more than 100 Member States in supporting resolution ES-6/2 in which the Assembly deplored the armed intervention in that country. Immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of all foreign troops was called for. That resolution was ignored. Soviet troops remain in Afghanistan. They are there because the regime they installed cannot survive without them. The people of Afghanistan have, by their resistance, shown their rejection of that regime and the alien forces which continue to prop it up.
100.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan violated the basic principles of the Charter. It threatened the security of neighbouring States. It increased tension in West Asia and the Indian Ocean region, and it has thrown into disarray the process, of detente to which the Soviet Union has so often pledged its commitment.
101.	There is only one sure way to reverse that dangerous situation and that is for the Soviet Union to display that respect for the principles of international behaviour which it champions so earnestly when the actions of others are concerned. It must withdraw its troops. It must allow the Afghan people to decide their own future freely and without interference.
102.	That assault on the sovereignty of a small neighbouring State has its parallel in South-East Asia. There a client Government has been imposed on the people of Kampuchea and maintained by force of arms. The situation in Kampuchea has implications for peace, stability and progress in the whole of South-East Asia.
103.	At the thirty-fourth session, the Assembly called for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from Kampuchea. That call was disregarded. Those forces are still there and they are involved in fighting along the Thai-Kampuchean border and elsewhere. It is a matter of grave concern to New Zealand that there has been so little improvement in the situation since the Assembly last met in regular session. The longer the fighting goes on, the greater is the risk that the conflict could spread. Until there is a political settlement, there can be no regional stability and no sure end to the hardships of those ordinary people for too long caught up in a conflict in which they want no part.
104.	Relief efforts will be needed for a long time to come. It is essential that the relief operation should be able, without hindrance, to distribute supplies to those in greatest need, wherever they are. It is no less important that Kampuchea's agricultural production should be restored. Its economy must be revitalized so that the victims of the conflict can return to their homes and to a normal way of life.
105.	I know that the countries of South-East Asia want peace and stability. They want to pursue their economic development free from threats to their security. The Association of South-East Asian Nations [ASEAN] countries, with broad support from the international community, have consistently sought a durable political settlement. The resolution adopted last year set out the principles that must form the basis for a settlement.
106.	The Assembly needs to give stronger support to the search for a settlement. New Zealand welcomed the visit of the Secretary-General to Bangkok and Hanoi. Clearly, he can play a major role. We, like others, look to him to help get productive talks under way between Viet Nam and its ASEAN neighbours and to facilitate the holding of an international conference which is needed to reduce tension and achieve a just and lasting settlement.
107.	Another area in Asia which is subject to severe strains is the Korean peninsula. New Zealand will continue to support measures aimed at reducing tension in that area. We have been encouraged by the recent series of preliminary meetings between representatives from North and South Korea which have had as their objective the development of north-south contacts. We urge both sides to maintain the momentum of those meetings and to continue in good faith the search for a peaceful and lasting accommodation.
108.	The conflict between Iraq and Iran is also a matter of great concern to us. It has caused loss of life and damage in both countries and could, if fighting continues, have serious consequences within the region and beyond. We are anxious that the fighting should be halted so that the differences between the two countries can be resolved peaceably and soon. We support the appeal made by the Security Council to that end in its resolution 479 (1980) and welcome the efforts being made by others to bring about a peaceful settlement.
109.	It is no less urgent that a settlement should be negotiated in the Middle East. That dispute is a continuing threat to world peace and security. The peace treaty between Egypt and Israel  was a conspicuous step forward, but it was only a beginning. The hopes that it would lead to a comprehensive and durable peace based on the principles embodied in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) have not been realized. They will not be until Israel acknowledges the rights and aspirations of the Palestinian people. Those include the right to self-determination and the right to establish a separate State, if that is their wish. Equally, the unilateral declaration on Jerusalem and the continued establishment of settlements in occupied territories can hardly be construed as anything but obstructions to a negotiated settlement.
110.	The continuing detention of people from the American Embassy in Teheran is another grave cause of tension. New Zealand's position is clear. We deplore Iran's refusal to release the hostages. A speedy and honourable solution must be found—first for the sake of the people concerned, but also if we are to respect the principles of international law. We are certainly willing to join others in efforts to get a peaceful solution.
111.	A year ago New Zealand welcomed two major advances in the search for a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in southern Africa: the London conference on Zimbabwe and the resumption of negotiations on Namibia.
112.	Zimbabwe's presence here today is testimony to the determination of its people and of all those who have worked so hard for a just and equitable settlement. It is a particular pleasure to me that the Commonwealth was able to play a formative part in the peaceful transfer of power in that country.
113.	A similar transfer of power must also be the objective in Namibia. There is no good reason why the few issues that remain outstanding should not be settled quickly. It has long been time for the South African authorities to end their illegal occupation of Namibia. They must, if they want a peaceful settlement, co-operate with the Security Council in bringing independence to the people of Namibia. Just as in 1980 we welcomed the independence of Zimbabwe so in 1981	we should welcome that of Namibia.
114.	If there is to be lasting stability, however, the South African Government must move ahead with the dismantling of the apartheid system in South Africa itself. If there are signs that the present rulers of South Africa are beginning to understand the need for change, there is less evidence of serious commitment to this course. They must now demonstrate clearly and unequivocally by their actions and policies that institutionalized racism and the injustices and suffering that apartheid has inflicted on generations of Africans are being brought to an end. There is no other way to a peaceful future. The alternative, a vicious and bloody conflict, must be avoided. It can be, but only if the South African Government will promptly set about overturning the detestable system of apartheid.
115.	Increased tension in many parts of the world and, above all, the invasion of Afghanistan have had grave consequences for relations between the great Powers. Detente is in jeopardy.
116.	Nowhere has that been more clear than in negotiations on arms control and disarmament. Here the central need is for confidence that obligations assumed will be fully met, so it is no surprise that there has been no real forward movement. The SALT II Treaty remains un-ratified. The Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe are stalemated. The sessions of the Committee on Disarmament have, by and large, been unproductive. The second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ended without agreement on a final declaration. Many countries, my own among them, rightly criticized the two super-Powers for lack of progress in their negotiations on arms control and disarmament.
117.	There is nothing in the relationship of those superpowers to suggest that we can expect quick progress on those arms control and disarmament issues which are essentially bilateral in nature. But that should not mean that movement must be held back in other areas. A fresh impetus is needed to get negotiations under way again.
118.	One such issue is a comprehensive test-ban treaty. No disarmament measure is more urgent. No one disputes the need for a treaty. The report presented to the Committee on Disarmament at the end of the latest round of bilateral talks showed that the negotiating States had made limited progress on many elements of critical importance. In our view, it is essential that a draft comprehensive test-ban treaty should be ready for consideration at the second special session on disarmament, in 1982. We believe, too, that a working group of the Committee on Disarmament should be established next year to begin negotiations on a treaty. One of its first tasks should be to devise a framework within which an international seismic detection system could operate to monitor adherence to the treaty.
119.	Many of these issues will continue to haunt the inter-national community throughout the i980s. There are others. What progress will we make in dealing humanely with the mass movement of displaced persons across borders? Will we be able to say, when it ends, that the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination has achieved its goals? The United Nations Decade for Women is already at mid-course. Will we be able to say in five years’ time that the lot of half the world's population has been greatly improved, when we know from the evidence given to the World Conference at Copenhagen in July, that the impact of the first five years has been so limited?
120.	The same question—whether achievement will match objectives—can be asked of many items on the Assembly's agenda. The answers, I believe, depend in large degree on whether we are willing to use the Organization sensibly, to seek genuine agreement to negotiate rather than declaim. Above all, it depends on whether we are able to break away from old rigidities and preconceptions and seek new ways of working together, ways which are imaginative and realist? That is the way for the world body, and for all of us, to face the challenges of this decade.
﻿Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to your highly responsible position and to express my conviction that your activities will contribute to the fruitful work of the present session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
93.	Speaking today from this rostrum, I should like to emphasize at the very outset the great importance which this session of the General Assembly would have if its work were successful. In view of the specific character of the situation in the world arena today, it is essential for the work of the session to be conducted in a constructive atmosphere. Its participants will have to display to an even greater extent than before a sense of realism, a considered approach to key international issues and a genuine interest in finding solutions to them.
94.	Thereby the States Members of the United Nations would demonstrate their commitment to the principles and purposes of this world Organization and awareness of their responsibility for the destinies of peace. Indeed, this is now a vitally important task for them individually and collectively.
95.	We focus attention on this because the state of affairs in the world has lately become more complicated as a result of a sharp turn in the policies of the United States of America and some other members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO].
96.	Let us look at the facts—they are more eloquent than words.
97.	Back in May 1978, the NATO countries decided automatically to increase their annual military expenditures almost to the end of this century. Last December, they took a decision to produce and deploy in Western Europe new American medium range nuclear missile systems designed to change the military and strategic situation to the unilateral advantage of the NATO bloc. Simultaneously, Washington also announced its own multibillion dollar build-up programme.
98.	The course chosen by the United States of America, which cannot be called anything but militaristic, is expressed in the so-called "new nuclear strategy". Under the cover of arguments that have nothing to do with reality concerning the possibility of some "limited" or "partial" use of nuclear weapons, the architects of this strategy seek to instil in the minds of people the idea of the admissibility and acceptability of a nuclear conflict. This foolhardy concept exacerbates the risk of a nuclear catastrophe, which cannot but cause concern throughout the world.
99.	And is it not contrary to the expectations of the peoples of the world that Washington should have indefinitely postponed ratification of the Soviet American treaty on the limitation of strategic offensive arms, SALT II?  It has demonstrated that it sets a low value on the assurances and promises it gave earlier.
100.	Several theses have recently been adopted by American foreign policy which, by all appearances, are regarded as its credo. Here is one of them. A given region of the world is chosen at will—especially if it is rich in energy resources or important from the point of view of transport and communications, or simply if the Pentagon has taken a fancy to it—and that favoured area is declared with naked bluntness to be a United States "sphere of vital interest". And if, to boot, it is a sphere of American interests, not just anyone's, and on top of that—God only knows why—of "vital" interests, efforts are made simply to deprive the peoples who live in that area of the right to be masters in their own home and masters of their own wealth. It is even harder to understand that at the end of the twentieth century generally recognized rules of international law hallowed by time should be so blatantly and so rapaciously flouted.
101.	Another proposition is that any internal changes in any State—merely because they are not to Washington's liking—are considered to be a good enough pretext for United States interference in the affairs of that State, including the dispatch there of armed forces and commandoes. It is precisely these functions that have been assigned to the rapid reaction corps. And it is surely those countries which cannot defend themselves that become the first victims.
102.	And what about the treatment of Cuba? This is a striking example. Contrary to the legitimate demands of its Government and people, a part of Cuba's territory, Guantanamo, where a United States military base is located, is held by force. But at Washington they reason in the following way: we want this base—so that is that. It is of no importance to them that the sovereign rights of Cuba and its people are thus flagrantly ignored, once American interests stand to gain.
103.	And what a host of statements are made to justify such a policy. Those deal at length with human rights, the rights of States. It is simply amazing how such a policy can be combined with genuine respect for the rights of States, the rights of peoples, and human rights. If such statements are to be believed—and they are, incidentally, repeated with the importunity of commercial advertising—then all manuals and all books on international law, and indeed the United Nations Charter itself, which strictly protect the sovereignty of States, should all be discarded. But no verbal acrobatics, no diplomatic contrivances can conceal the real essence of such a policy.
104.	The methods of pressure and blackmail in foreign policy are making themselves felt in various parts of the globe. Blatant violence is employed against Iran. Everybody knows this. United States actions in the Persian Gulf area threaten the sovereignty not only of that country but of other countries of the region as well.
105.	A build-up of the United States military presence is under way in East Africa, where, most recently, new American military bases have been coming into being. This is taking place in particular in Somalia, a country whose leadership continues to make groundless territorial claims in respect of its neighbours. The Soviet Union fully supports those States which raise their voices in protest against the establishment of such bases. Surely, those who offer their homes for American military bases assist in the accumulation of inflammable material in that area, with all the ensuing dangers.
106.	The anti-Arab Camp David deal has as its direct consequence unabated tension in the Middle East, where the situation is fraught with perilous and unforeseen developments, That should not be overlooked. That deal, which runs counter to the interests of and slights the just demands of Arab States and the inalienable rights of the Arab people of Palestine, whose only legitimate representative is the PLO, is intended to satisfy Israel's annexationist claims and to affirm an American military presence in the Middle East.
107.	In short, since the time of the separatist collusion among the United States, Israel and Egypt, the situation in that region has proved to be further from genuine peace than ever before. It is for that reason that Camp David is rejected by Arab States and denounced by all those who are interested in a just and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East, not in a settlement dictated by imperialist interests. That has been graphically demonstrated by the recent resolutions of the seventh emergency special session of the General Assembly, on the Palestinian question, and by recent resolutions of the Security Council.
108.	In another region, the Far East, Washington is striving to strengthen its political and military position and is heating up militarist trends that are far from being on the wane in certain quarters in Japan. Beijing is acting in unison. Yet one would think that the Japanese leadership would display the ability to see things as they are and succeed in resisting the outside influences prodding that country onto the road of hostility towards the Soviet Union, a road that has already led Japan to catastrophe.
109.	The United States, whose troops, contrary to General Assembly resolution 3390 B (XXX), still remain on the territory of the Republic of Korea, shares with the puppet Seoul regime the responsibility for the fact that the Korean problem is still unresolved. It obstructs the normalization of the situation on the Korean peninsula and the reunification of Korea on a peaceful and democratic basis without any outside interference, as is proposed by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
110.	The United States adds to the destabilization of the situation in IndoChina and in the whole of South-East Asia. Here, too, the United States acts in league with the Beijing hegemonists who, having committed aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, continue their demonstrations of military force on the Sino-Vietnamese border and stage provocations against the People's Democratic Republic of Laos and the People's Republic of Kampuchea, whose voice, we are sure, will sooner or later be heard from this rostrum. Other countries of that region are also under constant pressure from Beijing and Washington.
111.	In recent years, the United States and some other Western countries have resorted ever more frequently to playing the "China card"—they love it—in order to use to their own advantage the great Power ambitions of Beijing, which is itself keeping pace with the most zealous proponents of the position of strength policy and is stubbornly and cynically advocating the idea of the inevitability of another world war—with never a thought of giving up this idea. I stress this idea of the inevitable nature of a new world war.
112.	While these countries are intent on having China follow ever more closely in the wake of their policy, Beijing, for its part, in seeking a rapprochement with them, attempts to put them on the track of the cold war and confrontation with the Soviet Union, although our country, I would note here, stands for the normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China, as has been repeatedly stated at the most authoritative level. Even if we leave aside the question of who is playing whose cards more, it must be emphasized that this game is dangerous to the cause of peace.
113.	The facts I have enumerated suffice to lead us to the conclusion that influential circles in some countries would like to squander away the substantial assets of the policy of detente that were accumulated, especially in the 1970s, as a result of prolonged and strenuous efforts by many States.
114.	Not long ago, at Vienna, where the SALT II Treaty was signed, there was a frank conversation between Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, and President Carter of the United States. The latter also recognized the need to maintain the existing approximate parity of military strength between East and West, the Soviet Union and the United States. This was recognized also by the leaders of other NATO countries. At present, contrary to their previous statements, the leaders of the NATO bloc are seeking to change the strategic balance of forces in the world in that bloc's favour. That is the root cause of the aggravation of the present international situation.
115.	Attempts to give a different interpretation of world developments and to cast aspersions on the foreign policy of the USSR by once again resorting to the myth of a Soviet military threat constitute a gross deception.
116.	Only the gullible could heed the groundless assertions to the effect that the aggravation of the world situation has been caused by the temporary introduction of a limited Soviet military contingent into Afghanistan. As has already been explained repeatedly, our move was made to assist the Afghan people in protecting their country's sovereignty and repelling armed incursions into its territory from the outside, as well as to prevent the emergence of a direct threat to the security of the USSR on its southern border. That assistance was rendered in response to repeated appeals by the Government of Afghanistan, and it is in full accord with the Soviet-Afghan Treaty of 1978 and the United Nations Charter. I believe that there still exist in the United States persons who signed the United Nations Charter, which contains a provision relevant to this. Now that the situation in Afghanistan is gradually returning to normal, some of our military units have been brought home by agreement with the Afghan Government.
117.	Not infrequently, and notably at the United Nations, one may hear persons speak in favour of a complete withdrawal of the Soviet military contingent. To that we reply that the USSR will withdraw its contingent by agreement with the Government of Afghanistan as soon as the reasons that made the introduction of a contingent necessary have been removed, but not before.
118.	It will be recalled that the Afghan Government has put forward a programme for a political settlement of the situation around Afghanistan. It is quite possible to achieve such a settlement on that basis and the Soviet Union is firmly in favour of that. But any attempts that run counter to the sovereign rights of Afghanistan are futile. The truth about the nature and essence of events in Afghanistan and around that nonaligned State is steadily gaining ground.
119.	The allegation being bandied about in certain Western countries that the Soviet Union is building up its military might on a scale that exceeds its defence requirements is also patently false. There are some experts who make such claims. Our country believes that the strategic parity of forces obtaining in the world is sufficient to protect its own security and that of its allies and friends. Our country aspires to nothing more.
120.	Let us take Central Europe, the area with the highest concentration of military forces confronting each other. There, the Soviet Union, unlike the NATO countries, has not for a long time now increased its forces by a single soldier, a single tank, a single aircraft. On the contrary, it has been reducing them.
121.	As for the medium range nuclear systems deployed in the European part of the USSR—we do not deploy them on the territories of other States at all—in terms of the number of launchers and the yield of their nuclear warheads, such systems have recently even been somewhat reduced. The leaders who, with a specific purpose in mind, are trying to mislead people are also fully aware of that. However, being at odds with the truth, they systematically feed public opinion with fraudulent propaganda whenever they talk about the foreign policy or the armed forces of the Soviet State. The products of such propaganda are often to be seen floating around this hall.
122.	Against that background, it is obvious that those who speak of some unprecedented build-up of our country's defence potential are in fact trying to turn attention away from their own plans to deploy hundreds of new United States nuclear systems on the territories of several West European countries.
123.	In order to prevent another round of the arms race, the Soviet Union has proposed negotiations to be held on the basis of equality and with observance of the principle of equal security. In order to remove the obstacles to negotiations arising from the NATO decision, we propose that discussions be initiated without delay on the question of medium range nuclear weapons in Europe and the question of United States forward based systems, concurrently and in organic interrelation. It is understood that eventual agreements would be implemented after the entry into force of the SALT II Treaty.
124.	The USSR has not so far received a substantive reply to its initiative. The Soviet proposal is talked and written about; various assessments of it are made, and it is sometimes alleged that it is unclear or even mysterious, But those who are supposed to respond to it have as yet said nothing intelligible. And the reason for all this is that the Soviet Union's proposal is designed to find a genuine solution to the problem of strengthening European security and to erect a barrier to prevent Europe from becoming an even more dangerous staging area for military confrontation, with enormous quantities of nuclear weapons in readiness day and night.
125.	It would seem that the delays in making a constructive reply to the substance of our proposal are intended to muffle the positive international response which it has evoked. We express the hope that common sense and a responsible approach to improving the situation in Europe will yet prevail. We would like to believe that. The Soviet Union is ready to start talks with its partners on the aforementioned just basis at any time,
126.	Of course, if there is any lack of clarity as to the substance of our proposal, we would not be averse to removing it through consultations and exchanges of views, but it is essential that the participants in such exchanges of views should join us at the negotiating table in good faith and not just to kill time. At the same time, it must be clearly understood that the Soviet Union and the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty will not allow the military strategic balance they have achieved between them and the States members of NATO to be upset. Any calculations aimed at disrupting this balance should be discarded.
127.	The USSR and other countries of the socialist community have never sought, and are not seeking, any military superiority. They have not had, and will not have, any strategic doctrine other than a defensive one. As Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev stated once again, with all clarity, in his recent speech in the city of Alma-Ata:
"Our country's foreign policy is a clear and honest policy of peace which is not directed against anyone else. We do not encroach on anybody's land; we do not interfere in anybody's internal affairs. But we shall always manage to defend our rights and legitimate interests".
128.	Peaceableness is an inherent feature of the foreign policy of socialism, which is a social system having no classes interested in war. A world without wars, said Lenin, is the very ideal of socialism. The source from which the policy of the socialist countries draws confidence in its strength is the identity of their objectives in constructing a new society, in defending the cause of peace. To this end, the perfecting of relations of full equality, fraternal unity, comradely mutual assistance and fruitful cooperation in all spheres of life is constantly in the forefront of their attention, and this was once again borne out by the results of the meetings held in the Crimea last summer between Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev and the leaders of fraternal parties and States.
129.	The Soviet Union and the socialist community have been and will continue to be in the vanguard of the struggle for international security. However, we do not claim a monopoly in this field. We shall stand in the same line with all States which consistently pursue a policy of peace and of averting the threat of another world war, a policy of detente.
130.	The concrete deeds of the socialist countries are shown in a whole series of initiatives, in particular those they have advanced since the previous session of the General Assembly. These are: the proposal put forward by the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty  for holding a top-level conference of the leaders of States of all regions of the world to discuss problems related to the elimination of hotbeds of international tension and to the prevention of war; the measures for curbing the arms race, for disarmament and for strengthening peace in Europe and throughout the world contained in the declaration which was adopted at that same meeting; the initiative of the USSR with regard to holding negotiations on medium range nuclear weapons in Europe in close interrelation with United States forward based systems; the recent withdrawal by the Soviet Union of 20,000 troops, 1,000 tanks and other materiel from the German Democratic Republic, a process which has been completed; the proposal submitted by the socialist countries at the Vienna talks" providing, among other steps recommended, for the reduction of United States military personnel by 13,000 and of Soviet military personnel by 20,000, in addition to the Soviet military contingent which has been unilaterally withdrawn from the territory of the German Democratic Republic; and the withdrawal of some Soviet military units from Afghanistan.
131.	A comparison of the list of the initiatives we have advanced during the past year alone with NATO's record immediately reveals the contrast between the two main lines in world politics. The facts are self-evident in showing which policy line is consonant with the aspirations of the peoples and which is in conflict with them.
132.	It certainly seems to be far from easy to create a distorted picture of our foreign policy in the minds of the peoples. Misinformation and, primarily of course, slander directed against it backfire on those who resort to them.
133.	Given the present state of international relations— when the policy of detente is being put to a severe test, when the danger of war is growing—it is essential to multiply efforts in order to arrest this course of developments. Even if the initial steps were not to be the most radical ones possible, they would still be steps which could infuse an invigorating spirit into the international political climate.
134.	Proceeding from this, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Urgent measures for reducing the danger of war", and we are submitting for the Assembly's consideration a relevant draft resolution What is proposed here is the adoption in the immediate future of the following measures.
135.	First, an important step would be for the States members of military alliances to renounce the expansion of existing military political groupings through the admission of new members, and for countries which are not members of such groupings to renounce joining them. All States, without exception, should avoid any action conducive to the establishment of new military alliances or to assigning military functions to regional organizations which have no such functions at present. At the same time, the statements repeatedly made by the USSR and the other socialist countries concerning their readiness to disband the Warsaw Treaty organization if, simultaneously, the NATO bloc were dissolved and, as a first step, to eliminate the military organizations of the two groupings, starting with a mutual reduction of their military activities, remain fully valid.
136.	Secondly, it is essential that all States, and, first of all, the permanent members of the Security Council and countries which have military agreements with them, undertake not to increase as from a certain date—say 1 January of the coming year—their armed forces and conventional armaments, as a first step towards their subsequent reduction.
137.	Thirdly, proceeding from the premise that an early conclusion of an appropriate convention, with the participation of all nuclear and nonnuclear States, would best serve to strengthen security guarantees for nonnuclear States, the USSR is also prepared to consider other possible solutions to this problem, provided the other nuclear Powers adopt a similar approach. We call upon all nuclear countries to make identical and solemn declarations concerning the non-use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States which have no nuclear weapons on their territories. Such declarations, if they serve the aforementioned objective, could be reinforced by an authoritative decision of the Security Council. At the same time, the Soviet Union reaffirms that it will never use nuclear weapons against those countries which renounce the production and acquisition of such weapons and do not have them on their territories.
138.	Fourthly, we are convinced that, if our partners in the negotiations, the United States and the United Kingdom, show corresponding readiness, it is quite realistic to expect a successful conclusion within a short time limit of the elaboration of an international treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests. We consider this to be possible. There are no insuperable obstacles.
139.	To this end, the USSR proposes that all nuclear Powers declare themselves ready to renounce within a period of one year, beginning on a date to be agreed by them, all nuclear explosions. The point is to have a one year moratorium while negotiations would continue with a view to achieving a more radical solution.
140.	A prompt implementation of all these measures would blunt the edge of some of the issues in international relations. It could be instrumental in easing the burden of military expenditures of States, strengthening the regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and creating favourable conditions for progress in the field of the arms race limitation. We hope that the General Assembly will give these proposals careful and due consideration, and that it will support them.
141.	In today's international conditions, the Soviet Union considers it an imperative duty of the United Nations Member States to intensify their efforts in all major directions of the struggle for peace. As hitherto, the Soviet Union will maintain and deepen the dialogue and cooperate with all States that display political will towards this end. By the way, with regard to "dialogue", this is a term often used nowadays. One way of reasoning goes like this: if there is something I do not like in the policy of a State, I will not speak with it. But to our mind such capriciousness, such vagaries, have been widely condemned, and rightly so. There should be no place for them in politics.
142.	At the current session, we consider it necessary to recall the United Nations decisions which have yet to be implemented, proposals put forward by the USSR and other countries, as well as to set forth our views on enhancing the efficiency of efforts in specific sectors of this historic struggle. To this end, the USSR is submitting at this session a memorandum entitled "peace, disarmament and international security guarantees" 
143.	There is hardly any need to prove that the greatest threat to peace on our planet is posed by the unabated nuclear arms race. There is, however, a need to say again and again that it is inadmissible to put up with a situation where people live under the burden of a constant fear of a nuclear disaster.
144.	While recognizing the complexities of the problem of nuclear disarmament, one should not toe the line of those who shirk even its discussion. It is for people to resolve this burning problem. People have created the nuclear weapon, and it is they who can and must outlaw and destroy it. There is no denying that man's mind is stronger than his fists. None the less, the fact remains that the negotiations proposed by the Soviet Union for ending the production of all types of nuclear weapons and gradually reducing their stockpiles until they have been completely destroyed have never started, owing to the negative position of certain Governments. We stand for the talks getting under way and for the Governments concerned to adopt a serious attitude towards them, so that the relevant decision of the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament may be fulfilled.
145.	The conclusion by States of an agreement on the renunciation of the use of force in international relations would be of great importance for the cause of peace and detente. In statements made from this rostrum the Soviet Union has repeatedly stressed the importance of such an agreement and of resolution 2936 (XXVII) adopted by the General Assembly in 1972 entitled "Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons". In the current situation, the duty of the United Nations to pronounce itself in favour of the prompt completion of efforts in this field is becoming ever more imperative.
146.	To lessen the threat of nuclear war, it is of decisive importance to check the further growth of the strategic potentials of States and subsequently to reduce strategic nuclear weapon systems quantitatively and to limit them qualitatively. And could anyone deny how significant would be the entry into force of the Soviet American Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, SALT II?
147.	The USSR is ready to ratify the SALT II Treaty and afterwards strictly to comply with all its provisions. It is also the intention of the Soviet Union to participate in the negotiations on the further limitation and reduction of strategic arms, with strict observance of the principle of equality and equal security. But it would not be out of place to say in this connection that, although the Treaty has not yet entered into force, the American side is already laying a mine under it in the shape of a plan whose implementation would open up the possibility of excluding from appropriate verification a large number of strategic nuclear missile systems. I think that this is well known to all representatives in this hall.
148.	Now that the nuclear missile arsenals of States are being constantly inflated, the question of elaborating and adopting more reliable measures to prevent the possibility of the accidental or authorized use of nuclear weapons is becoming ever more acute, and repeated false nuclear alarms in the United States armed forces give ground for serious thought in this regard. Indeed, the fact that the alarm was false becomes known later—afterwards. And this surely leads to certain conclusions. Such things should not take place if the leadership of a State deals with all questions pertaining to nuclear weapons with a sense of responsibility.
149.	It has always been the stand of the Soviet Union that the strengthening of the regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should be a subject of unfailing concern. The failure to see that transfers of nuclear equipment, materials and technology intended for peaceful purposes could serve as a channel for spreading nuclear arms is fraught with the most negative consequences. An important step would be taken if an international agreement were reached on the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of countries where there are no such weapons at the present time, regardless of whether or not these countries are allies of a given nuclear State. However, owing to the opposition of certain Powers, progress in negotiations on this question is slow, to say the least.
150.	The lethal power of such means of mass destruction as chemical weapons does not at all pale in comparison to the monstrous destructive force of nuclear armaments. The negotiations on their prohibition have been dragging on for many years, with the distance to the finishing line—the signing of a relevant international convention—remaining almost as long as ever. It will be impossible to cover the remaining distance without energetic efforts on the part of all participants in the negotiations. We, for our part, have been persistently working towards that end.
151.	The Soviet Union, as before, is fully in favour of observance of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. It has always been, and remains, faithful to the spirit and letter of the Convention, which constitutes a measure of real disarmament.
152.	Sometimes representatives of military quarters float allegations that the Soviet Union does not always respect the obligations it assumes under international agreements. But such allegations are a ploy that is as old as the universe. The reasoning of their authors is obviously as follows: if peoples are to be deceived, let the deception be huge to make an impression. But in the contest between truth and deception, truth has always been victorious sooner or later. The Soviet Union has not violated one single international agreement and it does not intend to do so.
153.	Those who resort to such allegations attempt to weave them into a thick shroud to cover their own unseemly deeds. Look at what is taking place in the country whose representatives indulge in such statements: plans are openly being discussed there for building new plants to produce chemical weapons. I said plans are being discussed there, but it would be more accurate to say that they are being discussed here, and this is being done at a time when representatives of that very country are sitting at the negotiating table where the question of banning chemical weapons is being discussed,
154.	And how often has the Soviet Union made representations regarding noncompliance with agreements by those who aim such allegations at the Soviet Union? Those for whom these words of ours are meant know that very well. That is how things are with attempts to cast a shadow on the attitude of the Soviet Union towards its international obligations,
155.	The world is not safeguarded from the possible emergence in the not too distant future of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction. This is particularly dangerous now, since forces have appeared that are counting on achieving military superiority. The USSR favours the adoption of additional measures to ensure the conclusion of an international agreement banning the development of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction, as well as the conclusion, as necessary, of special agreements on individual types of such weapons.
156.	Vigilance and perseverance are required in the struggle against the neutron weapon—that barbarous means of annihilation. The position of our country, which declared in the past that it would not begin production of neutron weapons unless the United States did so, remains valid and it also applies to the possible emergence of such weapons in any other State.
157.	Objectively, there is a basis for the early completion of work on a treaty banning one type of weapon of mass destruction—radiological weapons.
158.	Owing to the opposition if certain Powers, the question of what are called conventional armaments has actually been left outside the sphere of concrete negotiations. The solution of that question should be speedily moved to a practical plane. Representatives of certain countries wish to talk endlessly and willingly on that subject, while doing nothing, however, to facilitate agreement.
159.	The danger of war could also be reduced in no small measure by the limitation and cessation of the arms race in particular geographical areas as well. That applies first of all to Europe. Developments in Europe have always had a most significant impact on the state of world affairs. The Soviet Union, like other countries of the socialist community, is seeking to ensure a steady continuation of the process initiated by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and compliance with all the provisions and principles of the Final Act which it adopted.
160.	As we are staunch advocates of the Leninist principle of peaceful coexistence, we have always striven to ensure that no avenue in our relations with States belonging to a different social system, including the United States, should remain unexplored. We expect those States to do likewise. Indeed, an overwhelming majority of them do build their relations with us in that fashion.
161.	The course for maintaining and strengthening security in Europe and for reducing the level of military confrontation on the continent was convincingly demonstrated last May at the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty. It was also manifested during the recent talks held by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev with French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing and with the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Helmut Schmidt.
162.	In the series of proposals made by the countries of the socialist community with regard to Europe, a prominent place belongs to the initiative for the conclusion by all States participants in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe of a treaty on the non-use of either nuclear or conventional arms—I repeat, nuclear or conventional arms. Does anybody who stands for peace object to this proposal?
163.	The socialist countries have taken steps, some of them quite recently, which provide a solid basis for reaching agreement at the Vienna Talks on the Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. Success in that work is being obstructed by those who do not wish to give up attempts to gain unilateral advantage to the detriment of the security interests of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty.
164.	The holding of a conference on military detente and disarmament in Europe is a matter of paramount importance. We express the hope that all States concerned will contribute to the realization of this idea. This is a good idea.
165.	A significant role in achieving general agreement on the convocation and the subject matter of the conference is to be played by the Madrid meeting of representatives of States participants in the European Conference. We wish the meeting to be business-like and to be crowned with positive results on all sections of the Helsinki Final Act. We urge other countries to display the same constructive approach to the Madrid meeting.
166.	The problem of lessening tensions in the Indian Ocean is increasingly important. The Soviet Union has invariably supported the initiative of the littoral States to turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. For the purpose of implementing that initiative, we shall continue to cooperate with all States concerned, inter alia, at the Conference on the Indian Ocean scheduled for 1981. The same objective would be served by the resumption of the Soviet American talks, suspended by the United States, on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in that ocean. We are ready at any time to sit at the same table with the United States and to continue negotiations on that matter. It is now up to the United States.
167.	The States parties to the Warsaw Treaty favour discussion within the framework of the United Nations of the question of limiting and reducing the level of military presence and military activities, be it in the Atlantic, the Indian or the Pacific Ocean, in the Mediterranean or in the Persian Gulf. Agreements in that field would serve the interests of peace and stabilization of the international situation. The Soviet Union is prepared at any time to come to the negotiating table to discuss this issue with the States concerned.
168.	More than once the United Nations has tried its hand at achieving agreed decisions on the reduction of the military budgets of States. However, each time, it encountered resolute opposition and all means of misinformation are employed here to frustrate any progress towards agreement in this extremely important field. As a result, the military appropriations of States have been growing from year to year. And what a variety of methods have been devised by certain Governments to extract from the taxpayer ever greater sums to be fed into the grinder of military production. And this is taking place at a time when hundreds of millions of people in the world are suffering from starvation, have no access to proper medical services and education or have no roof over their heads. Resources which could be used for the benefit of people are being consumed by the arms race. Regrettably, the United Nations has not so far pronounced its weighty opinion on that score. It has great possibilities for speaking out.
169.	Now as before, the USSR is prepared to proceed to negotiations on specific reductions, in absolute figures or in terms of percentage points, of military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council as well as of other States with large economic and military potential. We are also prepared to reach agreement on the amounts which each State reducing its military budget would allocate for increased economic aid to developing countries.
170.	The Soviet Union believes that thorough preparations should be carried out for the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, which is to take place in 1982. That session should be followed by a world conference on disarmament to ensure that a profound consideration of disarmament issues may result not merely in recommendations, but in decisions to be implemented by States fully without any exception.
171.	There must be implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted 20 years ago on the initiative of the USSR.
172.	We welcome the emergence this year of new independent States. In southern Africa there is the Republic of Zimbabwe, which was born in the flames of the long struggle of its valiant people. We are convinced that the day will come when the people of Namibia, too, will win their freedom and independence. Everything must be done to bring nearer the moment when here in this hall of the General Assembly final victory will be solemnly celebrated over the monster which has taken the lives of or crippled many millions of human beings, which for centuries has mercilessly exploited many a people and whose name is colonialism.
173.	The Soviet Union has always shown respect for the legitimate aspirations of States which have freed themselves from the yoke of colonialism. We have good relations with most of them. We note with satisfaction the increasing role of these States in international politics and appreciate the peaceful anti-imperialist orientation of the movement of the nonaligned countries.
174.	Our country has consistently supported the developing States in their desire to attain economic independence, their inalienable right to dispose of their natural resources and their legitimate demand for the restructuring of international economic relations on the basis of equality, without any discrimination.
175.	Problems affecting all mankind are becoming ever more conspicuous in the broad spectrum of the concerns of our time. I shall make special mention of one of them: preservation of nature. The Soviet Union wishes to see man show greater care and concern for nature, and to see natural resources used in the interests of all nations on a scientific basis.
176.	However, everybody knows what immense material and intellectual resources are being deflected from the solution of this problem by the arms race, how ruinous and perhaps irreversible is the damage inflicted on the entire human environment by military activities of States such as tests of various types of weapons and, above all, of nuclear weapons, the stockpiling of poisonous chemical agents and so on, to say nothing of the disastrous consequences which a nuclear war would have not only for people but also for nature in general.
177.	It is the duty of the United Nations to draw the attention of the States of the world to their historic responsibility for preserving the nature of the earth, which is indispensable for the life of present and future generations, and to make its contribution to the development of international cooperation in this field. We have submitted an appropriate draft resolution for consideration by the General Assembly at the current session.
178.	Our views and specific proposals on important measures which should be adopted in the evolving situation stem from the peaceful nature of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union. We are convinced that the necessary possibilities for staving off the threat of war and putting international peace on a more solid foundation exist. There are forces able to do that. For it is the will of the peoples and the policies of States, not late, that determine the trend of world developments.
179.	No responsible politician in the world can remain indifferent to the course pursued by those countries in whose policies the cult of war is becoming the dominant factor. Indeed, even here and now in the host country of the Headquarters of the United Nations there is massive propaganda in favour of nuclear war—before our very eyes, it can be said, But it is not only a question of propaganda; plans for such a war are being worked out and discussed, and this is all being done at government level. In the atmosphere of militarist frenzy which has of late become so widespread in the United States, there is ever less room left for sound and sober assessments of the world situation and well considered conclusions on the conduct of policy.
180.	The United Nations would be right to issue a firm warning to those who seek a dangerous exacerbation of tension and war hysteria. It would be a good thing to say to those responsible: "Gentlemen, do not push the rock down the hill, for there is a risk that you will not be able to stop it later on".
181.	Saving mankind from the scourge of war is the goal towards which the States should direct their efforts, instead of preparing for war. If the General Assembly took that stand, it would add a bright page to the book of modern history.
182.	Despite all the differences in social systems, levels of economic development, national characteristics and historical destinies of the States represented in the United Nations, all peoples want to live with confidence in their future. No country, no Government, if it expresses the aspirations and will of its people, can remain aloof from the struggle for disarmament, for the relaxation of tensions and for peace.
183.	This is the basis on which the Soviet Union acts. "We shall continue to spare no effort", stressed Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, "to preserve detente, everything positive that was achieved in the 1970s, to ensure a turn towards disarmament, to uphold the right of peoples to free and independent development, to preserve and consolidate peace."
184.	Our country and its representatives are prepared to participate in a most constructive manner in the work of this session and to contribute actively to its success.
﻿Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. It is a recognition of your extraordinary diplomatic skills, but, more important, your election is a tribute to your country and to its contribution to international cooperation and understanding.
52.	On behalf of the United States delegation to this Assembly, I come here today to express anew the United States commitment to the United Nations. I come also to express our hopes for its future at a moment when the world is deeply troubled by tension and uncertainty. Peace is threatened by smouldering regional conflicts and by assaults of the strong upon the weak. Nations large and small are buffeted by steeply rising oil prices and serious economic strains. Within many countries poverty and oppression form an explosive combination.
53.	A few weeks ago I spoke to this Assembly about the international economy.  I stressed the obligation of nations to cooperate in facing world economic problems: payments imbalances, energy inflation, slowed growth in many developing countries, the spectres of environmental decay and even famine.
54.	Our inability to reach a consensus on procedures for global negotiations is a pause in the process, not a failure in our objectives. I do not mean to say that the differences that have kept us from finding a formula for global negotiations can be glossed over. They are real. They are substantive. But we are prepared to use the span of this General Assembly to continue discussions that can lead to procedures, to an agenda and to a negotiating structure that will foster broad agreement among all the nations here represented.
55.	Today I want to look beyond economic problems to the one condition that is a prerequisite for all material progress: peace. If we truly care about building a world in which peace and justice prevail, the world's nations, and this Organization, cannot ignore certain political and legal obligations also—obligations every bit as compelling as the economic obligations I spoke of earlier.
56.	These responsibilities are not new. They are proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations. But dangerous new circumstances require that we stress them anew, lest we betray the very purpose the United Nations is designed to serve.
57.	Our first obligation is to refrain from aggression and to deal with it vigorously. Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations provides for "the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace". Article 2 prohibits "the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State".
58.	Accordingly, the United Nations must confront the continuing assault upon Afghanistan. I raise this issue not to set off a rhetorical exchange, not in the interest of polemics, but in the interest of peace.
59.	Today, more than 1 million refugees attest to the human toll of the violence in Afghanistan. And more is at stake than the independence of one country. If this assault continues, the independence and integrity of every small defenceless nation will be called into question.
60.	Last January, at an emergency special session, this Assembly condemned by a large majority the assault upon Afghanistan. We strongly believe that at the thirty-fifth session also the General Assembly must work under the Charter to reinforce the principles of the United Nations. We must work for a total withdrawal of Soviet troops and a political settlement. We must support the principles of non-intervention, self-determination and non-alignment for Afghanistan.
61.	In Kampuchea as well, armed aggression continues. We welcome reports of some progress made under th4 leadership of the United Nations Secretary General and international organizations in relieving the conditions of deprivation and disease so prevalent a year ago. The threat of renewed starvation requires significant further contribution from the international community.
62.	Despite some improvement in Kampuchea's desperate human situation, no progress whatsoever has been made towards securing the withdrawal of occupying Vietnamese forces and the restoration of self-determination to the Kampuchea people, as called for in last year's resolution on Kampuchea, sponsored by the nonaligned nations. We strongly support the basis for a settlement, including the concept of an international conference, contained in that resolution, which was passed by a large majority.
63.	Above all, let us keep in mind two basic purposes for which this body exists: to oppose armed aggression and to assuage its consequences. No achievement could be more important to the future influence and effectiveness of the United Nations. No failure could be more damaging than a failure to deal firmly with these issues.
64.	Our second obligation, proclaimed by our Charter, is to settle international disputes by peaceful means. Achieving this goal remains urgently important in two key regions: the Middle East and southern Africa.
65.	In the Middle East, the United States is committed to a comprehensive peace—an enduring peace based on the principles of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We are determined to pursue to a successful conclusion the peace process begun at Camp David two years ago this month.  Already that process has achieved something once thought impossible: peace between Egypt and Israel. Now the negotiations are focused upon, a second goal: taking a significant first step towards resolving the Palestinian problem. The current autonomy talks have as their goal arriving at interim arrangements to establish full autonomy for the people of the West Bank and Gaza. After that, the process will proceed to negotiations which will determine the final status of those areas.
66.	As we seek to resolve this conflict, we are committed to finding a solution to the Palestinian problem in all its aspects and, at the same time, to permanent security for the State of Israel. We have no illusions about the difficulties of this quest. We are dealing with a conflict of long duration and intense feelings. There can be no short cuts.
67.	So today I call on all members of this Assembly to lend their support to these negotiations. Camp David has proved so far, and remains for the future, the most hopeful and productive avenue to peace in the Middle East. There is no alternative to negotiations except further conflict. Let us remember that differences are rivers to be crossed, not reasons to turn back.
68.	That persistence can bear fruit—that negotiations can yield peace—has been reaffirmed in recent months in southern Africa. Through arduous negotiations, the new nation of Zimbabwe has been born in peace. Today we have reason to celebrate not only this accomplishment, but also the way in which nations worked together to achieve it. And for the future, the Zimbabwe settlement offers hope—and a model—for peaceful settlements in southern Africa and elsewhere.
69.	The United States will continue its strong efforts to advance the United Nations plan for Namibia. There are no major substantive issues left to be resolved. I am convinced that the United Nations plan would be implemented fairly. All that remains is for South Africa to act in its own interest, in the interest of peace in the region, and in the interest of the Namibian people: to accept implementation of the United Nations settlement. If that does not happen soon, this chance for peace could be lost, and we would face a bitter future of protracted conflict and tragic human suffering.
70.	The settlement in Zimbabwe can also provide a precedent for peaceful change in South Africa. We will continue to urge the Government of South Africa to abandon the repugnant policy of apartheid. We consider it urgent that talks among representative leaders begin on the issue of peaceful, orderly change in South Africa—while there is still time.
71.	We must continue our search for peace and restoration of respect for international law in other parts of the world as well. In Lebanon, in Cyprus and elsewhere, we will lend our full support to the peace making and peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations.
72.	And although the holding of American hostages in Iran is not an item on the agenda of this Assembly, it remains a matter of extreme urgency that this tragic impasse be resolved—resolved in a way that strengthens peace and restores respect for international law. The continuing situation in Iran contributes to uncertainty about security and stability in Southwest Asia. The security of Iran itself and the stability of the area depend on a united, strong and independent Iran living at peace with its neighbours.
73.	With the end of the former regime and the death of the late Shah, a chapter in Iran's history has closed. As a new chapter opens, we emphasize that we recognize the reality of the Iranian revolution, and we respect the right of the Iranian people to choose their own form of government without intervention of any kind. With the emergence of a new constitution and governmental structure and the gradual consolidation of authority, the Islamic Republic of Iran can assume its obligations and independent role in this community of nations.
74.	An indispensable step will be the safe return to their families of the American hostages in Iran. Throughout the 324 days of their captivity, the Member States and institutions of the United Nations have expressed their concern for the hostages in numberless ways and channels. With their safe release, repeatedly called for by the Security Council and the International Court of Justice, Iran could end its isolation from those nations that live in accordance with international law, and sanctions would be terminated.
75.	Today I urge the nation of Iran, its Parliament, and its people also, to consider the human face of the hostage problem. These innocent people and their families have experienced acute suffering. I ask this community of nations to join us in urging that their ordeal be brought to a safe, honourable and prompt end. We also know that in Iran, as in the United States, there are deep feelings as a result of grievances and suffering perceived in the past. We are prepared to do our part in resolving fairly the issues between us. The Iranian Parliament has announced that it will name a commission to deal with the hostage question. We hope that this positive step will bring the Government of Iran closer to a decision on release of the hostages.
76.	The United States shares many common values with the people of Iran. When the safe return of all the hostages to their families is assured, we are prepared to deal on a basis of mutual respect and equality with all the outstanding issues and misunderstandings between Iran and the United States and to reach understandings on the principles which will govern our relationship.
77.	As we look to the future, 1 urge the United Nations, as soon as possible, to take firm and effective measures to counter the global menace of attacks upon diplomats and others. The danger it poses to civilized international life is growing; no institution of peace can afford to ignore it. For our part, the United States seeks peace with all nations. Whether it be with Iran or with the Soviet Union, we are eager to reduce tensions and to restore productive relations as soon as their actions allow.
78.	In all cases our policies will reflect our commitment to non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations. As the President of the United States, Mr. Carter, has affirmed, we shall not interfere in Poland's affairs and we expect that others will also respect the right of the Polish nation to resolve its own problems in its own way.
79.	Another obligation of nations is the control and limitation of arms. A period of heightened tension in the world makes this obligation more difficult to fulfil, but also more urgently important.
80.	For that reason, let me underscore anew today the commitment of my Government to arms control, to practical measures that contribute to world peace and enhance international stability. President Carter voiced this basic commitment when lie was sworn in as President in January 1977. It remains equally valid today.
81.	Let me give several concrete illustrations of that commitment. Some of the arms control efforts I shall mention involve active participation by the United Nations; others involve negotiations outside the United Nations framework. But all are of intense concern to the international community, for an unrestrained arms race would darken the horizon for all humanity.
82.	First, it is President Carter's intention to move forward as speedily as possible towards ratification of the SALT II Treaty.  Accordingly, the President intends to consult with the leadership of the United States Senate soon after the election with a view to resuming the ratification process as soon as is feasible. We consider it of cardinal importance to ratify SALT II and to move forward with the SALT process. The Soviet Union, however, must recognize that for many Americans recent Soviet actions have called into question the Soviet Union's commitment to international peace and cooperation. Accordingly, we call upon the Soviet Union to act in ways that will enhance, not damage, the prospects for SALT II and for other arms control efforts.
83.	Secondly, we are committed to the pursuit of meaningful and equal limitations on theatre nuclear forces in the framework of the SALT III negotiations. We are ready to begin talks with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union this week to discuss this subject and to seek agreement on the arrangements for beginning these talks promptly.
84.	Thirdly, we are committed to seeking an effective and verifiable comprehensive test ban treaty. Substantial progress has been made towards this goal and we are determined to continue pursuing these efforts vigorously.
85.	Fourthly, the United States is committed m the Vienna talks to achieving mutual and balanced force reductions and limitations to diminish the risks inherent in the massive presence of military forces in central Europe.
86.	Fifthly, we are prepared to develop further the security aspects of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. If the international situation permits and if there is balanced progress in all areas, including the human rights area, at the second review session of the Conference, to be held at Madrid in November, we are prepared to consider a post Madrid European conference of the signatory States to the Final Act of the Conference on developing militarily significant confidence-building measures.
87.	Sixthly, we support the effort of the newly expanded Committee on Disarmament to develop the provisions of an international convention on radiological weapons We also support its work towards a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons and we continue to pursue our bilateral negotiations with the Soviet Union on an effective prohibition against chemical weapons.
88.	Finally, the further spread of nuclear weapons would constitute a serious threat to international peace and security. We firmly support efforts, therefore, to reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation. The Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is a cornerstone of those efforts; we strongly urge non-parties to embrace the Treaty, for it enhances the security of all nations, nuclear weapon and nonnuclear weapon States alike. At the second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons there was unanimous agreement on the fundamental soundness of the Treaty and the desirability of universal adherence to it. For those nonnuclear weapon States that have not joined the Treaty, we attach particular importance to the goal of achieving comprehensive, full scope international safeguards coverage. We believe that acceptance of such coverage should become a condition of new nuclear supply commitments to such States. We shall continue to work for a world in which all nations can share in the peaceful use of nuclear energy without the danger of spreading nuclear weapons.
89.	Before I leave this subject, let me emphasize our deep concern over another arms control matter. If arms control is to be successful, agreements must be fully honoured. Questions such as those raised by persistent reports that chemical weapons have been used in Afghanistan, Laos and Kampuchea cannot be ignored by the international community. To do so would undermine both arms control and international law. The United States, therefore, welcomes the emphasis placed by the Committee on Disarmament at its most recent session on the need for international efforts to determine the facts behind those reports. We believe that an impartial investigation into those reports could most appropriately be launched under the auspices of the United Nations.
90.	Important as they are, the obligations I have mentioned by no means exhaust the responsibilities which rest upon us as nations, and as a community of nations, if we are to secure peace. By peace, I do not mean the fragile, artificial stability that comes with repression of a people by its Government; I mean the true stability of societies that are at peace with themselves because the rights of their citizens are protected and nurtured.
91.	So let me close by underscoring another obligation of nations: our obligation to uphold human rights and to concern ourselves compassionately with fundamental human needs.
92.	In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights the community of nations has nobly defined the concepts of human rights and human dignity, just as in the Charter of the United Nations we have outlined the precepts of peaceful cooperation.
93.	The failure of nations to live up to those human rights obligations is a continuing tragedy, made painfully manifest in the waves of refugees now sweeping across the world.
94.	Those suffering people present a dramatic challenge to the international community represented by This Assembly. Over the past five years the United States has welcomed more than 600,000 refugees—from Africa, from Asia, from Europe, from the Middle Last and from the western hemisphere. In the past five months alone we have received more than 120,000 people driven from Cuba to our shores—an influx which has presented extraordinary challenges to our resources.
95.	In recognition of the human need implicit in this worldwide wave of refugees, President Carter has made known the intention of the United States to accept an additional 217,000 refugees over the next year.
96.	Our country, of course, is only one of the many which have welcomed and helped refugees. More than 1 million Afghan refugees have fled to Pakistan; 400,000 Indo Chinese are in Thailand. More than 3 million are homeless in sub-Saharan Africa. Clearly this is a global problem; it requires a global response.
97.	The refugee resettlement efforts agreed upon at Geneva last year [see A/35/12, para. 6] demand our energy and our generosity. We must strengthen the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
98.	The humanitarian programmes of the United Nations and of the other agencies require a renewed commitment from all of us to their support and to their strengthening. But ultimately this human tragedy can be dealt with only by removing its root causes: by overcoming poverty, by ending the abuse of human rights within nations and by establishing peace among nations so that no person need be forced to flee from home and country.
99.	This is why my nation supports the growth of democracy and personal freedom in the Americas, in Africa and in every region of the world. Achieving these ultimate purposes remains a supreme challenge for the United Nations. Making progress towards them must be the work of this thirty fifth session of the General Assembly.
100. Let us not ignore the facts. Ours is a moment of worldwide economic difficulty and a time of tension between great Powers. At such moments, peaceful cooperation becomes even more difficult than usual. At such moments, our obligations as members of this Assembly of nations take on new importance. At such times, when a cloud of troubling events darkens our aspirations to ultimate peace, we can light our path by adhering faithfully to our Charter, to the international law that binds us, to the standards of international conduct that protect us.
101.	Let us hope that the light we generate by doing so will dispel the clouds of tension and discord that darken the world today.
102.	The United States will do its part. We will live up to our obligations to oppose aggression, to build peace, to limit arms, to support human rights and to foster economic justice, for us and for other nations, these endeavours can immeasurably improve life on earth and build the just and lasting peace for which all our peoples yearn.
﻿Mr. President, first of all allow me to extend warm congratulations to you on your being elected President of the thirty fifth session of the General Assembly. We believe that under your presidency the current session will achieve new successes in the noble cause of maintaining international peace and security.
81.	This year we are celebrating the thirty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 1514 (XV) containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. On this occasion we note with pleasure that four more countries—Zimbabwe, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Kiribati and Vanuatu—have joined the ranks of independent countries since last year. We warmly welcome the admission of Zimbabwe and of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations. It is our sincere hope that these newly independent countries will play an active role in international affairs and make their contributions to the cause of world peace and to the progress of mankind.
82.	The past year has witnessed encouraging progress in the struggle to win national liberation, defend state independence and safeguard world peace. The brilliant victory of the Zimbabwe people marks a significant turning point in the course of the African people's struggle to root out colonialist and racist domination in southern Africa. The just demand of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples for the recovery of their lost territories and the restoration to the Palestinian people of their national rights has won increasingly extensive support throughout the world. Irresistibly, the national democratic movement of the Latin American peoples continues to develop in depth. The peoples of Kampuchea and Afghanistan, holding high the sacred banner of safeguarding national independence and fighting heroically against brute force, have upset the smug calculations of foreign aggressors for a quick decision in the war and exacted an ever heavier price from them. In 1980 the United Nations, the Islamic Conference, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN], the Organization of African Unity [OAU] and the European Community have made a series of very important decisions on the major international issues of today, giving expression to the urgent desire of all peoples for world peace, security and justice. The unprecedentedly strong reaction to the Afghan incident shows that the struggle of the people of the whole world against hegemonism and for world peace has reached a new level.
83.	However, we cannot ignore the fact that world peace and the independence and security of States are still facing serious threats. The international situation is more tense and turbulent than before. The danger of war is growing. Relying on its vastly increased military strength, the Soviet Union has stepped up its pace of expansion. It has launched a blitzkrieg against Afghanistan and occupied the country by armed force. With Soviet backing, the Vietnamese authorities have not only refused to withdraw their forces from Kampuchea but have invaded the border areas of Thailand, making threats of war against the Southeast Asian countries. Thus the resolutions of the United Nations on Afghanistan and Kampuchea have been grossly trampled underfoot.
84.	Prior to the Afghan incident, the Soviet Union had normally carried out its military invasion or subversion of third world countries through its agents. But this time, in Afghanistan, it dropped the mask and sent troops to fight the battle itself. Through its propaganda machine it openly declared that "under the new historical conditions, the internationalist missions of the Soviet armed forces have broadened". In other words, the Soviet Union may, under the pretext of fulfilling its "internationalist obligations", carry out armed intervention in other countries at will. It even advanced a theory to justify aggression by stating that, in the Soviet Union, "a hostile Afghanistan is unacceptable, because there is a common border 2,200 kilometres long". This "doctrine" of allowing no hostile neighbours means that all the neighbours of the Soviet Union must show complete obedience. It is even more peremptory and aggressive in nature than the notorious doctrine of "limited sovereignty". Based on such logic, would it not be all right for Israel to hold on to the Arab territories it has occupied by force and commit further aggressions against the neighbouring Arab countries that are opposed to its expansionism? Would it not be all right too for the racist regime in South Africa to continue its illegal occupation of Namibia and even send troops for aggression against southern African countries that are opposed to racism? Clearly, in spreading these fallacies, the Soviet Union is trying both to defend its present aggressions and to create theoretical justifications for similar acts in the future. Whether in theory or in practice, the Afghan incident marks a new stage of development in the external expansion of the hegemonists.
85.	In sending troops to Afghanistan and supporting the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the Soviet Union aims not only to enslave those two countries but also to turn them into springboards for further expansion. Both incidents are important steps taken by the hegemonists in their policy of a southward drive. With the dispatch of troops to Afghanistan, the Soviet armed forces have pushed more than 600 kilometres southward to press against the northern and western parts of the Pakistani border and the eastern part of the Iranian border. Another step forward will take them to the Indian Ocean and the shores of the Gulf. By supporting the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the Soviet Union has strengthened its control over Viet Nam and moved into Cam Ranh bay, thereby advancing its military base in the Far East southward by more than 4,000 kilometres and pressing towards the Straits of Malacca. In driving south towards the Indian Ocean and along the Pacific Ocean, in coordination with its activities of expansion in the Red Sea and in the Horn of Africa, the Soviet Union aims to seize strategic sites in the vast area of crucial importance—from the Red Sea and the Arabian Peninsula in the west, through the Straits of Malacca in the middle and to the South China Sea in the east—encircle the oil fields in the Gulf and control key international sea lanes. In other words, while further threatening the whole Asia Pacific region, it intends to outflank western Europe and to hasten the completion of its global strategic deployment for world domination.
86.	Therefore, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and its support for the Vietnamese aggression in Kampuchea are certainly not "accidental" events, but premeditated acts; not "defensive" measures, but offensive and aggressive moves; not "local" problems, but major issues affecting the overall situation of the world. The threat they pose to world peace and the security of all countries is not "temporary". The hegemonists will never stop where they are. They will see how the wind blows and wait for an opportune moment to start new adventures in order to attain their strategic goals. In these circumstances, while the third world countries located along the route of the hegemonists' southward drive will no doubt bear the brunt of the attack, other countries, including the Western European countries and Japan, will also be facing gravest threats. Should the Soviet Union succeed in every step of its expansion and in its global strategic plan, it will be difficult for the world to avoid another holocaust.
87.	It is not without reason that, faced with the realities of intensified arms expansion and war preparations by the Soviet Union over the years and considering the change that has taken place and is going to take place in the global balance of military strength, many people have pointed to the mid1980s as a period of danger. This point of view is not devoid of foundation. That the 1980s opened with the Afghan incident was indeed a bad omen. The incident has further revealed the ambitions of the hegemonists and brought into relief their adventurous nature. Thus an alarm was sounded for the people of the world, awakening them to the fact that the international situation has now reached a crucial point. Faced with the war provocations by the hegemonists, the people of the world must promptly and decisively choose between a resolute counterblow or a steady retreat.
88.	We believe that the strategic offensive by the hegemonists should be countered with overall measures so that wherever they seek expansion, they will be held in check. It is not enough just to condemn and call for sanctions against the aggressors. We must also adopt effective measures to help the people of countries subjected to aggression, because in fighting for their national independence and liberty they are in fact struggling for international peace and security. Provided that the countries of the world strengthen their solidarity, coordinate their actions and persist in struggle, it is entirely possible to check the aggressive drive by the hegemonists, upset their global strategic plan and prevent their launching a new world war.
89.	But if we yield our positions one after another in the face of hegemonist onslaught, the hegemonists will become even more insatiable and unscrupulous in their expansion and aggression. In the end, we shall be backed against the wall with nothing but the choice between being forced into complete submission or being caught totally unprepared for a major war. The course of the Second World War has demonstrated to the full what a heavy price one has to pay for the failure to make the right choice in time. History does not simply repeat itself, but the lessons of the past are worth taking seriously.
90.	At present, the Soviet Union is playing the trick of "detente" with great fanfare in order to divert world attention and divide the anti-aggression forces. For some time it has been advocating "a summit meeting of leaders of States of all the regions of the world", making appeals to the parliaments and members of parliaments of various countries "to strengthen peace and detente", and so on and so forth. As a matter of fact, it has long been the established practice of the hegemonists to pursue aggression and expansion while trumpeting the slogan of "detente". Especially after massive aggression and expansion, they always strike a pose of defending peace and launch a big "detente" offensive. Was it not the Soviet Union which proposed in 1969, not long after its invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, that the question of so-called "strengthening international security" be considered by the United Nations General Assembly? Shortly after the Afghan incident, it was predicted that the Soviet Union would come forward with another round of the "detente" offensive. As it turned out, that was exactly what happened. The new item entitled "Urgent measure for reducing the war danger" proposed by Mr. Gromyko; the plenary meeting yesterday for consideration at the current session is precisely that kind of thing. The facts show that the armed aggression against Afghanistan being carried out by the Soviet Union constitutes in itself a grave threat to world peace. If the Soviet Union is really sincere about "reducing the war danger", is there any action more "urgent" and practical than the scrupulous implementation of General Assembly resolution ES6/2, endorsed by 104 countries, and the immediate and total withdrawal of its aggressor forces from Afghanistan?
91.	In the face of the current pressing international situation, the Chinese people are determined to keep up the struggle against hegemonism together with the peace-loving and justice upholding peoples all over the world. The Chinese Government will maintain its consistent foreign policy of peace and wishes to establish and develop State relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. But we are resolutely opposed to any act of hegemonism. We take this stand not merely for the sake of our own security but, more importantly, with a view to safeguarding the overall interests o world peace.
92.	The question of how to check the naked armed aggression in Afghanistan and Kampuchea must have priority over other issues on the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly.
93.	More than eight months have elapsed since the sixth emergency special session of the General Assembly adopted a resolution by 104 votes, calling for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan. However, the Afghan people continue to shed their blood because foreign aggressor troops are still engaged in the massacre, over 1 million Afghan refugees have been compelled to flee the country and the number continues to rise. While intensifying its repression of the Afghan patriots, the Soviet Union instructed the Kabul regime to put forward a so-called "seven point proposal" for the settlement of the Afghan question, advocating bilateral negotiations between the Kabul regime and Governments of neighbouring countries. The aim of the Soviet Union is to legitimize the Afghan regime it has installed through military intervention and to confuse the public so that the crux of the Afghan question would appear to be a matter of relations between Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, and not one of Soviet armed aggression. Such a proposal has of course met with universal opposition.
94.	Viet Nam has behaved exactly the same way in Kampuchea as the Soviet Union in Afghanistan. Disregarding General Assembly resolution 34/22, adopted by 91 votes, Viet Nam has not only persisted in its aggression against Kampuchea but also extended the flames of war to Kampuchea's neighbour, posing an increasingly serious threat to peace and stability in Southeast Asia.
95.	After the recent setback in its armed incursion into Thailand, Viet Nam, acting as the overlord in IndoChina, has dished up a so-called "four point proposal" for defusing the tension along the Thai Kampuchean border. While evading the question of the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea, the proposal calls for the establishment of a demilitarized zone along the Thai Kampuchean border and advocates negotiations between Thailand and the Heng Samrin regime. In essence, this is an attempt to force others to recognize the puppet regime in Kampuchea, installed and propped up by Viet Nam at bayonet point, and to divert attention from Vietnamese armed aggression, which is at the core of the Kampuchean issue.
96.	Thailand and other ASEAN countries have sternly rejected this unreasonable Vietnamese proposal. The Thai Government has sharply pointed out that the proposal represents "an attempt to legitimize the illegal presence of foreign forces in Kampuchea". Viet Nam has now sanctimoniously requested that the "Question of peace, stability and cooperation in Southeast Asia" be included in the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly. One cannot help asking: in Southeast Asia today, which country, in fact, has stationed its troops on foreign soil? Which country has tried to overthrow the Government of another country by means of armed aggression? Which country, after all, is sabotaging peace, stability and cooperation in the region?
97.	It is understandable that some countries hope to find a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions so as to ease international tension. China is in favour of a just and reasonable political settlement of the two questions. However, we are opposed to any political settlement based on the acceptance of the faits accomplis created by the aggressors. We should guard against their attempts to distract public attention in the name of seeking a political solution, and to turn negotiations for a political settlement into an endless debate so that they may buy time to step up their military actions and consolidate their gains from aggression. We should likewise guard against their attempt, in the course of a political solution, to exploit the desire of certain people in the world for momentary peace and security and to induce them to sacrifice the fundamental interests of the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples.
98.	The Afghan and Kampuchean incidents have the same characteristics. In the joint statement issued at Kuala Lumpur last March by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of ASEAN and the European Community, it was pointed out that the two incidents "have as a common denominator the imposition of will on small independent States by foreign Powers through the use of force in open violation of international law, thereby threatening international peace and security”. In the view of the Chinese delegation, a just and reasonable settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions requires that the following three basic principles be followed.
99.	First, the foreign aggressors must withdraw all their troops immediately and unconditionally from Afghanistan and Kampuchea in compliance with the relevant United Nations resolutions. This is a principle of key importance and the prerequisite of any settlement.
100.	Secondly, after the withdrawal of foreign troops, the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples should be free to decide their own destiny without any outside interference. In its resolution, the Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Islamabad from 17 to 22 May of this year, emphasized respect for "the Afghan people's inalienable right to decide their own form of government and to choose their economic, political and social system". Recently, the Government of Democratic Kampuchea stated that after the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea "the Kampuchean people may choose their own national government through a general election by free, direct or secret ballot, and, if necessary, under the supervision of the United Nations Secretary General or his representative". The Chinese Government supports the above propositions.
101.	Thirdly, Afghanistan and Kampuchea should be restored to their independent and nonaligned status.
102.	After the Afghan and Kampuchean questions are settled in accordance with the above three principles, China, in the interest of safeguarding the independence of these two countries and peace in Asia and the world, will be ready to join the other countries concerned in an international guarantee that the territory of Afghanistan or Kampuchea shall not be occupied or used to encroach on the independence and sovereignty of other countries in either region, nor shall there be any form of interference in the internal affairs of these two countries.
103.	At the current session the Assembly will also consider some other major international political and economic issues. We should act promptly, wisely and with farsightedness in our effort to find a just, reasonable and effective solution of these issues, not only on the merits of each case but also in consideration of their impact on the world situation as a whole.
104.	The Middle East question has been dragging on for several decades, gravely threatening regional and world peace and stability. At the seventh emergency special session of the General Assembly on the question of Palestine, held in July this year, speeches made by many representatives and the final resolution, adopted by 112 votes, expressed the demand of the people of the world for an early comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question. In this connexion, the declaration of the European Community issued at Venice on 13 June also has a positive significance in promoting a Middle East settlement. However, Israel has brazenly declared the above resolution "illegal", accelerated its plan of occupying Jerusalem and committed new aggression against Lebanon. This is an act of utter contempt for the international community and a direct challenge to the United Nations. Israel has been so intransigent and arrogant precisely because it feels secure in the knowledge that it has the backing of one superpower and that the other superpower, honey on lips and murder in heart, will not give genuine support to the Arab countries.
105.	The Chinese people strongly condemn Israel for its policy of aggression and expansion and for its dogged obstruction of a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question. We firmly support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. We favour the position of many countries that Israel should withdraw from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, that the Palestinian people should regain their national rights, including the rights to return to their homeland, exercise self-determination and establish their own State, and that all the Middle East countries should have the right to independence and existence. We have always held that the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], being the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, should participate as an interested party in a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
106.	The people of Zimbabwe has finally shaken off the yoke of colonialism and racism after protracted armed struggle. This has greatly changed the outlook of southern Africa and will undoubtedly expedite the great historical process of eradicating colonialism and racism from the entire African continent. After independence, the Zimbabwe Government has made creative efforts in handling racial relations at home. This will have a far-reaching impact on future developments in southern Africa. However, to this day the racist regime of South Africa still refuses to end its illegal rule over Namibia; what is more, it has further intensified its repression of the people of South Africa. This is intolerable. We firmly support the correct views of the frontline States on the question of southern Africa. Like Zimbabwe, Namibia should achieve genuine national independence in conformity with the aspirations of its people and on the basis of territorial integrity and national unification. Apartheid and the system of racial discrimination in South Africa should be completely abolished. The United Nations should make its due contribution to the termination of the colonial and racist rule in southern Africa.
107.	The developments on the Korean peninsula call for close attention. The military junta in South Korea is intensifying its Fascist dictatorship by every ruthless means. Recently, in defiance of world condemnation, this regime has brazenly pronounced a death sentence on the well-known democrat, Kim Dae Jung. All this has not only created new obstacles to the North South dialogue and the peaceful reunification of Korea, but has also added to the destabilizing factors in the Korean situation. A reasonable solution of the Korean question will be of major significance to the maintenance of peace in East Asia and the Pacific region. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has put forward a series of formulas and proposals for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and has worked tirelessly to this end. On its part, the international community should help to create favourable conditions for its realization. It is necessary to implement as soon as possible the relevant resolution of the General Assembly adopted five years ago by dissolving the "United Nations Command", withdrawing all the United States military forces and equipment from South Korea and converting the Korean armistice agreement into a peace agreement through negotiations between the parties concerned.
108.	We are deeply concerned over the recent military conflict between Iraq and Iran. We sincerely hope that the two parties will cease hostilities speedily and settle their disputes through peaceful negotiations so as not to be exploited by those harbouring ulterior motives.
109.	The current session, moreover, cannot shut its eyes to the stark economic situation prevailing in the world today. Most developing countries, poor in the first place, are now finding their economic situation deteriorating further. The disparity in wealth between North and South is in fact widening. An important reason for this is that, though politically independent, the third world countries are hampered by the old international economic order. This inequitable international economic order must be reformed if the economic development of the developing countries is to be promoted. The recently concluded eleventh special session of the General Assembly reached consensus on the international Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, which, to a certain degree, reflects the desire of the developing countries. However, on the question of global economic negotiations, the session has failed to achieve the progress it should have achieved. In this connexion, we hope that the current session will take a bigger step forward to make a good start in the global economic negotiations and guide them in the direction of strengthening economic cooperation between nations on the basis of equality and mutual benefit. The key to this hinges on the renewed efforts on the part of the developed countries, which would hardly be able to expand their own economies without economic ties and cooperation with the third world countries. What is more, the present international situation requires them to look farther ahead from a vantage point and approach the North South relations from an overall strategic perspective. Improvement in the economic situation of the third world and better North South economic relations will contribute not only to world economic stability and growth, but also to the cause of world peace and security.
110.	Thirty-five years have elapsed since the founding of the United Nations. During this period, the international Organization itself has undergone great changes. A large number of newly independent countries have become Members of the United Nations. This has so changed the composition of the Organization that it is better able to reflect the aspirations of the people of all countries to the maintenance of international peace, security and justice as well as their desire to promote economic development and social progress. Today, it is no longer possible for any big Power to control and manipulate the United Nations. The United Nations traversed a tortuous road before it became what it is today. This has not come about easily, but through the joint efforts of all countries and peoples that love peace and uphold justice.
111.	However, we must not fail to see that the United Nations is facing a grave challenge. It is expressly provided in the Charter that the primary task of the United Nations is to suppress acts of aggression. But actually a good number of correct resolutions adopted by the General Assembly for this purpose have been brazenly violated and undermined by certain Member States. The Charter clearly stipulates that all Members shall refrain in their international relations from the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State; yet, certain Member States have deliberately violated these provisions. Again, the Charter stipulates in explicit terms that international disputes must be settled in conformity with the principles of justice and international law; yet, certain Member States attempt to replace these principles by the law of the jungle and "recognition of faits accomplis created by aggression". The overwhelming majority of the Member States demands that the United Nations effectively fulfil the noble obligations placed on it by the Charter; yet, a tiny minority attempts to lead it onto the tracks of the League of Nations. This is an intense struggle, which can be won by the overwhelming majority of the Member States only if they persevere in opposing and suppressing by deeds as well as words, both inside and outside the United Nations, any violation of the United Nations Charter.
112.	This is the first session of the General Assembly in the 1980s. The coming decade will be a complicated and volatile decade, fraught with crises. Therefore, people have every reason to expect the current session to make a new contribution to opposing aggression, preventing war, safeguarding peace and promoting progress, so that a good start may be made in the work of the United Nations in the 1980s. We must not disappoint the people of the world. China is ready to work together with other Member States for the success of the current session and for the implementation of the purposes and principles of the United Nations as laid down in the Charter
﻿Mr. President, first of all I should like to congratulate you most sincerely on your election to the highest office in the United Nations and to commend you on your impressive inaugural address. Your election is for us a token of recognition of six years' constructive work as the Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations. We also feel that it can be seen as a recognition of the active participation of the Federal Republic of Germany in the world Organization. This participation is of great value to our policy, which is directed towards peace.
79.	I should like to express our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Salim, one of the great representatives of the African continent.
80.	I am also very pleased to be able to welcome Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as a new Member State of the world Organization.
81.	This first regular session of the General Assembly in the 1980s is dominated by anxious questions about the future of our world. We commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV) which contains the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. But the recollection of that Declaration also calls to mind the contrast between then and now. In 1960, newly independent African States became Members of the United Nations. At the same time, the economic development of the third world emerged as a task for the community of nations as a whole. By proclaiming the First United Nations Development Decade, the United Nations launched a great effort to cope with that task as well.
82.	At the beginning of the 1960s mankind was resolutely setting out for new horizons, and the rate of progress did indeed increase. The process of decolonization has almost been completed. The number of Members of the United Nations has increased from 100 in 1960 to 154 this year. A number of developing countries became new industrial countries or threshold countries. The per capita income of the third world rose at an annual rate of 3 per cent. And though this average rate may conceal the disparities between individual developing countries, it was an unprecedented growth which only few had thought attainable at the beginning of the 1960s.
83.	In 1966 the General Assembly adopted the two International Covenants on Human Rights  and, by specifically defining those rights, imbued them with a force which, despite all resistance, has begun to leave its impression on the lives of nations all over the globe.
84.	And, finally, as the 1960s drew to a close, the climate of cold war between East and West gave way to a newly emerging detente. To many it seemed that the time had already come for the States of the world acting as equal partners to concentrate on the great task of our age: the development of the third world.
85.	But now, on the threshold of the 1980s, it has become increasingly clear that the path towards this goal is paved with obstacles: the designs of power politics are threatening detente; there is the threat of a new arms race; unresolved conflicts weigh heavily on the third world and the quest for power creates new sources of crisis; and in the mid-1970s the world economy experienced its first grave setback since the war. Oil price explosions are having devastating effects on the industrialized countries and are plunging many oil importing third world countries into a development crisis.
86.	Is this the end of the endeavours for a world community of equal States initiated in 1945, with the foundation of the United Nations, and reaffirmed so impressively in 1960? Has the third world struggled for its independence, only to lose it in the face of new challenges? Is economic advancement in parts of the third world grinding to a halt? Will poverty be with us for ever?
87.	In view of these challenges it remains our historic task to establish a world of equal partners based on the right of nations to self-determination and on respect for the inalienable rights of the individual.
88.	The fundamental task is to secure—through an active policy for safeguarding peace—the political conditions for mankind's resumption of steady progress.
89.	What is required in the first place is to continue undiminished efforts to reduce tensions and foster cooperation between East and West. This policy, on a basis of equality, is of vital importance not only for peace between East and West but also for peace and peaceful economic development in the world as a whole. A policy for safeguarding peace is inconceivable without a general determination for detente and cooperation. Such determination cannot do away with the fundamental conflict inherent in contrasting values and political systems. But it can help to prevent avoidable conflicts and to keep unavoidable conflicts under control by means of diplomacy. It can also build bridges to span the gulf and promote cooperation for mutual benefit. Seen in this way, detente and cooperation constitute a realistic and long-term policy for peace.
90.	My country, firmly embedded in the European Community and the North Atlantic defence alliance, has from the outset been among the chief protagonists of detente in Europe. Acting on the basis of shared convictions of freedom and human dignity, these two communities have long been champions of freedom, stability, security and peace in the world. We firmly abide by the policy of detente and cooperation—aware that we share responsibility for peace and that the Germans who have to live in two separate States would be especially affected by a relapse into the cold war.
91.	The basic tenet of our policy continues to be to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination. We know that history is on our side.
92.	The Treaty on the Basis of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic" has established the conditions for cooperation which take account of the responsibility of Germans for peace and pave the way for improvements in the humanitarian sphere for all Germans. We are guided by the goals of this Treaty in our efforts to develop further, wherever possible, our cooperation with the German Democratic Republic.
93.	Federal Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and the Chairman of the State Council of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, have both expressed the view that never again should war originate on German soil.
94.	We want to play our part in keeping the situation in and around Berlin stable and peaceful. Berlin is the barometer of detente in Europe.
95.	Ten years ago the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union laid the foundation for the development of fruitful mutual relations. Chancellor Schmidt and I went to Moscow on 30 June and 1 July 1980; that visit was an expression of our will to maintain direct contacts in difficult times and to do everything to keep the way clear for a policy which we regard as long term. We consider the signal given by our visit, after months of stagnation, for the commencement of talks on medium range weapons to be an incentive to continue our efforts.
96.	We shall also maintain our efforts to develop cooperation with the Polish People's Republic and the other Eastern European countries.
97.	Furthermore, we attach great importance to the multilateral process of detente in Europe. At the Second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, soon to be held at Madrid, we shall discuss the implementation of all parts of the Final Act of Helsinki in all its parts, in a sincere and realistic manner, but we shall also talk about what remains to be done. We want to achieve even progress in all fields. The Conference should be neither a tribunal nor a forum for empty rhetoric.
98.	In the economic field we advocate an East West conference on energy, and in the field of human relations we urge the solution of humanitarian problems, the fostering of contacts .between people in the East and West and a wider exchange of information.
99.	Considering the importance which the Madrid Conference holds for the future, we hope that all participating States will, by their policies, make it possible to achieve progress.
100.	Disarmament is the great task of the 1980s. We must not be discouraged, despite all the disappointments and setbacks. We know that detente and cooperation between East and West can be lasting only if they are founded on military equilibrium. Seeking a position of superiority only serves to create instability and, hence, insecurity. Disarmament cannot, therefore, mean the preservation of superiority, but rather must mean a stronger commitment to disarm on the part of those in a position of superiority. In the field of armament and disarmament, all States must be judged solely by what they actually do. My country and its allies are striving to achieve equilibrium at the lowest possible level of armaments.
101.	The defence efforts of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] are determined exclusively by its own security requirements. The Federal Republic of Germany is not seeking superiority, nor are the other European members of the Western defence alliance, the United States of America or Canada.
102.	We are disturbed by the superiority in conventional weapons of the Warsaw Pact countries in central Europe, and we are particularly concerned about the rapid build-up of the Soviet Union's new SS20 medium range nuclear missiles, which are not trained solely on Western Europe. That arms build-up goes beyond the Soviet Union's own security needs. That is a fact which nobody can deny.
103.	Since it is our serious intention to achieve equilibrium at the lowest possible level of armaments, the Western defence alliance put before the Warsaw Pact countries, in December 1979, a comprehensive package of arms control and disarmament proposals.
104.	The Western defence alliance also linked its decision to modernize its nuclear systems to the offer of negotiations on limiting the medium range land based missiles of the two sides. It is now a question of getting those negotiations under way as quickly as possible.
105.	I am glad that the United States Secretary of State and the Soviet Minister for Foreign Affairs will be discussing here in New York tomorrow the commencement of the preparatory talks on this subject. I am also glad that the President of the United States has stated his intention to seek ratification of the SALT II agreement at the earliest possible date.
106.	The second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, to be held at Madrid, should decide on the establishment of a European conference on disarmament with the clear mandate to agree on confidence-building measures for the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Urals. Confidence is indivisible, also, in geographic terms. The achievement of concrete results at the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in central Europe can also help to stabilize the situation in all of Europe.
107.	Verifiable arms limitation and disarmament are among the primary objectives of German foreign policy. We pursue that objective in Europe and we pursue it worldwide.
108.	Success in arms control negotiations is dependent upon openness and sufficient information about military capabilities in the world. For that reason, we should like to see all nations disclose their military expenditures. In that connexion, the United Nations has worked out a matrix designed to make military budgets comparable. The Federal Republic of Germany, other Western States and third world countries have reported on their military expenditures on the basis of that matrix and given an example of its practical application.
109.	It is now necessary to encourage all countries to disclose their military expenditures according to that system.
110.	Just as in Europe, so also on a global scale confidence-building measures are necessary. In response to a suggestion for which we were responsible, the General Assembly last year appointed a working group to study the possibility of confidence-building measures in various regions and throughout the world. 
111.	One crucial task of our active policy for safeguarding peace is to frustrate all hegemonic aspirations. This must apply worldwide. Hegemonic policies and resultant military intervention destroy the right of nations to self-determination. The East West confrontation must not be transferred to the third world.
112.	In an interdependent world, one of the foundations of which is respect for the right to self-determination, interventionism is not a matter which concerns only those who intervene and their victims; it is a challenge to the entire community of nations. This is also the essence of the principle of the indivisibility of detente.
113.	The signatory States to the Helsinki Final Act expressly declared their intention not only to base their relations with one another on the principles embodied in the Final Act, which include the renunciation of force and respect for equality of rights and for the right of nations to self-determination, but also to conduct their relations with other States in the spirit of those principles.
114.	Accordingly, the Federal Republic of Germany and France, in their joint declaration of 5 February 1980, described as unacceptable the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan and stated clearly that detente would not be able to withstand another blow of that kind.
115.	The nonaligned movement is becoming an increasingly important force in international politics. The more all its members associate themselves with the aim of true non-alignment, the greater will be their contribution to stability in the world.
116.	The conflicts in the third world must also be resolved through negotiations.
117.	The agenda for this session of the General Assembly includes four major crisis areas: the Middle East, southern Africa, Afghanistan and Cambodia. To these must be added the Iraqi Iranian conflict, a source of great concern.
118.	In the Middle East, new obstacles have been piled up on the road to a comprehensive peace settlement. The positions of the parties concerned have hardened and tension has again built up to a dangerous level.
119.	The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, Mr. Thorn, who is currently presiding over the European Community, has explained the position of the nine member States on all aspects of the Middle East conflict. Together with our European partners, we shall do everything in our power to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The Palestinian people must be enabled to exercise fully its right to self-determination. That right must be implemented, just as much as the right to existence and security of all States in the region, including Israel.
120.	We are convinced that the Middle East problem can only be solved if all the parties concerned forgo exclusive territorial demands. There must be no "all or nothing" attitude. On none of the issues should one side confront the other with a fait accompli. That applies to settlements in the occupied territories, and it applies especially to Jerusalem, of whose importance for the three major religions we are particularly aware.
121.	A necessary step on the road to comprehensive peace is the renunciation of force or the threat of use of force by all the parties concerned. This is the only way to create in the area the climate of confidence that is indispensable to a settlement.
122.	Our intention to give a new impetus to the Euro Arab dialogue by adding a political dimension to it, and the continuing willingness of the Europeans to participate in international guarantees, indicate our determination to take our share of the responsibility for peace.
123.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany views with grave concern the armed confrontation which has flared up in the past few days between Iraq and Iran. We appeal to those involved not to add yet another conflict to those already existing in the Middle East, but rather to settle matters at the negotiating table. And we appeal to all States to exercise the greatest restraint so as to prevent the conflict from spreading. The United Nations must shoulder its responsibility for peace.
124.	In Africa, the year 1980 has brought crucial progress towards eliminating the remnants of colonialism.
125.	The people of Zimbabwe have exercised their right to self-determination through free elections under international supervision, and have obtained their independence. This shows that negotiated solutions to even the most difficult subjects are possible.
126.	In Namibia a solution will only be possible, in our view, if based on the United Nations plan for Namibia. Attempts to achieve an internal settlement would have no chance of bringing peace and freedom to the country; Zimbabwe has confirmed that. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) must now be implemented without delay.
127.	At the sixth emergency special session of the General Assembly, held from 10 to 14 January this year, the international community condemned by an overwhelming majority the armed intervention in Afghanistan and called for the immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of the foreign troops. It urged that the people of Afghanistan be enabled to determine their own form of government and choose their economic, political and social systems free from outside intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind whatsoever. This resolution must now finally be implemented.
128.	We welcome the endeavours of the Islamic and other third world States to find a political solution to the Afghanistan problem.
129.	It is also necessary to find a political solution to the crisis in Cambodia. Here, too, the United Nations has categorically called for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops. Here, too, it has demanded that the people of Cambodia be enabled to choose their own government by the democratic process—without outside intervention, subversion or coercion.
130.	The conflict must not now be carried even beyond Cambodia's borders. The people of my country are shocked by the terrible fate of the Cambodian people. My Government and the private relief organizations in my country will continue to render humanitarian assistance as best they can. I appeal to all responsible: open up all channels necessary to allow assistance to reach the starving people in all parts of Cambodia.
131.	We must tackle the problem of the world's refugees at its roots. It constitutes a growing challenge to our conscience, an increasing disregard for basic human rights and a growing threat to good neighbourly relations between States and to the international order as a whole.
132.	Today, all over the world, people are fleeing their home countries and seeking refuge in camps. Their number is estimated at about 15 million. Anyone who has visited a refugee camp is aware of the abject misery suffered by these millions.
133.	I refer to the mass exodus from Indochina, Afghanistan and Ethiopia, which has greatly aggravated the refugee problem. In Somalia 30 per cent of the population are refugees, according to government estimates. The development of that country threatens to collapse under this tremendous burden. In the border region between Thailand and Cambodia, refugee problems have led to an acute clanger of war. These examples indicate that the refugee problem has become a threat to peace in many parts of the third world and a threat to the political stability and economic development of the countries receiving the refugees.
134.	So far the United Nations has concentrated on the humanitarian task of mitigating the consequences of flight and expulsion. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has rendered an outstanding service in this field.
135.	We must increase further the humanitarian assistance for refugees and make it more effective. But we must also face up to the political task of counteracting the causes of their flight and expulsion. We must work together to avert new refugee flows. We must elaborate rules governing the conduct of States. We must prevent racially and ideologically undesired minorities from being forcibly expelled by their Governments or compelled to flee as a result of unbearable living conditions. This, too, is part today of a comprehensive and active policy for safeguarding peace. I therefore suggest that this session of the General Assembly include in its agenda a new and urgent item entitled "International cooperation to avert new refugee flows".
136.	Without development of the third world there can be no lasting and secure peace. Nor is peace in the world possible if the gap between the rich and the poor countries grows larger, if hunger and want in the developing countries spread further. What we need is accelerated economic development in the third world and the recovery of sustained growth in the industrial countries. Cooperation in the development effort is an indispensable part of a world order based on partnership.
137.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly that has just ended and at which I presented my Government's views unfortunately met only some of our expectations. Admittedly, agreement was reached on the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade. It was also agreed that the aid extended to the least developed countries must be stepped up considerably. This consensus is a good starting point for the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries to be held in 1981.
138.	The special session was not, however, able to complete the preparations for the global negotiations. It is precisely in view of the difficult world economic situation that my Government considers such negotiations important and urgently necessary. At the present session, therefore, a consensus must be attained on the procedure and the agenda for the negotiations so that they can start in January 1981 as planned. The Brandt Commission has presented an important document on North South issues.' We advocate a North South summit meeting, as recommended by the Brandt Commission. Such a meeting can give important impetus to the negotiations in the United Nations.
139.	Resolution 34/138 establishing the global negotiations relating to international economic cooperation for development, specified five main subjects: commodities, energy, trade, development, money and finance. In all of these fields we must recognize the common interests of industrialized and developing countries. We shall establish a new international economic order not by destroying the existing one but by developing it further. We must preserve free world trade as the driving force behind growth and development. We must solve the world's energy problems and thus safeguard the basis of economic growth and development. We must ensure a stable world monetary system and safeguard the effectiveness of the competent institutions. We must step up the flow of resources to the third world so as to accelerate development and thereby provide important stimuli for growth in the industrial countries and create new jobs there.
140.	Despite its adverse budgetary situation, the Federal Republic of Germany has, between 1977 and 1979—that is, within two years—doubled its official development assistance from 3.2 to 6.1 billion deutsche marks. In absolute terms, my country is therefore, together with France, the second largest donor country. Furthermore, its official development assistance amounts to 0.44 per cent of its gross national product and thus exceeds the average of the industrial countries.
141.	An indispensable part of the global negotiations is a comprehensive dialogue on energy between oil importing and oil exporting countries. The energy issue has now become so crucial and has such far-reaching effects on all other economic sectors that the aim of global negotiations would not be achievable without an energy dialogue.
142.	Successful cooperation for development in the new decade will also depend, to a decisive extent, on whether all countries participate to the best of their ability. Support for the development of the third world cannot be seen as the responsibility of the Western industrial countries alone. It is the responsibility of the entire international community, and everyone must shoulder his portion.
143.	Here 1 appeal particularly to the Communist industrial countries. In recent years their assistance has amounted to only about 0.1 per cent of their gross national product. Almost three quarters of that aid went to just two developing countries.
144.	The world's total arms expenditure will exceed $500 billion this year. Military spending is increasing everywhere— in the East and the West and not least in the third world. The success of development depends more and more also on whether it proves possible to halt the global arms race. What the world needs is not an arms race, but a race in the provision of aid for the developing countries.
145.	I consider it necessary to set up two registers in the United Nations. The first should record how much every industrial country spends per capita on armaments and how much on development assistance. The second register should cover worldwide exports and imports of weapons.
146.	We must not look on passively while arms expenditure is growing and while expenditure on development aid is lagging behind or even stagnating. We must not remain idle when weapons are poured into developing countries which need not guns but schools and hospitals, tractors and lathes.
147.	A world of partnership and an active peace policy call for worldwide respect for human rights. We know how far we still are from this great goal. We have witnessed, especially in recent years, a number of massive violations of human rights. The United Nations has introduced procedures and institutions with a view to promoting the effective implementation of human rights throughout the world. These procedures are still comparatively weak, although their effectiveness is increasing as evidenced by the work of the Human Rights Commission.
148.	It is now necessary to strengthen and develop the instruments of the United Nations for the protection of human rights. These instruments must include a United Nations court of justice for human rights.
149.	Nobody can overlook the appalling abuse in the imposition of the death penalty in many parts of the world. In his annual report, Secretary General Kurt Waldheim condemned the summary execution of individuals without regard for due process of law.
150.	Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights limits the death penalty. Today, 14 years after the signing of the Covenant, it is time to seek the abolition of that penalty. My Government will therefore propose a convention to eliminate capital punishment. This convention could be given the form of a second optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
151.	It is stated in the Constitution of my country that "Capital punishment shall be abolished". This important decision is the result of painful experiences in our recent past. We know that different historical developments, legal traditions and religious beliefs have prompted different attitudes towards the death penalty in other countries. But this should not make anyone less conscious of the frequent abuses in the imposition of capital punishment. Such abuses can only be eliminated by the total abolition of the death penalty.
152.	Our world is in a state of transition. It is moving towards a new order, the first truly global order in history to be founded on the concept of equality and partnership. The outlines of this new order are already discernible, even though reactionary trends are blurring the picture. I should like to emphasize two basic principles of the new order: the self-determination of all nations and the regional integration of equal States to form larger communities.
153.	Self-determination means the full development of each country's own potential and independent political, economic and cultural development. This aim must be realized today especially in the third world. There would be no genuine and sustained development in Africa, the Arab States, Latin America and Asia if these vast cultural regions merely tried to copy Western or Eastern industrialized countries. Development must build on a country's own culture and, with due respect for inalienable human rights, must use modern science and technology to enhance these cultural values.
154.	Anyone who opposes such independent development and seeks to impose alien, prefabricated concepts upon the third world acts against the interests of the developing countries and the world as a whole. The national, religious and cultural identity of nations must remain intact. Mankind needs a variety of cultures to prevent its creative forces from dwindling. To reject a pluralistic world and to force humanity under the yoke of a single ideology would be tantamount to halting progress.
155.	Regional integration is becoming increasingly important as a means of creating political and economic areas in all parts of the world which will ward off hegemonic designs by foreign Powers and permit the development of modern economies. The European Community provides a model of a regional grouping of States on a basis of equality, a union in which no one dominates. We consider the emergence of regional communities of States in all parts of the world, including Africa, Asia and Latin America one of the most important international developments.
156.	The European Community promotes this development wherever it can. It has already instituted special forms of cooperation with most of these groupings which provide forward-looking models for cooperation between industrialized and developing countries in a spirit of partnership.
157.	The increasing regional cooperation in the third world, the large groupings of the nonaligned countries and the Group of 77 is also developments of great consequence for our work in the United Nations. Without these groupings the political opinion forming process and agreement on solutions in the United Nations would today be almost unthinkable.
158.	It is clear that regional and interregional cooperation supplement and facilitate global cooperation, but do not replace it.
159.	The universal Organization of the United Nations will be more than ever the centre of a new world order based on equality and partnership. It is our task to strengthen it, to make it more effective and, above all, to make use of it for the good of the whole world and not merely to safeguard individual interests. This is a task which my country will help to accomplish to the best of its ability.
﻿In electing you Sir, to the presidency of the thirty-fifth session of our General Assembly, the United Nations wished to pay tribute to the great democracy of the Federal Republic of Germany and to Europe, of which it forms one of the pillars. The United Nations has conferred a distinction on a diplomat whose competence, experience and human qualities are appreciated by one and all. In the name of the friendship which unites our two nations and the trustful cooperation which they have established, allow me to say. Sir, how glad I am to see you presiding over the work of this Assembly.
161.	I should also like to express once again my gratitude to our Secretary General for the distinguished services he has constantly rendered to the United Nations, and for his skill, his authority and his talent.
162.	Finally, I am happy to greet the young State of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as it enters our Organization.
163.	Last year I began my address here by stating that in spite of the upheavals and dangers that had threatened it. The global peace of the world had been preserved for over 30 years. In addition to being a statement of fact, my words were also grounds for hope and an act of faith in the future.
164.	Why does this observation today appear almost unseemly? Why has the hope it brought us given way to a mute feeling of uneasiness?
165.	The reason is of course, the events taking place at this very moment on the Iranian border which, quite rightfully, are in our minds and deeply concern each and every one of us. But in reality—since the uneasiness reaches further back—it is above all because the world has witnessed a number of serious events over the past year, because disturbing trends have developed and, although world peace has not been broken, the confidence we placed in the soundness of its foundations has been shaken.
166.	In fact nothing, unless it be peace itself, is more important than that confidence. It is that confidence that has deteriorated. It is that confidence which must be restored; no task is more urgent.
167.	Never, perhaps, have our peoples and our States been more keenly aware of the solidarity of their destinies and the fragility of peace. Similarly, never before has it seemed so necessary to counter the blind workings of fate with clear-sighted analysis, courageous action and effective structures for international cooperation: a clear-sighted analysis in order to assess, without empty complacency, the gravity of the crises besetting us, and also to acknowledge that, directly or indirectly, those crises affect us all; courageous action in order to reject the dangerously simple recourse to force and to seek with determination the only solutions that are valid, namely, those of law and justice; lastly, effective structures for international cooperation in order to ensure that, at all levels of responsibility and organization within the international community, selfish interests and ideological preferences make way for the higher needs of peace.
168.	It is to this threefold aim of clear-sightedness, courage and cooperation that I have come here to make France's contribution.
169.	It would be both simplistic and incorrect to attribute the critical world situation to a single factor. The new element introduced into the situation by the current military confrontation between Iran and Iraq should be sufficient to remind us of this. We know well that whether longstanding or recent, political or economic, there are many causes of tension. We are aware that they are responsible for the proportions and gravity of the critical world situation. We should not, we cannot ignore any of them.
170.	The critical situation has taken on a very special significance since the intervention of the Soviet army in Afghanistan. The Afghan crisis is not simply an addition to other crises; it is of a different order of gravity and so are its implications, for three main reasons.
171.	Looking beyond the tragic suffering it is inflicting on 15 million Afghans, the crisis calls into question, first and foremost, respect for a fundamental and universal principle, namely, national independence, the right of a people to determine its own destiny. This cannot be concealed, however artfully the situation is presented.
172.	The issue is also the fate of a country and a region whose security and stability are essential to world equilibrium and peace.
173.	Lastly, the issue involves the conduct of one of the two Powers which alone have the means to start a global conflict and on which special obligations devolve by virtue of this fact.
174.	The crisis in Afghanistan also has other implications. One has only to look at its consequences in East West relations: the course of detente has changed for the worse and momentum has been lost; a shadow has fallen over the prospects of the Madrid Conference; efforts towards disarmament are at a standstill in some places and have been interrupted in others.
175.	It is pointless to think that the crisis in Afghanistan can be reduced to local or regional proportions. By degrees it has come to affect international relations as a whole. It has repercussions on other crises; it increases their dangers and makes them more difficult to resolve.
176.	I am thinking in the first place of the Middle East. The conflict which continues there and which is growing more acute is as old as our Organization itself. How many hopes have been disappointed over the past 30 years, how many paths explored that led nowhere? To limit myself to the last 12 months, how can one fail to note once again, with sadness, that in spite of the efforts made and even in spite of the progress accomplished, thanks to the evacuation of a large part of the Sinai, when it comes to fundamentals the end is far from being in sight.
177.	What is more, the unilateral and illegal decisions of the State of Israel, whether in regard to the West Bank or more recently to Jerusalem, are new impediments to the search for a peaceful settlement.
178.	Lastly, what can one say of the attacks on Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and on the mission and authority of the United Nations Force in that country? The friendship that links France to Lebanon and my country's role in UN IFIL make these actions all the more abhorrent to France.
179.	Is it conceivable to imagine the situation in that region of the world continuing without presenting the gravest dangers to peace?
180.	As regards Southeast Asia, last year we deplored the occupation of Cambodia by the Vietnamese army. This occupation continues. The Cambodian people have escaped annihilation only thanks to the massive humanitarian effort by the international community. The conflict of which they have been the unfortunate object has even recently threatened to spill over Cambodia's very borders.
181.	Concerning southern Africa, the satisfaction we feel at welcoming the presence of the delegation of an independent Zimbabwe to our Assembly should not blind us to the slow pace of progress in Namibia's decolonization nor to the obstacles still blocking its path. Moreover, it should not cause us to forget that in South Africa the system of apartheid maintains millions of human beings in a state that is an offence to human rights and to the dignity of Africa.
182.	I shah not dwell on the latest developments in the crisis between Iran and Iraq, except to say that it is vital to avoid interventions that might widen the conflict, to prevent interference in freedom of navigation in the Gulf, which is of worldwide importance, and lastly to foster the «;arch for a political solution. That is what France requests. That is what the European Community requests. That is what we expect of the consultations currently taking place on the initiative of our Secretary General.
183. Afghanistan, the Middle Fast. Cambodia, southern Africa, those major areas of crisis are by themselves sufficient to warrant the most serious concern.
184.	The picture would, however, be incomplete if I did not mention the formidable problem which forms the backdrop to them all, namely, the problem of hunger and development.
185.	The recent debates of the special session of the General Assembly on that subject are fresh in all our minds. They did not enable us to reach complete agreement. That was a serious disappointment. We must not resign ourselves to that setback, however. What is at stake is, indeed, far too important. It commits us all, morally, economically and politically.
186.	Hunger, poverty and underdevelopment do more than breed misery. They feed frustration and lead to despair. They are felt to be the worst injustices of all and are a permanent factor of instability.
187.	Such, then, is the state of the world. We should not be lulled by the comforting illusion that crises will take care of themselves and problems will be solved of their own accord. But we must not give way to discouragement either.
188.	Because there are, indeed, solutions to those problems. I should even venture to say that they are within our grasp. They are based on the principles that form the foundation of our international community. Those principles are embodied in our Charter. They give us the law as our rule, and dialogue and consultation as our methods.
189.	Law implies self-determination for peoples, independence and security for States, dignity and equality for mankind. Dialogue and consultation mean the refusal to accept unilateral action and the condemnation of recourse to force.
190.	In the light of current events, those time-honoured words, which we mistakenly view as worn out acquire an immediate practical value. They provide a much needed compass that can guide us through the turbulent waters the world has entered. That compass will show us that, despite differing circumstances in the four crises that, in the long term, weigh most heavily on international relations—I refer here to Afghanistan. Cambodia, the Middle Cast and Namibia—the same causes lead to the same effects, the same obstacles stand in the way of the same goals, the same problems call for the same solution.
191.	In Afghanistan the goal is the right of the Afghan people freely to determine its own future. What are the obstacles? The first is the intervention of a foreign army; the second is the temptation to turn that country into a stake or a threat. The first obstacle must be removed and the second avoided. The two things must go hand in hand. So the States that are in a position to influence Afghanistan's destiny by virtue of their close proximity or power must agree to eliminate those two obstacles. If they pledge to respect Afghanistan's sovereignty, if they cease trying to bring it into their zone of influence and. more importantly, if they refrain from introducing military forces into that country on maintaining them there, that will be enough to restore to the people of Afghanistan their freedom and independence, to give equilibrium and calm to the region, and to give security and hope to the world.
192.	In Southeast Asia the goal is to lead ill-fated Cambodia out of the hopeless impasse in which it has been locked by a conflict that is beyond its control and foreign to it. The Khmer people did not escape the barbaric oppression of a bloodthirsty tyranny in order to submit to the protector-ship of someone else. That people is entitled, after all its tribulations, to live in freedom and stand on its own feet. The countries of the region are entitled to have among them a partner that wants to practise peace and friendship with all its neighbours. France has known that people long enough to realize that, left to itself, it would aspire to no more than that. The military occupation still has to end and an agreement has to be reached if Cambodia is to re-emerge free, peaceful and neutral. Providing those two conditions are met, the accumulation of physical and human ruin can be rebuilt and a lasting peace restored throughout Southeast Asia.
193.	As far as Namibia is concerned, no one can any longer dispute the fact that that country is entitled to accede to international sovereignty, or that the genuine independence it seeks can come only from the free choice of the peoples living there. To create the conditions to make that possible, here again, the obstacles standing in the way must be cleared. In this case, that means neutralizing those forces which, by their presence or their action, could unfairly influence the outcome of the national elections. The example of Zimbabwe shows that stability in southern Africa could only gain thereby.
194.	What is true in all those cases is also true of the Arab Israeli conflict. Complex though the many factors in that situation may be, the basic facts are still analogous. Two rights are in conflict in the territories now under military occupation—which occupation neither confers legitimacy nor provides a basis for peace: they are the State of Israel's right to security and the Palestinian people's right to self-determination. Neither can be affirmed by negating the other. Passionate and violent confrontation must be replaced by rational and fair reconciliation. It will then become clear that those rights, far from being incompatible, can become complementary, providing that the guarantee of one and the exercise of the other are equally ensured in the framework of an overall settlement based on withdrawal from the territories occupied since 1967 and the universal recognition of Israel's boundaries. The way must be paved for the indispensable negotiations in which all the interested parties, and therefore the Palestine Liberation Organization must necessarily participate.
195.	In every case, in view of the dangers raised by crises, there can be only one response: the rule of law, and not the rule of force, is the key to peace.
196.	That applies just as clearly to the threat weighing on the future of the world in the shape of underdevelopment which is persisting and in some cases, is growing worse.
197.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly, which was held in this same hall a few weeks ago, made no mistake about that subject. True, the session did not come to an agreement; but lei us at least give it credit for having emphasized the importance of the subject and for having pointed the way for us to proceed on the crucial subjects.
198.	While there was no formal adoption of a text, the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade won a consensus. Aims were defined, main lines mapped out and pledges made. There is no need for these to be modified. France, for its part, will uphold them firmly.
199.	Next, resolution S-11/4 which was adopted by the Assembly with regard to the least developed countries expressed a deep-rooted, widespread conviction. The new international economic order must operate to the benefit of all but primarily to that of the poorest and the most impoverished. This priority and the concrete measures it implies can no longer be forgotten. They will serve to guide France's actions.
200.	There remains a last obstacle before global negotiations can be opened and the balanced text proposed by the Chairman of the negotiating group provides us with the means to overcome it. My country, which within the framework of the European Community has consistently directed its efforts towards compromise, believes this text should be acceptable to all. It invites this General Assembly not to disband without arriving at the agreement that is indispensable on this point if global negotiations are to begin by 1981. Indeed, my country could not understand how procedural differences could prevent or delay what must constitute a major step in the construction of a new international economic order.
201.	The critical period we have entered calls for a longer term effort to strengthen the structures of international cooperation at all levels: first, the world level, then the level of East West relations and. lastly, the level of regional cooperation.
202.	The world level is pre-eminently the level on which, within the framework of our Organization, universal law is both defined and affirmed. All States are equally called upon to play a part in shaping that law. No State can escape its duties.
203.	That is why it is so important for the membership of our Organization to be enlarged by the entry of new States and why its activities benefit from their participation. In particular, that is win my country is glad to see China playing a more and more active role in the work of our Organization after having been for too long unjustly kept outside.
204.	The law we want to see become the norm must henceforth be a universal one.
205.	This law must be universal with regard to human rights, which it defines and protects and whose progress it untiringly ensures, That is also why the World Conference on the status of women, "held at Copenhagen, has evoked such a wide response in all quarters. That is also why so many countries, among them France, have taken and are continuing to take a stand—in spite of the friendship they continue to bear towards the Iranian people—against the violation of law constituted by the holding of American diplomats as hostages in Teheran. By liberating them, Iran will once again assume its place within the international community.
206.	This law is universal, also, with regard to defining a new international economic order and with regard to the question of disarmament. It applies even beyond the context of the global negotiations which, as 1 have already said, France firmly expects to see started in 1981, and the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea is a good and important example of this universality. On this subject, I should like to welcome and express the great hopes aroused by the progress that has recently been achieved in this area and that augurs well for a favourable conclusion in the near future. By the same token, France, which has pleaded more strongly than any other country for disarmament to become the concern of us all, is extremely pleased with the new impetus given to the work of the Committee on Disarmament at Geneva, from 5 February to 29 April and from 12 June to 9 August this year, and with the birth of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, which is now assured.
207.	Finally, the law is universal in the political area. False realism cannot make us accept as irreversible situations which have been created by force alone. When law is violated, silence acts as an accomplice. One cannot support the self-determination of peoples in one area and show indifference to it in another.
208.	Law, like peace, is indivisible. It would be a mistake to think it is powerless when it expresses itself through the unanimous voice of the international community. In this respect, the role of our Organization is one that cannot be replaced. Its effectiveness is in direct proportion to the support we give it.
209.	However important it may be to strengthen the structures of international order on a world level, we cannot forget that the relationship between Fast and West remains, in many respects, one of the key elements of that order.
210.	At this level the main factors hinge on two States, which are called superpowers precisely because they alone have the power to thrust the world headlong into general conflagration. These factors hinge first on their conduct and next on their relations with each other.
211.	As far as their conduct is concerned, my country is the friend and ally of one of them. Looking beyond ideological differences, it has with the other relations of cooperation which it values and hopes to be able to maintain and develop. In the past my country did not conceal its feelings about United States policy in Viet Nam. Today it is compelled to say that the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan is unacceptable; that no security considerations can justify such action and that it is essential, in the interests of everyone—and that includes the Soviet Union itself—to find a political solution to the crisis that is consistent with the legitimate aspirations of the Afghan people and the requirements of international peace.
212.	Next, as far as the relations between the two superpowers are concerned, it is in the first place up to those that possess the most formidable arsenals and are constantly striving to increase and perfect them to put an end to the arms race. Last year, the conclusion of the SALT II agreement offered some hope in this direction. Although this undoubtedly was not genuine disarmament, it at least constituted a beginning, and I said at the time that France recognized the importance of the step that had just been taken. Even though I understand the extent to which the international climate puts a strain on that agreement, I should like to repeat here that my country hopes to see it take effect as soon as possible.
213.	In addition to the world dimension and the East West dimension of international relations, there is increasingly nowadays a regional dimension.
214.	There are, of course, large continental organizations such as the Organization of American States and the Organization of African Unity, and they are constantly reaffirming their vitality and usefulness.
215.	But there are also other new associations which arc demonstrating their solidarity and taking common initiatives and actions on a more limited scale. The phenomenon is too widespread not to reflect a profound need. We may rest assured that these groupings, associations and communities will be the pillars of peace and the relay stations on the road to the development of the world of tomorrow. Many examples show that they have already begun to do just this and that the hope is already in the process of becoming a reality.
216.	We all remember that the so-called frontline States made an essential contribution to the decolonization of Rhodesia at its most delicate stage. We all remember the initiatives taken by the Islamic Conference and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN). I also have in mind the efforts made by a number of West African countries to help recreate the conditions needed for national reconciliation and civil peace in Chad. I should also like to pay a tribute to the appeal made recently by the President of the Republic of Djibouti for a truce and a negotiated settlement in the Horn of Africa.
217.	Lastly, in mentioning the role of the European Community, I should like to recall that France was one of its founding members. The nine member countries are not satisfied merely to cast a brotherly look towards those new associations. They have established direct contacts with several of them, with ASEAN in particular and the Andean Pact.  The nine Community members are preparing to take new initiatives. As a European community, they have long devoted the main part of their efforts to contributing to development. They will continue to do so. But their action is increasingly directed also towards detente and peace. They are less able than ever before to retreat into indifference or a wait and see attitude in the face of the increased dangers. They are no longer satisfied simply to make their voice heard. They have decided to make their presence felt. The mission that Mr. Thorn, current President of the nine members of the European Community, recently undertook to the Middle East on their behalf both implies and announces that decision.
218.	Periods of crisis are not the time to stay on the sidelines or abdicate responsibility; they are, on the contrary, a time for responsibility and initiative. The State on whose behalf I speak is the first to be aware of this. France is committed to the free determination of peoples, both for itself and for others; it has shown this many times over the past 20 years. It respects the free choice of the peoples for which it has responsibility. It did so only recently by terminating, on the date arranged, the condominium it had administered with Great Britain in the New Hebrides. It would not allow this free choice to be dictated by others either. France would not allow predetermination to take the place of self-determination.
219.	France has experienced the oppression and the trials of war. It understands the suffering caused by violence, intolerance and poverty, and it opens its borders wide to refugees of all origins who seek asylum on its soil.
220.	France is party to no conflict and has claims against no one. But it knows the price of security and it is determined to pay it. Having formed many faithful friendships on five continents over the course of a long history, France is open to cooperation with everyone. But it will never compromise on its independence.
221.	Do not be surprised if France speaks in grave tones today. Conflicts are multiplying and becoming entrenched; international dialogue, when it is not actually interrupted, does not even manage to get started; and whether the subject is detente, disarmament or peace, it looks as if the world does not dare either to deny these principles or to advance them further.
222.	In concluding today on a note of warning and an appeal. France is remaining true to its tradition and its calling. France, like every other State, has national interests to protect, but it recognizes no higher interests than those of peace, justice and progress for mankind.
﻿Mr. President, may I first congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at this thirty-fifth session. You have taken on a task which demands many qualities, not least stamina, firmness and tact. It is a task for which your distinguished record at the United Nations has shown you to be well qualified. I offer you the best wishes of the British Government and of its representation at the United Nations in the weeks and months ahead.
2.	In so doing, I wish also to join those who have expressed their appreciation of the efficient and statesmanlike way in which your predecessor, Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania, conducted the business of the presidency over the past year.
3.	Since I last addressed this Assembly 12 months ago, many terrible things have happened in the world. There has been much cruel and cynical defiance of the principles on which our Charter is based. It would be difficult to say that the world is a safer, more prosperous or happier place today than it was a year ago. Indeed, within the last few days the emergence of a fresh conflict in the Middle Eastern region has given us further cause for anxiety. The tasks confronting all of us remain formidable.
4.	But what has happened during the last 12 months has not all been bad. The great majority of the States Members of this Organization have observed the Charter. And things have happened to inspire us and to persuade us, if persuasion were needed, that conflicts can be resolved; that peaceful negotiations can uncover compromises on which warring parties can settle their differences; that perseverance, goodwill and realism, here at the United Nations and elsewhere, can end wars and save human lives.
5.	When I last addressed the Assembly, war was still raging in that country which is now called Zimbabwe and which, last 25 August, was welcomed as the one hundred and fifty-third Member State of this Organization. That conflict had been going on for 14years— some, I suppose would say longer. But long, complex and, at times, painful negotiations succeeded in finding a basis on which it could be ended and on which the people of Zimbabwe could be given the opportunity to decide for themselves how and by whom they should be governed. I should like to suggest that, as we enter this thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly, the example of Zimbabwe should inspire us to search all the harder for peaceful, practical and realistic— and I cannot emphasize the last adjective too much— solutions to the major problems that confront the world today.
6.	Before briefly surveying those problems, I should like to say a word about the eleventh special session, devoted to development and to international economic cooperation that has just ended. The United Kingdom supported that collective attempt to set a framework for development over the next decade. It was a positive act that accorded well with the ideals of our Charter. Britain accepts, as we all do, that many developing countries face immense social and economic problems. A common effort is essential to ensure that the world economic system evolves to meet the needs of all. But, in making that effort, we must not weaken the foundation of the world's trading, monetary and financial system which has been built up gradually over the years and which has seen an increase in world prosperity unprecedented in human history.
7.	I am glad that the special session was able to agree on an International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade and on a resolution concerning the least developed countries . I am disappointed that it proved impossible to reach agreement on procedures for global negotiations. But discussions will continue during this General Assembly. We shall work for a successful launch of the global negotiations on a generally acceptable basis.
8.	Meanwhile, I should point out that, despite our own domestic economic problems, the aid programme of my own country is substantial. It is the fifth largest among the aid programmes of the industrialized countries and the seventh highest as a percentage of gross national product. But aid is only one factor in the development process. Private investment and private flows are also essential. In 1978, for example, net private flows from the United Kingdom to developing countries amounted to $8.7 billion, or 2.8 per cent of our gross national product. Trade too is vital. In 1979, 18 per cent of Britain's total imports came from developing countries. They were worth $19 billion, or 4.6 per cent of our gross national product. In addition, we continue to work with our partners in Europe to increase aid, trade and investment for the benefit of developing countries. For example, through the Second ACPEEC Convention of Lome signed at Lome on 31 October 1979, the European Community has given to 59 countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific guaranteed access to our markets for an assured quota of their products. That Convention has also provided and does provide aid and. technical cooperation on a very large scale.
9.	I should now like to refer to some of the major conflicts which are on the agenda of this session and to offer some ideas, which I promise will be brief, about how, in the view of the United Kingdom Government, progress can be made towards peaceful solutions.
10.	The Middle East conflict is, above all, one which, in our view, cries out for negotiations leading to a peaceful solution. The violence has gone on far too long. Negotiations are bound to be a lengthy and complex process, and they can hardly succeed unless a calmer atmosphere can be created than that which prevails today. Britain appeals again to all concerned to refrain from inflammatory acts and statements. Such restraint would be a major contribution to the attainment of the goal of peace.
11.	The British Government welcomes the news that the leaders of Egypt, Israel and the United States are to meet again before long. In the meantime Europe has not been inactive. Britain and its partners in the European Community committed themselves to search for common ground and to gain acceptance of the principles set out by their Heads of Government in the declaration which they issued at Venice on 13 June this year. We believe that these principles, and only these principles, can form the basis for a just and lasting settlement.
12.	I said earlier that the great majority of States Members of the Organization had been faithful to the Charter. I wish I could say "all". We are pledged to respect the sovereignty of others. We are pledged to refrain from the threat or use of force in international relations. Nine months ago both of those principles were violated by a country which is a permanent member of the Security Council. I refer, of course, to the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union. One hundred and four Member States voted in this Assembly to condemn it. Nine months later, no end to the conflict is in sight. One million Afghans have sought refuge outside their own country. Tens of thousands of Soviet troops remain there; but they have failed to subjugate the people of Afghanistan. Here, too, let there be a political solution—a solution which will remove Soviet forces from Afghanistan restore to the people of that country their sovereignty and their independence and enable them to choose for themselves how they shall be governed.
13.	The occupation of Afghanistan is not the only violation of the United Nations Charter that we have seen in Southwest Asia in the past 12 months. The detention of the American hostages in Iran is another. International law and common humanity require their immediate release. I take this occasion to remind the Iranian authorities of their obligation under international law to protect the rights of all foreigners residing in their country. I am, of course, especially concerned for those British subjects who are at present detained in Iran and to whom my country's representatives have been denied any access.
14.	Speaking of violations of the Charter, the United Nations surely cannot ignore the grave situation that has developed in the past 48 hours between two Member States. Judging by what they themselves have announced, Iran and Iraq are now in a state of undeclared war. I share the view and the fear expressed yesterday by the Secretary General that this conflict could have serious and unpredictable consequences and I echo his call for the utmost restraint, for an end to the fighting and for a negotiated settlement. This surely is no more than the United Nations has a right to expect from two of its Members. Therefore I welcome the fact that, on the Secretary General’s initiative, the Security Council will be meeting in informal consultations here this afternoon.
15.	Acts of terrorism against diplomatic and consular premises and staff have increased alarmingly in recent years. They threaten the basic fabric of international relations. It is our common duty and our common interest to condemn such acts and to ensure that international terrorism, whatever form it may take, is never allowed to achieve its objective. The British Government is glad that this session's agenda includes proposals to enhance the safety of diplomatic and consular representatives.
16.	An increasingly worrying phenomenon in recent years has been the mass exodus of refugees from their own countries. When the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was set up as a "temporary" organization nearly 30 years ago, there were 1.2 million refugees in the world, mainly in Europe; there are now nearly 16 million refugees and displaced persons, principally in Africa and Asia—three decades of achievement by the international community. We cannot undo the tragedies that have occurred, but it is not too late to remedy their consequences.
17.	Let us take just one case, that of Cambodia. That country is a picture of the human misery that results if the Charter of the United Nations is not respected. The Vietnamese invasion and occupation of Cambodia have created tension and conflict in Southeast Asia. The stand taken by the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN] has my Government's full support. We believe that there must be a political solution but that there cannot be such a solution without the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Cambodia. That must be the first aim of any negotiations.
18.	Meanwhile, the United Nations is doing what it can to alleviate the plight of the people of Cambodia and of the refugees. I pay a tribute to the efforts of the United Nations agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross [ICRC] and the many nongovernmental organizations which have mounted the relief programme in Cambodia, often in conditions of personal danger. By the end of this year, the joint UNICEF/ICRC operation alone will have spent some $500 million, or $100 for each Cambodian. But there are limits to what we can achieve by humanitarian means. So long as there is no political solution, so long will the suffering continue.
19.	Another area of tragic armed conflict is Namibia. Here too a political solution must be found by negotiation. But, unlike the position in the other area, here there already exists a plan approved by the Security Council and negotiations are already well advanced. The British Government remains firm in the belief that the United Nations plan provides the only sure route to a peaceful and democratic settlement with general international recognition. We shall continue to work with the Secretary General and the African States most closely involved to achieve the long overdue agreement on implementation of this plan.
20.	I have already referred to Zimbabwe's advance to independence and to membership in the United Nations. That has given my Government great satisfaction, which 1 know is shared by every Member of this Organization. But this new Member of our Organization needs more from us than congratulations. It needs substantial aid to rebuild its economy from the ravages of civil war. My own Government has pledged $180 million of aid to Zimbabwe over the next three years. We have cancelled $53 million of official debt and rescheduled the remainder on favourable terms.
21.	Although a number of other offers of assistance have been made, I do not believe that the international community as a whole has yet done enough to put Zimbabwe back on its feet. The damage resulting from years of isolation and of war is enormous. The expectations raised by the peace settlement are high. An international effort to underpin the political and economic stability of Zimbabwe during its first few years as an independent State could secure its future prosperity and enable it to play an influential part in Africa. I believe it to be of the highest importance that such an effort should be forthcoming in the months ahead.
22.	As regards South Africa, the British Government's view is clear. We consider apartheid to be morally indefensible and politically unworkable. But if change is to come peacefully in South Africa, it will have to be a step-by-step process. We shall not achieve change, peaceful change, by increasing South Africa's isolation, or by ostracism, or by threats. We cannot know how fast changes will come to South Africa, but there are voices inside the country calling for change and we should not ignore them. What the United Nations can and must do is to continue to remind South Africa that apartheid is a system repugnant to all Members of the Organization and incompatible with its ideals and those of the international community as a whole.
23.	I should like to turn now to the efforts which are being made to deal with the larger and more general threats to international security.
24.	Mr. President, a few days ago you made an eloquent appeal for new efforts to halt the arms race. As you reminded us, the hopes attached to the Disarmament Decade of the 1970s were cruelly disappointed: global military expenditure continued to grow and arsenals of weapons multiplied. This is a field in which there are no short cuts. In arms control, above all, realism is called for. A comprehensive and step-by-step programme of attainable measures covering both nuclear and conventional weapons is the only realistic approach. Declaratory measures are of very little value; what matters is concrete results. The British Government will continue to work for agreements based on balanced and verifiable agreements. As we do so, we shall remind those with whom we negotiate that in military matters the key to building confidence between nations often lies in a readiness to publish information on such matters as budgets and force levels. The more is known, the less is feared; the more is concealed, the more is suspect.
25.	Arms control agreements depend on the existence of a climate of trust; they cannot create it. That too is a matter of realism. Arms control must go hand in hand with security. This hard fact is reflected in the outcome of the Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.  I know that progress in negotiations on nuclear disarmament has been slow, and that is frustrating. But I see no reason why our common interest in preventing nuclear proliferation should be diminished in any way. The British Government remains fully committed to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and is playing a full part in the search for solutions to the outstanding problems and for a renewed consensus.
26.	We remain committed to the undertakings we gave in 1975 under the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.  We believe that the Conference process can and should play a valuable role in the management of international relations in Europe. But popular faith in this process has been shaken by the actions of the Soviet Union, not least its invasion of Afghanistan, which violated at a stroke all the principles of the Final Act. We approach the second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, due to begin at Madrid in November, determined, first, to conduct a thoroughgoing review of the way in which the Final Act has been implemented and, secondly, to examine proposals for its future development.
27.	It should be clear from what I have said that the British Government continues to believe that the United Nations has an important role to play in the search for political solutions to the many problems that we all face. But if the Organization is to play that role, we must pay due regard to its structure and its management. We must be careful not to tamper with its institutions in such a way as to impair their ability to perform the functions assigned to them by the Charter.
28.	The Organization must set itself the highest standards of good management and economy. Here, obviously much depends on individuals. The United Nations is fortunate to have in its Secretary General someone who justly enjoys the respect of all Members and who in his tenure of office has set the highest standards. We must ensure that efficiency, competence and integrity remain the prime considerations in every appointment to the Secretariat. We must exercise restraint over the proliferation of meetings, which often only consume money and effort with no hope of practical results. We must make the best use of the institutions we have. And, at a time of worldwide economic difficulty, we must eliminate wasteful expenditure and curb the constant expansion of the Organization's budget. If new programmes are to be set up, we must find room for them by first identifying and then bringing to an end other programmes which are now obsolete or of little value.
29.	It is easy to expect too much of the United Nation, and it is too easy to decry its achievements. The United Nations provides the forum where ideals and realities come face to face. Our Charter embodies the ideals to which we should continue to aspire. The world supplies the yardstick by which to measure our progress. Our task is simple but gigantic: to seek year by year to bring the reality closer to the ideal.

﻿I extend to Mr. von Wechmar the warm felicitations of my delegation on his unanimous election to the presidency of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly. His nomination to that high office is a tribute to his personal qualities as an experienced and skilful diplomat. It is also fitting testimony to the dedication of his great country to the ideals of the United Nations, and his opening address amply demonstrated his personal devotion to the fundamental principles and purposes of the Charter. I wish him every success in his challenging assignment and pledge my delegation's full support in his endeavours.
138.	It is a matter of particular satisfaction for me to place on record the sincere appreciation of my delegation for the outstanding work performed by his predecessor, Mr. Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania. His presidency of the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session, as well as of the three special sessions during the past 12 months, was indeed an eventful one. The patience, skill, sincerity and unfailing courtesy displayed by him will long be remembered in the annals of the General Assembly.
139.	It is a pleasure for me to greet once again our distinguished Secretary-General. We admire the way in which he has been discharging the onerous and delicate responsibilities which the complexities of the international situation impose upon him. His travels and efforts straddling the globe, covering points of crisis and explosive situations, have helped defuse tension in our troubled world.
140.	I already had the opportunity at the eleventh special session to extend my congratulations to the freedom-loving people of Zimbabwe on the achievement of their hard-won independence and their membership in the United Nations. I should like once again to welcome Zimbabwe to our midst and to wish it all success in its exciting and difficult task of nation-building.
141.	It also gives me great pleasure to extend our warm and sincere felicitations to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, which has now become the one hundred and fifty- fourth Member of the Organization. We rejoice with them in their hour of triumph and joy and trust that their aspirations to a better and brighter future will be amply fulfilled in the years to come. India looks forward to establishing mutually beneficial relations with the new nation.
142.	The Indian delegation participates in this General Assembly in the context of a transformed domestic political perspective. India has had another general election since the General Assembly met last year. The people of India appraised the challenges that they had faced, reassessed the nature and quality of leadership required to meet them and massively reaffirmed their conviction in the leadership of Prime Minister Mrs. Indira Gandhi.
143.	The new Government in India is engaged in the difficult and enormous task of national reconstruction and regeneration of a pluralistic multilingual, multi-religious and diverse society, and this by democratic means. Intractable though our problems may seem, our national efforts to resolve them since our independence have borne results to a great extent. This has imbued our people with a sense of confidence and inspired them to the objective that India shall emerge as a strong, self-reliant and modern nation.
144.	It is also an abiding conviction of my Government and my people that India's future stability and development depends on the success of the international community in creating a world order characterized by durable peace. There is a national consensus, therefore, on the content and objectives of India's foreign policy. There is unanimity of opinion in India about the relevance of the principles of non-alignment and the imperative need for friendship towards all nations based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence.
145.	Developments during the past year have not been such as to bring credit to the international community as a whole. The collective behaviour of nation-States in recent months has only deepened the sense of insecurity and distrust in the world. New and ever more ominous strategic doctrines are being propounded, bringing the world closer to the cataclysmic outbreak of an all-out nuclear conflagration. The scientific genius of mankind is being exploited for the perverted purpose of manufacturing means of destruction, perhaps in the search for the "ultimate weapon" which, it is believed, I think quite erroneously, would enable one or the other group of States to impose its will on the others. Increasing recourse is being made to might in a manner which has threatened the national independence and integrity of small and medium States. The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States has been observed more in breach in a variety of ways, covert and overt. All means are considered legitimate in the pursuit of the objective of expanding spheres of influence. International economic relations continue to be marked by inequity, selfishness and short-sightedness, particularly by those who possess the means to bring about a change and to start the process to usher in a New International Economic Order. The wisdom which was evident last year when certain significant decisions were taken in the sphere of the North- South dialogue seems to have lost some of its momentum this year.
146.	Living as we do in this small and increasingly interdependent world, no one can completely escape responsibility for the current atmosphere of gloom, fear, frustration and diffidence. But the primary responsibility must rest with those who literally possess the power of life and death over all of us and who do not hesitate to wield that power, without caring too much for the consequences of their action. A few powerful nations are claiming and blatantly exercising what they consider their right to cause destabilization in any place and at any time and with any means of their choosing. It is obvious that the weak and poor nations cannot look upon this unenviable lot of theirs with equanimity. They have, therefore, to be eternally vigilant if they are to survive, if they are to preserve and promote the well- being of their peoples and if they are not to become pawns in the game of great-Power manipulation. They have to speak up on behalf of their mute millions, assert that they have no intention of acquiescing in the dangerous activity of big- Power brinkmanship and that they do not wish to face annihilation either by the deliberate design of callous Powers or by accidental errors of mindless machines.
147.	It is in this context that the policy of non-alignment assumes greater validity. Non-alignment is the embodiment of the aspirations of the vast majority of nations and peoples to protect their existence, their freedom, honour and dignity. The non-aligned movement is not directed against one or the other bloc. Over the decades it has come to represent a positive force—a force of life and not of death—in international relations which is now recognized even by those who had at one time ridiculed it. At the same time, the non- aligned movement has had to pass through certain vicissitudes. The general atmosphere of doubt and recrimination seems to have contaminated the movement to some extent. Internal problems within the movement have tended to affect its unity. We have to examine these problems closely and devise ways and means of ensuring the unity and continued effectiveness of the movement. While reserving these tasks for discussion at the forums of the non-aligned movement itself, I shall only express my confidence that, both by positive determination and by sheer necessity, non- alignment shall be restored to its original concept and sweep when it was devised to deal with global issues of detente, disarmament, decolonization and development.
148.	There is an organic relationship between these four issues. Progress in any one of them would help create the proper atmosphere for forward movement in the others. By the same token, setback in one leads to increasing difficulty in the others. The present international situation vividly illustrates their interrelationship. The collapse of detente has led to stalemate in disarmament negotiations and absurd increases in defence expenditures which, in turn, have prevented the developed nations from achieving what was expected of them in international economic co-operation and development or, at any rate, tended to provide them with an alibi for falling far short of expectations.
149.	It is a matter of considerable anguish to my delegation that the continent of Asia, which has given the world all its major religions and served as the main cultural pathfinder over several millennia, is at present the scene of most of the conflicts and much of the suffering caused by these conflicts—West Asia, South-West Asia and South-East Asia. The Indian subcontinent, I am happy to say, has been free from conflict for some years now, and it is my earnest hope and the constant endeavour of my Government to see genuinely peaceful and co-operative relations continue to develop in this area.
150.	In West Asia, the threat of a conflagration will continue to persist so long as the Palestinian problem is treated as a refugee problem and as long as the commitment of the United Nations to establish an independent State for the Palestinians in their homeland remains unfulfilled. Far from heeding the call of the United Nations to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories, Israel has unabashedly colonized Arab lands and illegally annexed the Holy City of Jerusalem in total disregard of its sacred heritage. I firmly believe, as I said a few weeks ago during the seventh emergency special session,  that a comprehensive solution to the problem of West Asia entails the following elements: the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State; the total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from all Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem; and the guarantee of the right of all States in the region, including Arab Palestine, to live within secure and recognized borders. A peaceful solution cannot be attained without the full and equal participation of the PLO, the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people, in any negotiations. Experience has shown that attempts at partial solutions without the participation of the PLO have neither succeeded nor contributed to peace in the region.
151.	The people and Government of India are saddened by the recent and continuing conflict between Iran and Iraq, two close neighbours of ours. Our cultural and economic ties with the peoples of the two countries are as old as history itself. Since our independence in 1947 those ties have become even closer and acquired new dimensions.
152.	Iran and Iraq are both developing countries, as in India. We cannot but express regret that the conflict will inevitably lead to retarding the process of economic and social development which is so vital to the needs of the peoples of the two countries. At the same time the conflict weakens the solidarity of the non-aligned and developing countries. We therefore urge Iran and Iraq to settle their differences peacefully, in accordance with the principles and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
153.	The developments in Afghanistan have been engaging the serious attention of the Government of India. India has historical and traditional ties with the people of Afghanistan. We are deeply concerned and vitally interested in the security, independence, stability and tranquillity of our friendly neighbour. Over the past months the Government of India has been in touch with the countries of the subcontinent, as well as other countries, in order to prevent the aggravation of these dangers and heightening of tension.
154.	We have consistently emphasized the inadmissibility of the use of force in international relations or intervention or interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States. It is also our firm belief that only by upholding the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States can peace and stability be preserved in the area. Observance of those principles would not prejudice the legitimate security interests of any State and, in fact, would go a long way towards safeguarding them. What is required is a dialogue among the parties concerned, without pre-conditions, so that the contours of a political settlement, acceptable to all, can emerge. I am satisfied that such a dialogue is possible, since most of the difficulties are essentially notional and at best technical and non-substantive. If the countries of the region are left in peace to work out their own destiny, without the competitive attention of great Powers, that will permit them to embark on relationships based on mutuality and a developing trust in bilateral negotiations as the best means of settling outstanding problems.
155.	India's relations with Kampuchea go back several centuries. Indeed, the temples of Angkor Wat bear testimony to the close interconnections between the cultures of our two countries. The gentle and peace-loving people of Kampuchea have suffered very greatly through no fault of their own. The world will not forget nor condone the calculated and heinous crimes perpetrated in the recent past by a cruel regime against the innocent and defenceless people of Kampuchea. It is a great irony that, while emphatic references are being made time and again to human rights, the first and foremost right of the Kampuchean people, namely, the right to live, has been glossed over conveniently. Politically motivated callousness seems to have crossed all limits when it is realized that remnants of the very same despotic regime are representing, as it were, their own victims of Kampuchea in this Assembly.
156.	The countries of Indo-China have been subjected to conflict, destabilization and war for far too long and should be allowed now to concentrate on the development of their economies and societies. The Government of India has decided to establish diplomatic relations with the Government headed by President Heng Samrin. This is an expression as much of the overwhelming majority of public- opinion within India as of our general policy of recognizing the reality of the political situation inside Kampuchea.
157.	We value highly our relations with countries of ASEAN and believe that the development of our relations with all our neighbours in South-East Asia will enable us to assist in the solution of the problems that confront them at the present time.
158.	Every objective analyst of the situations in South-West and South-East Asia must be convinced by now that extreme positions have not helped ease tensions in either region; on the other hand, they have only hardened attitudes and prolonged the sufferings of the concerned peoples. India's approach is based on the conviction that the search for a solution in both cases lies in political means and not through military force.
159.	There should be no illusion that India is seeking merely momentary peace. As we have repeatedly stated, we are against the presence of foreign troops or foreign bases in any country. But if we desire to move towards finding a positive solution, what is required is an assiduous and continued effort to devise suitable package solutions which take care of the concerns of all and succeed in eliminating outside intervention and interference. Willingness in this regard on the part of the concerned, howsoever partial, should be taken advantage of for furthering a solution and not being spurned out of hand. If only the efforts of influential countries had been bent in this direction, these problems would, I am sure, have already been well on the way to satisfactory solution. That has been India's approach, and I am glad to say that it has over the months begun to receive at least grudging approval by many. In this connection, I should like to make special mention of the beginning of a dialogue between Viet Nam and Thailand, with the good offices of the Secretary-General. This is the right direction, and I hope it will proceed to ultimate success in that region as well as elsewhere.
160.	The Indian Ocean has become over the past decade and a half the arena of increasing great-Power confrontation. The stresses and strains of their relationships have often been reflected in the corresponding arithmetic of their military presence there. That the littoral and hinterland States have expressed their unified and determined opposition to such military presence and called for its elimination in the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace in resolution 2832 (XXVI) is a fact of history which is often sought to be conveniently ignored.
161.	The current uncertainties in the political and security climate in the Indian Ocean as well as its environs, as evidenced by the frantic efforts to develop the Diego Garcia base, further underline the urgency of addressing ourselves to this central preoccupation. Both in the recently enlarged Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean, where we have welcomed the participation of the great Powers and major maritime users, and at the Conference on the Indian Ocean, to be convened during 1981 in Sri Lanka, India will clearly identify the key concern of the littoral and hinterland States in securing the effective implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. We are firmly committed to the convening of the Conference in 1981 in Sri Lanka and expect that the decision of the present session of the Assembly will contribute to that goal.
162.	On 1 October 1980 the President of Pakistan in his statement before the General Assembly [18th meeting] referred to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India. That reference, attacking as it does the territorial integrity of India, was unfortunate. Three times in 24 years Pakistan attempted to detach the State of Jammu and Kashmir from India by the use of force. It received a befitting response on each of the three occasions. In 1972, India and Pakistan signed the Simla Agreement, which provides for the settlement of all issues between the two countries through bilateral negotiations. But since 1977 Pakistan has repeatedly raised the issue of Jammu and Kashmir at the United Nations and other international forums. References are made to relevant United Nations resolutions on the subject, quite forgetting the fact that those resolutions have become irrelevant because of the action of Pakistan itself. In the face of such references, I am constrained to wonder whether Pakistan's adherence to the Simla Agreement has undergone a change. There is a clear contradiction between the expressed desire of Pakistan to normalize relations with India in accordance with the Simla Agreement and its pronouncements in various forums which attempt to set the clock back. India's stand, on the other hand, has remained constant, and we continue to be prepared to settle all matters with Pakistan through bilateral channels.
163.	There is an old Indian metaphor likening the world to a frog resting in the shadow of a cobra's hood. Such is the plight of peace in our age. The question of the relationship between ethics and power in international politics has long engaged the attention of both the philosopher and the practitioner of foreign policy in the nation State. Our principal concern in this nuclear age is, however, that the leadership of the most powerful nations of the world should consider not only the political appositeness of their foreign policy prescriptions but their consequences for the very survival of the world. We run the risk today of being carried on the wings of a collective paranoia. The situation calls for restraint and responsible behaviour so as to bring the world away from the edge of a nuclear catastrophe.
164.	Yet, judging by the current climate of international relations, the shadows of such a catastrophe have become darker. Not only have the expectations of the first Disarmament Decade, and especially those of the tenth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, been belied, but there has been a staggering, almost quantum leap in world military expenditure, which today totals nearly $US 500 billion. Familiar arguments of "deterrence" and doctrines of "balance of terror" are adduced to justify the continued escalation in the build-up of nuclear weaponry. New doctrines of limited nuclear war are being postulated which, by making nuclear war credible, increase the risk of such a war and even give it a semblance of respectability.
165.	All too often we are reminded of the dangers of an accidental nuclear holocaust being triggered off by human or technological error or by computer malfunction. The very existence of such weapons makes the possibility of system failures resulting in outright catastrophe frighteningly real. Over the years India has consistently argued that the only effective guarantee against the use, threat of use or accidental use of nuclear weapons is the total elimination of such weapons. Their use has been declared a crime against humanity and contrary to the Charter of the United Nations. Pending, however, the total elimination of nuclear weapons, all States possessing nuclear weapons should give a binding commitment not to use them under any circumstances.
166.	India is firmly of the view that, like the Geneva Protocol of 1925, which completely forbids the use of biological and chemical weapons, a convention on the total prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would be a most desirable objective which should be pursued energetically by the international community.
167.	We understand that the United States and the USSR are scheduled to resume shortly their dialogue on some aspects of the question of curbing the arms race. This is a welcome development.
168.	We have noted the proposals put forward by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union on urgent measures for reducing the danger of war. My delegation will give those proposals its most serious consideration.
169.	It is pertinent to recall that it was India which first brought the problem of the proliferation of nuclear weapons to the attention of the United Nations in 1964 by inscribing in the agenda an item entitled "Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons". Our approach was based on the premise that both horizontal and vertical proliferation were integral parts of a problem which had to be dealt with as a whole. This concept was endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution 2028 (XX), which declared, inter alia, that any treaty "should embody an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear and non-nuclear Powers".
170.	Unfortunately, this concept was deliberately altered in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, concluded in 1968. If the Treaty has become an unworkable document, it is only because it has adopted the narrow and illogical approach of addressing itself only to the question of horizontal proliferation. The conclusion of cartel-type arrangements, the attempts to impose full-scope safeguards and discriminatory constraints on the peaceful nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States are all aimed at perpetuating a kind of nuclear feudalism which is unrealistic, illogical and unacceptable.
171.	India is opposed to nuclear weapons. On the other hand, the Government of India is firmly committed to the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. We would oppose any moves or measures which are discriminatory in nature and which come in the way of our programmes to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The question of non- proliferation of nuclear weapons should not be confused with the right of all States to develop, acquire and use nuclear energy and to determine their peaceful nuclear programmes in accordance with their national priorities, needs and interests.
172.	As we prepare to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the United Nations can legitimately be proud of its record of achievements in the field of decolonization. Except for a few pockets where colonialism and racism are desperately fighting the forces of nationalism, the world today is free from colonial domination and exploitation. While the independence of Zimbabwe and Vanuatu was first and foremost the result of the freedom struggle of their peoples, the contribution made by the United Nations has been significant.
173.	We were hopeful that the independence of neighbouring Zimbabwe would set an example for a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia. The United Nations plan for Namibia contained in Security Council resolution 435 (1978) had established a framework for the early independence of Namibia. Its acceptance by the parties concerned had marked a step in the right direction. But the racist South African regime has continued its dilatory tactics by raising extraneous issues and by questioning the very impartiality of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. We should certainly support every effort for a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia which would be to the satisfaction of the people of Namibia. However, we regret to note that even the most recent communication, dated 22 September 1980, received by the Secretary-General from the South African Government does not indicate that South Africa has any intention to implement the United Nations plan. The only means left to the United Nations in the present situation is for the Security Council to impose mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, so as to compel South Africa to abide by the wish of the international community. Meanwhile the Member States should continue to provide moral and material support to SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the people of Namibia, in its struggle for national liberation.
174.	Permit me to refer briefly to the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, which concluded its ninth session at Geneva recently. The Conference has been in session since 1973 and before that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction had reviewed the law of the sea and done preparatory work for about six years. During that long period, understanding was reached on a number of significant issues, including a 12-mile territorial sea, a 200-mile exclusive economic zone, limits of the continental shelf, a regime for marine environment and marine scientific research, and a regime and international machinery for the exploration and exploitation of the international sea-bed area and its resources, which have been recognized and acknowledged by all States as the common heritage of mankind.
175.	We note with satisfaction that the Conference was able at its last session to make progress on some more critical questions and we hope it will successfully conclude its work of finalizing a comprehensive convention on the law of the sea in the near future.
176.	The year 1980 marked the mid-point of the United Nations Decade for Women. Considerable progress has been made during the first half of the Decade in focusing the attention of Governments and peoples on the need for improving the status of women. Women in India have traditionally enjoyed pride of place in our society. Long before the International Women's Year and the Decade for Women, the Indian people had enacted into law equality of women in all respects. That was no accident, for it flows from the best traditions of our history and culture, and in particular of our struggle for independence, when men and women together accepted sacrifices and rejoiced in the dawn of freedom, I hope that the Programme of Action adopted at Copenhagen" will provide the guidance and framework for action-oriented programmes to work towards the implementation of the objectives of the Decade through the United Nations and other international forums.
177.	The year 1981 will be the International Year of Disabled Persons. There is a vast segment of mankind, estimated to be around 400 million, which, being handicapped in one way or another, is unable to live with the dignity which is the right of all human beings. The bulk of those unfortunate beings is in the developing countries. We in India intend to reinforce our efforts in the rehabilitation of the disabled and, more important, in the prevention of disability. We have already taken several steps, including the establishment of a National Committee, in preparation for the International Year of Disabled Persons.
178.	We have just emerged from the frustrating processes of the eleventh special session and the agonizing memory of its disappointing ending is still fresh in our minds. However constructively one may try to look at the outcome of the special session, one is unable to escape the conclusion that the failure was not so much because of the complexity of the task but because of the absence of political will and the incomprehensible stubbornness of a few—to be precise, just three States Members of this Organization. In their incessant quest for an orderly and co-operative approach towards a new international economic order, the developing countries were persuaded to accept a compromise text on procedures for the global negotiations. That was the irreducible minimum for securing a process that would have provided hope of finding solutions to the critical problems facing the world economy as a whole and the economies of the developing countries in particular. A vast majority of the affluent nations, whose fortunes are interlinked with the destiny of the developing world, also accepted the procedures worked out through extremely difficult negotiations during the special session. Not all of them could have found those procedures entirely satisfactory, but they responded to the imperative of interdependence and to the obligations implicit in it. And yet, in the final analysis, all those endeavours ended in total collapse and the international community was at the end left chasing the wisp of international co-operation and interdependence. It would be less than candid on my part not to affirm that those who prevented a consensus being reached must bear the entire responsibility for the failure of the special session.
179.	It would be appropriate to ask why the concept of interdependence does not seem to have received acceptance in practice, particularly in all developed countries. There is a view that the fact of interdependence either is not quite apparent or is not urgent enough to be taken into account in formulating current economic policies and decisions of developed countries. The dialogue as well as the argument based on interdependence, therefore, takes on a rather academic and unreal character and does not seem to carry conviction with the people of developed countries. That is the distinct impression one gets from their media, whatever the pronouncements of their political leadership. It is time that this hiatus in understanding was seriously taken note of.
180.	Of course the position is not the same in all developed countries or on all occasions in the same country. It would therefore not be correct to lump all developed countries together in that respect. There are distinct variations in the perceptions of the Governments and peoples of those countries and it would be both relevant and prudent to analyse them closely. The extent of the genuine realization of interdependence on the part of the Governments and peoples of the developed countries is the real measure of success which the North-South dialogue will achieve.
181.	Until three days back India was the Chairman of the Group of 77 in New York and, as such, articulated the aspirations of the developing countries. India will continue to endorse the stand taken by the Group of 77 as before and contribute its mite for the success of the global negotiations. The Group of 77 has taken a reasonable and balanced stand. We hope that in due course it will find a favourable response from developed countries, mainly through a process of appraisal of their own long-term interests, which can be achieved only through co-operation with developing countries. That process obviously needs a persuasive and positive effort on the part of all right-thinking and sober elements in both the developed and developing camps. The attitude of charity would be just as unreal and fallacious as the approach of obligatory expiation would be impracticable and counterproductive.
182.	The nature of the phenomenon that we witnessed at the eleventh special session is disturbing and its consequences ominous for the future of economic co-operation among nations. My delegation is concerned to hear arguments of domestic pressure inherent in a democratic set-up preventing adherence to or fulfilment of international covenants and agreements. Whether it is the law of the sea, where difficult negotiations over long years are promising to come to fruition soon, or multilateral trade negotiations on which agreement was reached last year at Tokyo, or other internationally binding agreements, their sanctity is being breached in the name of national compulsions and with increasing impunity. Is it very difficult, I ask the members of this Assembly, to infer from all this that a wilful departure is being made by those countries from the concept of inter-dependence and from the process of international co-operation?
183.	Thirty-three years ago, when we achieved our political independence, we deliberately chose the democratic path of government. Democracy to us became a way of life, permeating the intricate political process as well as the methodology of development. Like most other nations, we too faced the conflict between national sovereignty and international obligations implicit in our existence as a member of the world community. To the best of our ability and belief, we have never turned away from our international obligations, nor can we be accused of violating the sanctity of international agreements freely entered into by my country. Such a course often involved domestic sacrifices, but our democratic structure gave us sustenance and strength in remaining true to our international or multilateral obligations. It would be particularly unfortunate if the leadership of a democratic country were to plead helplessness in fulfilling valid international obligations on the ground of opposition in its legislature. This helplessness would, in fact, detract from the credibility of the democratic system itself in international relations. So those who are having recourse to this argument, for whatever reason or short-term exigency, are in reality undermining the validity of their own cherished system. My earnest appeal would be that this tendency be eschewed.
184.	So far as India is concerned, we are determined to continue our efforts to bring about an early resumption of the North-South dialogue. For our part, we would expect the few developed countries which have still not fully accepted the logic of global negotiations to join in the process that would make the resumption of the North-South dialogue possible. It is also my expectation that we should be able to see this movement in the course of the current session of the General Assembly so that the preparatory work for the launching of the global negotiations could be completed before the end of this year.
185.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly did manage to reach a consensus on the text of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, embodying the goals and objectives of an integrated process of economic and social development during the 1980s and the policy measures required to achieve those goals and objectives. It remains to be seen to what extent the commitments undertaken in the Strategy when it is adopted during this session, will represent unambiguous and unanimous agreements. This is true particularly in regard to official development assistance, industrial redeployment, international trade and monetary issues. Having said this, I would like to underline our satisfaction at the consensus that exists in regard to measures to meet the critical situation in the least developed countries.
186.	At this session the General Assembly is expected to consider and take appropriate action in regard to the suggestions made by the Secretary-General last July for overcoming the critical economic situation of many developing countries. We await the elaboration by the Secretary- General of his suggestions and trust that it will be possible for him to go into all relevant details, such as the feasibility of raising the amount required for additional assistance and operational arrangements for its disbursement among low- income countries most seriously affected by the current economic crisis.
187.	I should also like to refer to the policy measures for the most seriously affected countries that have been agreed to in the context of the International Development Strategy. The General Assembly resolution on the subject last year called upon the Secretary-General to submit an analytical report at the special session in 1980 and called upon all donor countries to consider in the meantime extending relief and assistance to the most seriously affected countries. While the special session was unable to consider the report of the Secretary-General in detail, the International Development Strategy does refer to agreed measures that will need to be urgently considered by the international community and this Assembly.
188.	Many years ago Jawaharlal Nehru, reflecting on the dilemma of his time over the futile attempts at disarmament, wrote:
"The real difficulty ... has been that there are two classes of countries—the satisfied Powers and the unsatisfied Powers, the dominant Powers and those that are suppressed, the Powers that want the present state of affairs to continue and those that want a change. Between the two there can be no stable equilibrium, just as there can be no real stability between a dominant class and a suppressed class .... Nothing proves the unreality and mockery of international politics today so much as the failure of all attempts at disarmament. Everybody talks of peace, and yet prepares for war."
189.	These words, written more than 40 years ago, have a ring of tragic prophecy. They are symptomatic not only of disarmament negotiations but of the entire gamut of international relations today. Sometimes, looking at great stretches of history, it is difficult to believe that the ideal of co-operation and working together for the common good has made much progress. And yet, if we are to avert a catastrophe, we should resolutely continue on the path of dialogue and co-operation and turn away from sterile polemics and confrontation. All of us perhaps perceive the danger and recognize the challenge, but the will to act has so far been sadly lacking. Let us, therefore, so readjust our sights and conduct our affairs that future generations may not condemn our times as yet another barren stretch in the history of man.
﻿Mr. President, at the outset I should like to express to you our congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly. Your vast experience and the outstanding qualities that you have exhibited in the realm of multilateral diplomacy ensure your ability to keep a firm grasp on the helm of the Assembly during this stormy period.
53.	Al the opening of this session a new State joined the ranks of the United Nations: Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. On behalf of the Government and people of Israel, I should like to welcome it to the Organization and wish it all prosperity and success as an independent and sovereign Stale.
54,	To my very grout regret, it is not possible to express satisfaction at the condition of the United Nations today, cither in general or from the specific perspective of my country. Indeed, it is questionable whether there remains much similarity or correlation between the noble ideals, principles and purposes which guided the founding fathers of the United Nations and the reality prevailing in the Organization today. The founders of this Organization saw in their vision a forum and a framework for the achievement and maintenance of peace between nations after the horrific experience of the Second World War, a horror which they had experienced at first hand.
55.	Perhaps the most cynical expression of the gap between the original vision and the reality prevailing in the United Nations today has been the refusal of this Organization, ostensibly dedicated to the peaceful settlement of disputes, to adopt and encourage the Camp David accords' and the subsequent Peace Treaty, which brought to an end decades of hostilities between Israel and Egypt and raised the possibility of expanding the peace process to embrace all of Israel's neighbours. This Organization, whose principal purpose is the promotion of peace among nations, has thus betrayed its own raison d'etre by rejecting an historic step towards peace and by playing into the hands of the enemies of peace, the rejectionists and the warmongers.
56. This unhappy phenomenon is not confined to the General Assembly. Out of the 18 debates which have been conducted thus far during 1980 in the Security Council, nine were devoted to subjects involving my country. Is there anyone who seriously believes that half of the world's international problems today are connected with Israel? We need only glance at a map of our region, the Middle East—which is just one region of the world—to sec that it is riddled from length to breadth with countless conflicts between States, between ethnic minorities and between different religious groups. Virtually all those conflicts have a history and a dynamic of their own, totally divorced from the Arab-Israeli conflict.
57. By way of illustration. I need only mention the situation in Afghanistan and. of course, the full-scale war between Iran and Iraq—a worrying outbreak of hostilities which has wide-ranging implications. That war between two States ruled by extremist, irresponsible and trigger-happy regimes threatens both regional and international security by putting at risk much of the world's regular supply of oil, That war, a struggle between two Moslem States, demolishes, in our opinion, the naive and groundless belief that the world's oil supply is dependent on a pro-Arab solution to the dispute between Israel and its neighbours. It has become all too clear that the solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict will not provide any miracle cure for the region as a whole or eliminate the many other grave conflicts raging in it. The ability of the United Nations to work for an end to the bloodshed in Iraq and Iran will be a yardstick of the Organization's ability to continue to fulfil its role for the encouragement and maintenance of peace.
58.	Important tasks have been allotted to the United Nations. Besides its role in the preservation of international peace and security, it also has a vital role to play in other spheres which require our earnest attention, in particular through the specialized agencies established for various purposes. But even the specialized agencies have been gravely compromised by the plague of politicization. Business-like debates and deliberations in them have become increasingly difficult—if not all but impossible to conduct—to the grave detriment not only of the agencies themselves but also of those whom they were set up to serve.
59.	While I am bound to express deep regret at the condition of the United Nations today. I must also express the hope that all Members of the Organization which share our concern and feelings of responsibility for its future will intensify their efforts both to bring the United Nations back to the ideals of its founders and to channel the specialized agencies back to their specific areas of concern.
60.	Among the subjects which have rightly been given a prominent place in the agenda of the United Nations are the state of the world's economy and the relations between the industrialized and the developing nations. The convening of the recent eleventh special session of the General Assembly attests to this fact. Israel took part in that special session with the intention of making a constructive contribution to its work. We therefore share the disappointment over the results of that event, which were not adequate. We sincerely hope that in the near future the efforts to have a constructive dialogue rather than confrontation will be resumed, so that those whose needs are greatest will not suffer the most.
61.	Despite our small size and limited resources, we have for decades devoted far greater efforts than might have been expected to assisting nations of the third world in the development of their economies and societies. Israel has shared freely the know-how which it has developed, as well as its experience as a small State in an arid and subtropical region, which has enabled us to make great strides over a period of a few short years.
62.	The problems encountered by Israel in the course of its social and economic development are similar to the problems facing much of the developing world today. Many of the solutions worked out in Israel can be applied directly by others. Despite the disappointments which my country has experienced, Israel continues to have deep sympathy for the struggle of the developing countries to ameliorate and advance the condition of their peoples and economies. Israel stands ready to continue to give of its know-how and to take a vigorous and constructive part in the efforts of the international community in the spheres of health, social services, agriculture, development of new and renewable sources of energy, and in every other sphere to which we can contribute.
63.	From this rostrum I should like to give expression to the anguish of our Jewish brothers in various parts of the globe. There is. it would seem, no end to the pain of the Jew in history. The suffering and persecution continue even today. And we, the people of Israel, feel responsible for the lot of every Jew who suffers anywhere.
64.	In the last year additional harsh limitations have been imposed on Jews who seek to leave the Soviet Union and emigrate to the State of Israel. Those restrictions conflict with the most basic human and national rights of peoples, and we are in duty bound to echo the cries of the Jews in the Soviet Union and appeal to the Government of that country to remove the restrictions and facilitate the immigration of Jews to Israel.
65.	We must also express anxiety over the condition of the tortured Jewish community in Syria, whose human rights are severely curtailed, and many of whom have been imprisoned and have had their property impounded. I would thus also appeal to the Government of Syria to respect the basic-human rights of its Jewish community, which it holds as hostages and which it prevents from leaving.
66.	The Jews of Iran have suffered painfully in recent months, and their situation is deteriorating from day to day. Many Jews have been thrown in gaol; others have been given the death sentence, in most cases on "charges" of contact with Israel. We know of the difficulties in dealing with the present regime in Iran, to which fundamental concepts of human rights and the norms of international relations seem foreign. But we hope that sight will not be lost of the situation of the Jews there who are perhaps among the most vulnerable of the minorities in that troubled land.
67.	Two years ago a development took place in the Middle East—a breakthrough which can appropriately be called historic. After serious negotiations between the parties, with the active and important participation of the United States, the Camp David framework and the subsequent Israeli-Egyptian Peace Treaty were signed by the leaders of the two countries and witnessed by the President of the United States. Israel made major concessions and took considerable risks by signing those agreements, l.et me cite only our withdrawal from the oilfields in Sinai, for there is no need for me to waste words on the significance and implications of that step in this day and age. Similarly I need only point to the strategic depth in Sinai which Israel has relinquished, as well as to the advanced air bases located in Sinai, the evacuation of which will be implemented in due course in accordance with the terms of the Peace Treaty.
68.	Israel believed that its concessions and sacrifices would be met with appreciation and understanding by the world community and that a long-awaited breakthrough would be achieved on the international scene. Not only has that not 06itte about, but many countries in the world have spared no effort to destroy that hard-won peace, and Israel continues to be the object of unending accusations and attacks.
69.	Nevertheless, the decision and determination of Israel remain firm to continue on the road to peace. Thus, in accordance with the Camp David framework, negotiations have taken place for the attainment of full autonomy for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judaea. Samaria and the Gaza District.
70.	Substantial progress has been achieved in these talks in certain fields, but the talks have, it is true, had their tips and downs and have even been suspended a number of times by Egypt. There is nothing exceptional or extraordinary about the difficulties encountered thus far in the progress of the talks. They reflect the complexities inherent in the subjects under discussion. The difficulties are familiar to any country which, at one time or another, has been engaged in complex negotiations involving multifaceted and long-standing problems.
71.	One area in which progress has been achieved in the negotiations is the modalities of the free elections to be held in the territories concerned. These procedures would make the proposed autonomy into one of the few—all too few— examples of free democratic process in the Middle East. Progress has also been achieved in the area of powers and responsibilities of the autonomy covering many aspects of the everyday life of the inhabitants of the territories in question.
72.	We certainly believe that autonomy can and must be established. All the parties to the Camp David framework are convinced that the process set out in that framework is the only one which is within the realm of the possible. All alternative suggestions for the solution of the problem at hand—ideas such as the holding of an international conference or the like—are devoid of real prospect or purpose. No one can really believe that the various elements in the Middle East which arc so much at odds with each other would attend a peace conference and achieve a positive outcome that would lead to a solution acceptable to all. Thus too the ideas entertained by the European Community, which do not take Israel's position into account, are only likely to encourage those who are opposed to peace.
73.	Those who genuinely seek peace should encourage the progress which has been achieved through the Camp David process. Let them also bear in mind and give due regard to the fact that, by proposing the idea of autonomy in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, Israel has taken on itself great risks for the sake of peace.
74.	We hope that the autonomy talks will be resumed in the near future. We also hope that the process of normalization of relations between Israel and Egypt will be intensified and will serve as the best possible proof and a living symbol of the fact that peace can and must take the place of war. The full significance of these peaceful relations should be grasped for what they are—and for what they may lead to—as the very corner-stone for peace in the region.
75. The leaders of Israel and Egypt have reiterated time and again their mutual commitment to the proposition that there will be no more war. Let us hope that the change which has come about in the Middle East with the signing of peace will be the opening for a positive and long-lasting transformation in the history of our conflict-ridden area. The strict adherence to the agreements by Israel, in accordance with their letter and spirit alike, is a guarantee of the continuation of the peace process. However, by itself it is not enough. We hope that all the others involved will act in the same way.
76. Much has been alleged against Israel in the name of the principle of self-determination for nations. We favour that concept, and we have proved that in the support that we extended to many States which have achieved their independence in our generation, in Africa, Asia and elsewhere. The Governments of those States and their peoples know that full well. But there is no connection between that principle and the perverted attempt to turn self-determination into the basis for the destruction of the Stale of Israel, as certain States are endeavouring to do. Anyone who is familiar with the ideology and the terminology of the murder organization that calls itself the PLO, as well as with the declarations of the various Arab rejectionist States, can see beyond all doubt that the term "self-determination", as they use it, is nothing more than a euphemism for the destruction of Israel.
77.	It should not be forgotten that the Palestinian Arabs have achieved their self-determination in Jordan, a State which is the Arab State in Palestine, by virtue of its history, territory, population, culture and all aspects of its national life. The establishment of a second Palestinian Arab Slate by distorting the principle of self-determination means the creation of an extremist and hostile base opposed to the very-existence of Israel. Hence we will not agree to a distorted form of self-determination, which in reality implies self-destruction for our ancient nation deeply rooted in its own land.
78.	The programme of autonomy which we have proposed for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, as accepted in principle in the Camp David frameworks, is the first practical proposal to be advanced to provide a dignified solution for the needs of the Arab population of those areas. It comes in place of all the empty declarations with which the Palestinian Arabs concerned have deluded themselves and have been deluded by other States and organizations over the years.
79.	One of the most vivid expressions of the rejection of all peace proposals by the Arab rejectionist States is to be seen in their unprecedented military build-up and in the armaments which they have received in recent years from the Soviet bloc or purchased from the United States and Western Europe. In the course of the last three years, orders for arms purchases by the larger Arab States have reached astronomic sums. The quantities of arms that were actually supplied have been equally staggering. There is no precedent for the amassing of arms on this scale in our region. Those arms are designated first and foremost for use against Israel. But the implications of that vast array of armaments ait not confined to my country alone. It also serves to inject war into the area at large.
80.	We call upon the United Nations to take due note of the military build-up by the Arab rejectionist States and to urge them to decrease their armament. For our part, we are prepared to lend a hand in any joint effort to bring about the limitation of arms in our region which is poised on top of a volcano.
81. I should like to address myself to another crucial aspect of disarmament. Israel has consistently supported resolutions of the General Assembly aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. This global problem, we believe, can best be solved by means of negotiated regional arrangements. Hence, since 1975, Israel has consistently advocated the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East on the Tlatelolco model. Israel believes that an international conference of all the Slates in the region and adjacent to our region should be held, leading to the conclusion of a formal, contractual, multilateral convention among all States of the region.
82.	We hope that in the course of this General Assembly, we shall find a suitable opportunity to give concrete expression to our views on this matter. In the meantime, I should like to reiterate my Government's position, which is that Israel will not be the first to introduce nuclear weapons into the Arab-Israeli dispute.
83.	In the last months, Jerusalem has been the object of attacks on Israel in various international forums. There has been much hypocrisy and cynicism in those attacks, For, truth to tell, never has the situation of the various religions represented in Jerusalem been better than that prevailing since the unification of the city by Israel in 1967. For 19 years, between 1948 and 1967, the eastern part of the city was under Jordanian occupation and barbed wire divided it in two. Places holy to the Jews were maliciously desecrated. Ancient synagogues and cemeteries were destroyed in a barbaric manner, and Jews were denied access to the Holy Places which are the spiritual life-blood of the Jewish people. It is not out of place to remark that the Moslem Arab citizens of Israel were also denied access to their Holy Places during that ignoble period. And where, I am bound to ask, was the voice of this Organization during that period".' Not once was it raised in condemnation of those illegal acts.
84.	On the other hand, since 1967. all—irrespective of religion and nationality—have been accorded free access to the city of Jerusalem and the possibility of worshipping at the Holy Places and shrines revered by them. Israel has assured the free and unfettered observance of the religious rites of all members of all faiths, who also administer their religious lives and their Holy Places without any outside interference. That is the truth well known to everyone who lives in Jerusalem and to everyone who has visited the city. There is no substance or basis to any claim to the contrary.
85.	There is no need for me to dwell at length on the bond between the Jewish people and Jerusalem. The Jewish people is the only people which has made Jerusalem its capital since it appeared as a nation on the stage of human history. Throughout the many years of exile inflicted on it. The Jewish people prayed three times a day, every day, for its restoration to Jerusalem.
86. For the last 150 years there has been a Jewish majority in Jerusalem. Whoever seeks to sever Jerusalem from Israel seeks to decapitate the Jewish people. We hope that nations that seek peace and know the reality which prevails in Jerusalem today will respect the city as the sovereign capital of Israel; a city which will not be divided again, in the same way as Israel respects the Holy Places of all religions and their freedoms in the city.
87.	I wish to conclude with a call in the spirit of the Prophets of Israel, who were a light and an inspiration for much of mankind. My call is for peace—peace which is at the very basis of the existence of the United Nations.
88.	We in Israel yearn for peace. We have done so since the first day of the restoration of our national sovereignty—in our Declaration of Independence, which was issued on the very day that the State of Israel was founded in 1948. In that Declaration, we extend the hand of peace and good neighbourliness to all the States around us and all their peoples. We have taken far-reaching steps and have made huge sacrifices for the sake of peace. But peace with Israel does not mean peace without Israel, or peace at its expense. Nor does it mean peace with a weak Israel deprived of its capital and with its wings clipped from the security and geostrategic viewpoints. With such an Israel peace will not be attained, because a weak Israel will be an object of unceasing attacks and destructive designs.
89.	I wish to call upon the Arab States which are our neighbours, and also upon the Palestinian Arabs living in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, to follow the dictates of reason and to join the peace process. I wish to call upon the other nations of the world to support this course and to prevail upon the Arab States to adopt it. The world at large, and not merely our region alone, will benefit from this.

﻿Sir, may I congratulate you on your election to the presidency. I know that, like your predecessor, Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania, you will carry out your responsibilities with firmness, courtesy and skill.
74.	As a Commonwealth member, New Zealand welcomes to the Assembly the delegations of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Zimbabwe. They bring, from different parts of the world, special perspectives which will help us all in considering the serious problems which face us.
75.	In welcoming these two new Members, we should not forget that other peoples are also moving rapidly towards independence. In our part of the world Vanuatu, in the most difficult circumstances, came to full nationhood. As a neighbour we were delighted to welcome the new Republic into the fellowship of the South Pacific Forum. We have watched with great sympathy the moves to greater autonomy by the island groups that make up the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. New Zealand's immediate partners, the people of Tokelau, are assuming increasing responsibility for the government of their tiny country.
76.	The South Pacific is coming to the end of a long period of constitutional change. Twenty years ago, when the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was adopted , New Zealand and Australia were the only independent countries in our region. Now there are some 13 independent or fully self-governing States. Some are represented here. In the course of time more will come, and the voice of the Pacific will be heard more insistently.
77.	As the United Nations has grown, its ways of doing business, as well as the scope of its activities, have changed. To some it seems a less effective, less purposeful Organization than it was. I know that this body is itself a reflection of the world around us—and that has been troubled enough. And yet it is difficult not to be pessimistic when we assess what has been achieved over the past year.
78.	Only last month the General Assembly met in special session to discuss development and economic issues. The session was convened against a background of mounting concern about the world economy. Every speaker at that session talked of the gravity of the present situation. Every speaker called for rapid change. Every speaker supported the launching of a new round of global economic negotiations.
79.	This was not mere rhetoric. During the past month I have spoken to many political leaders, especially from Asian and Pacific countries. It was crystal clear that all of us shared an overriding preoccupation with economic issues. Time and again I heard the same themes: terms of trade have deteriorated rapidly; inflation, most of it imported, is far too high; deficits are expanding at an unprecedented rate. The conventional answer—retrenchment—exacts a high economic price in terms of contraction of trade and stagnation of production. The political cost, not least in jobs lost and social disruption, is prohibitive. To cover their share of the total oil deficit, countries in our area have had to borrow heavily. For many of them, debt servicing burdens are already crippling. High interest rates and a good deal of nervousness on the part of the private banking system compound the problems of financing economic development in the face of the growing deficit problem.
80.	It is not surprising that Governments of developing countries—and quite a few in the more affluent world—are apprehensive, for tensions produced by economic forces induce political reactions.
81.	Yet at the recent eleventh special session the Assembly failed even to agree on procedures for carrying out the global negotiations, let alone to discuss an agenda. I can well understand the scepticism of those who ask whether the Assembly, or a derivative of it, is the best place in which to discuss complex international economic issues. I tend to agree with them. However, the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has shown that it is possible to resolve a wide and complicated range of such issues in a forum in which all Member States are represented. If we can draw some encouragement from that example, we should not forget how long the process has taken and how much had to be done outside the main meetings to develop a consensus about legitimate objectives and priorities. Above all, we should remember that the Conference on the Law of the Sea is succeeding because it organized its negotiations on the basis of actual situations and shared interests—not on the basis of political alignments and regional groupings. I must emphasize that we do not have a decade to make progress on the world's urgent economic problems. We now have less than one year.
82.	If we are to make similar progress on global economic issues, we must tackle them with new urgency. We shall have to accept that there is not going to be a revolutionary change of attitude on the part of the wealthy industrialized countries—whether of West or East. Progress will come gradually and probably most effectively by using the specialist bodies. A central forum may well—and should—give drive and coherence to those negotiations. However, let us not expect too much from it. It simply is not realistic to believe that some supranational forum can direct and determine the course of negotiations in bodies like IMF, GATT and FAO. It is for these specialized bodies to take the immediate steps that are so essential. Here again, progress has been much too slow.
83.	We could speed up the global negotiations more effectively if we were first to call together a more limited but broadly representative informal summit, as proposed by the Brandt Commission.  It may be that the outlines of a broad consensus on the way forward are more likely to emerge from such a meeting than from a gathering of 150 or more. That was the view of the regional Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, which I attended last month, at New Delhi. The Meeting of Finance Ministers of Commonwealth Countries in Bermuda was even more convinced of the need for action.
84.	What we discuss is at least as important as where we discuss it. It has concerned me that recent discussions in New York have become bogged down in proposals for an agenda which is all-encompassing and unselective. The consensus of the heads of Government and Finance Ministers I have listened to in the past month is that the international oil situation and its flow-on problems, especially in financing, is the major issue to be faced if the longer-term difficulties in the world economy and in the North-South dialogue are to be dealt with adequately.
85.	I do not want to be misunderstood by oil producers when I say that the central issue is to solve the problem of international balances of payments, particularly of developing countries. That means we must find an effective means of recycling the surpluses of the oil producers. I do not deny that oil was under-priced in the past. Nor am I suggesting that the large increase in oil prices since 1973 is the sole cause of the world's present economic woes. I am simply saying that this is a major and immediate problem which requires international action—now.
86.	Look at these facts. The forecast is that the combined deficit of developing countries over the next three years will be about $US 160 billion. There are only two possible ways of covering those deficits: one is through grant aid; the second is through borrowing, whether at commercial or concessional rates. Grant aid is not going to cover deficits of that size, even in the unlikely event that official development assistance performance improves dramatically. Whether the private banking system can cope is equally open to question. The previous round of recycling subjected it to considerable stress. In my view, greater involvement by international financial institutions and greater flexibility in their approach are now a necessity if global payments imbalances are not to widen, with grave economic consequences for us all.
87.	Institutions, no less than Governments, have to adapt to new circumstances. If they show no capacity to adjust, the pressures to set up new bodies to replace them will become irresistible. That is why at recent meetings New Zealand supported calls for IMF to play a much more positive and dynamic role in the recycling process in support of the private banking system. I am convinced that IMF has the skills and expertise which will enable it to respond to the needs of the world today.
88.	I believe that the decisions taken at the annual World Bank and IMF meetings last week in Washington bring those institutions closer to grappling with the recycling problem. New Zealand has continued to advocate the concept of symmetrical surveillance, so that the capacity of surplus countries and the needs of deficit countries can be matched. The adjustment burden is a problem for the international community operating through its public as well as its private institutions. The surplus nations must realize the serious difficulties which confront the oil-importing nations of the developing world. They must—and, I believe, will- acknowledge that their economic power can be used through increased commitments and guarantees for IMF in order to avert a series of national bankruptcies.
89.	The international community has the power and ingenuity to act quickly on critical economic issues. It must do so. If we are to bring new urgency and purpose to the economic negotiations of the Organization, then we have to ask ourselves whether a more functional negotiating format is called for. Does the group approach to negotiations still serve us well? On the evidence of those major United Nations economic conferences held during the past two years, I would have to say that I doubt it. The Brandt Commission reached a similar conclusion. Its report says:
"The process of reconciling differences within each group has often led to extreme positions driving out moderate ones: maximum demands elicit minimum offers." 
90.	But that is only one of the weaknesses of our present system. Another is that the specific interests of individual countries, or groups of countries, are often subordinated to the cause of group solidarity.
91.	The small island communities in the South Pacific are a case in point. Their economies are small and their resources limited. Dependent on a narrow range of exploitable commodities, highly sensitive to price fluctuations, handicapped by high transport costs and uncertain services to their main export markets, they are especially vulnerable to external influences which they cannot control. The fragility of their economies is increased by their isolation from each other and from neighbouring regions. No other factor so persistently hampers Pacific countries in the struggle to develop their resources and provide better lives for their people.
92.	Clearly, the island States of the Pacific have special needs, and the international community must be responsive to those needs. It is not just that they require development assistance, though that is essential. It is also a question of providing the mechanism by which small countries can express their concerns and get them dealt with effectively.
93.	It is not enough in the long run to label developing island countries as a separate category meriting special treatment. I believe that what those countries want, and what other countries in the so-called special categories want, too, is to take their place in the mainstream of international life. They do not want to be set apart for ever as societies which do not fit into some preconceived pattern. Regrettably, the international community seems to have settled for this option in drawing up an international development strategy for the 1980s.
94.	We in New Zealand have also suffered from the rigidities imposed by bloc diplomacy. Our specific economic circumstances and interests are obscured when the membership of the Organization is divided by shorthand expressions like "North" and "South", or labelled by groups.
95.	For years the world community has ignored the questions of food production and market access which are central to New Zealand's economic well-being. The group system of negotiation has effectively blocked our efforts to have these issues given greater priority. Now, it seems, they are beginning to receive due attention. There is a new awareness that it is all too easy to undermine the confidence of rural communities. No one knows this better than the developing countries which, during the past decade, have changed from being exporters to importers of food. More and more countries are coming to see that the double standards governing the international food trade have got to go. Unless that happens it will be an uphill battle to restore and sustain the confidence of farmers, and they are the people we look to if we are to feed the hungry of this world.
96.	In the struggle to overcome agricultural protectionism in the industrialized world, New Zealand's interests are essentially the same as those of the developing countries. With them, and with many others, we also have an interest in bringing about a more liberal trading system in all sectors. In the global negotiations, in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, in UNCTAD, in GATT we shall work to that end with all who want a fairer trading system. If we achieve that, we may then see that expansion of world economic growth rates which is an essential ingredient of political stability and security.
97.	In your opening address, Mr. President, you reminded us that the vision of the men who established the Organization was one of a world at peace. You rightly said that that could be achieved only if the United Nations was determined to apply those principles for which it stands: to promote the self-determination of all peoples; to protect the sovereign equality of nations, especially the weak and the small; to promote human rights and freedom,
98.	It is chastening to think how far we have to go before we can say we have reached those goals which, by our membership, we have all set ourselves. That is all too clear from the political as well as the economic tensions that rock the world today. The principles that the Organization was established to defend have been persistently defied.
99.	Afghanistan is one crisis area that calls out for a speedy and just solution. Earlier this year New Zealand joined more than 100 Member States in supporting resolution ES-6/2 in which the Assembly deplored the armed intervention in that country. Immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of all foreign troops was called for. That resolution was ignored. Soviet troops remain in Afghanistan. They are there because the regime they installed cannot survive without them. The people of Afghanistan have, by their resistance, shown their rejection of that regime and the alien forces which continue to prop it up.
100.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan violated the basic principles of the Charter. It threatened the security of neighbouring States. It increased tension in West Asia and the Indian Ocean region, and it has thrown into disarray the process, of detente to which the Soviet Union has so often pledged its commitment.
101.	There is only one sure way to reverse that dangerous situation and that is for the Soviet Union to display that respect for the principles of international behaviour which it champions so earnestly when the actions of others are concerned. It must withdraw its troops. It must allow the Afghan people to decide their own future freely and without interference.
102.	That assault on the sovereignty of a small neighbouring State has its parallel in South-East Asia. There a client Government has been imposed on the people of Kampuchea and maintained by force of arms. The situation in Kampuchea has implications for peace, stability and progress in the whole of South-East Asia.
103.	At the thirty-fourth session, the Assembly called for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from Kampuchea. That call was disregarded. Those forces are still there and they are involved in fighting along the Thai-Kampuchean border and elsewhere. It is a matter of grave concern to New Zealand that there has been so little improvement in the situation since the Assembly last met in regular session. The longer the fighting goes on, the greater is the risk that the conflict could spread. Until there is a political settlement, there can be no regional stability and no sure end to the hardships of those ordinary people for too long caught up in a conflict in which they want no part.
104.	Relief efforts will be needed for a long time to come. It is essential that the relief operation should be able, without hindrance, to distribute supplies to those in greatest need, wherever they are. It is no less important that Kampuchea's agricultural production should be restored. Its economy must be revitalized so that the victims of the conflict can return to their homes and to a normal way of life.
105.	I know that the countries of South-East Asia want peace and stability. They want to pursue their economic development free from threats to their security. The Association of South-East Asian Nations [ASEAN] countries, with broad support from the international community, have consistently sought a durable political settlement. The resolution adopted last year set out the principles that must form the basis for a settlement.
106.	The Assembly needs to give stronger support to the search for a settlement. New Zealand welcomed the visit of the Secretary-General to Bangkok and Hanoi. Clearly, he can play a major role. We, like others, look to him to help get productive talks under way between Viet Nam and its ASEAN neighbours and to facilitate the holding of an international conference which is needed to reduce tension and achieve a just and lasting settlement.
107.	Another area in Asia which is subject to severe strains is the Korean peninsula. New Zealand will continue to support measures aimed at reducing tension in that area. We have been encouraged by the recent series of preliminary meetings between representatives from North and South Korea which have had as their objective the development of north-south contacts. We urge both sides to maintain the momentum of those meetings and to continue in good faith the search for a peaceful and lasting accommodation.
108.	The conflict between Iraq and Iran is also a matter of great concern to us. It has caused loss of life and damage in both countries and could, if fighting continues, have serious consequences within the region and beyond. We are anxious that the fighting should be halted so that the differences between the two countries can be resolved peaceably and soon. We support the appeal made by the Security Council to that end in its resolution 479 (1980) and welcome the efforts being made by others to bring about a peaceful settlement.
109.	It is no less urgent that a settlement should be negotiated in the Middle East. That dispute is a continuing threat to world peace and security. The peace treaty between Egypt and Israel  was a conspicuous step forward, but it was only a beginning. The hopes that it would lead to a comprehensive and durable peace based on the principles embodied in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) have not been realized. They will not be until Israel acknowledges the rights and aspirations of the Palestinian people. Those include the right to self-determination and the right to establish a separate State, if that is their wish. Equally, the unilateral declaration on Jerusalem and the continued establishment of settlements in occupied territories can hardly be construed as anything but obstructions to a negotiated settlement.
110.	The continuing detention of people from the American Embassy in Teheran is another grave cause of tension. New Zealand's position is clear. We deplore Iran's refusal to release the hostages. A speedy and honourable solution must be found—first for the sake of the people concerned, but also if we are to respect the principles of international law. We are certainly willing to join others in efforts to get a peaceful solution.
111.	A year ago New Zealand welcomed two major advances in the search for a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in southern Africa: the London conference on Zimbabwe and the resumption of negotiations on Namibia.
112.	Zimbabwe's presence here today is testimony to the determination of its people and of all those who have worked so hard for a just and equitable settlement. It is a particular pleasure to me that the Commonwealth was able to play a formative part in the peaceful transfer of power in that country.
113.	A similar transfer of power must also be the objective in Namibia. There is no good reason why the few issues that remain outstanding should not be settled quickly. It has long been time for the South African authorities to end their illegal occupation of Namibia. They must, if they want a peaceful settlement, co-operate with the Security Council in bringing independence to the people of Namibia. Just as in 1980 we welcomed the independence of Zimbabwe so in 1981	we should welcome that of Namibia.
114.	If there is to be lasting stability, however, the South African Government must move ahead with the dismantling of the apartheid system in South Africa itself. If there are signs that the present rulers of South Africa are beginning to understand the need for change, there is less evidence of serious commitment to this course. They must now demonstrate clearly and unequivocally by their actions and policies that institutionalized racism and the injustices and suffering that apartheid has inflicted on generations of Africans are being brought to an end. There is no other way to a peaceful future. The alternative, a vicious and bloody conflict, must be avoided. It can be, but only if the South African Government will promptly set about overturning the detestable system of apartheid.
115.	Increased tension in many parts of the world and, above all, the invasion of Afghanistan have had grave consequences for relations between the great Powers. Detente is in jeopardy.
116.	Nowhere has that been more clear than in negotiations on arms control and disarmament. Here the central need is for confidence that obligations assumed will be fully met, so it is no surprise that there has been no real forward movement. The SALT II Treaty remains un-ratified. The Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe are stalemated. The sessions of the Committee on Disarmament have, by and large, been unproductive. The second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ended without agreement on a final declaration. Many countries, my own among them, rightly criticized the two super-Powers for lack of progress in their negotiations on arms control and disarmament.
117.	There is nothing in the relationship of those superpowers to suggest that we can expect quick progress on those arms control and disarmament issues which are essentially bilateral in nature. But that should not mean that movement must be held back in other areas. A fresh impetus is needed to get negotiations under way again.
118.	One such issue is a comprehensive test-ban treaty. No disarmament measure is more urgent. No one disputes the need for a treaty. The report presented to the Committee on Disarmament at the end of the latest round of bilateral talks showed that the negotiating States had made limited progress on many elements of critical importance. In our view, it is essential that a draft comprehensive test-ban treaty should be ready for consideration at the second special session on disarmament, in 1982. We believe, too, that a working group of the Committee on Disarmament should be established next year to begin negotiations on a treaty. One of its first tasks should be to devise a framework within which an international seismic detection system could operate to monitor adherence to the treaty.
119.	Many of these issues will continue to haunt the inter-national community throughout the i980s. There are others. What progress will we make in dealing humanely with the mass movement of displaced persons across borders? Will we be able to say, when it ends, that the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination has achieved its goals? The United Nations Decade for Women is already at mid-course. Will we be able to say in five years’ time that the lot of half the world's population has been greatly improved, when we know from the evidence given to the World Conference at Copenhagen in July, that the impact of the first five years has been so limited?
120.	The same question—whether achievement will match objectives—can be asked of many items on the Assembly's agenda. The answers, I believe, depend in large degree on whether we are willing to use the Organization sensibly, to seek genuine agreement to negotiate rather than declaim. Above all, it depends on whether we are able to break away from old rigidities and preconceptions and seek new ways of working together, ways which are imaginative and realist? That is the way for the world body, and for all of us, to face the challenges of this decade.
﻿Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to your highly responsible position and to express my conviction that your activities will contribute to the fruitful work of the present session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
93.	Speaking today from this rostrum, I should like to emphasize at the very outset the great importance which this session of the General Assembly would have if its work were successful. In view of the specific character of the situation in the world arena today, it is essential for the work of the session to be conducted in a constructive atmosphere. Its participants will have to display to an even greater extent than before a sense of realism, a considered approach to key international issues and a genuine interest in finding solutions to them.
94.	Thereby the States Members of the United Nations would demonstrate their commitment to the principles and purposes of this world Organization and awareness of their responsibility for the destinies of peace. Indeed, this is now a vitally important task for them individually and collectively.
95.	We focus attention on this because the state of affairs in the world has lately become more complicated as a result of a sharp turn in the policies of the United States of America and some other members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO].
96.	Let us look at the facts—they are more eloquent than words.
97.	Back in May 1978, the NATO countries decided automatically to increase their annual military expenditures almost to the end of this century. Last December, they took a decision to produce and deploy in Western Europe new American medium range nuclear missile systems designed to change the military and strategic situation to the unilateral advantage of the NATO bloc. Simultaneously, Washington also announced its own multibillion dollar build-up programme.
98.	The course chosen by the United States of America, which cannot be called anything but militaristic, is expressed in the so-called "new nuclear strategy". Under the cover of arguments that have nothing to do with reality concerning the possibility of some "limited" or "partial" use of nuclear weapons, the architects of this strategy seek to instil in the minds of people the idea of the admissibility and acceptability of a nuclear conflict. This foolhardy concept exacerbates the risk of a nuclear catastrophe, which cannot but cause concern throughout the world.
99.	And is it not contrary to the expectations of the peoples of the world that Washington should have indefinitely postponed ratification of the Soviet American treaty on the limitation of strategic offensive arms, SALT II?  It has demonstrated that it sets a low value on the assurances and promises it gave earlier.
100.	Several theses have recently been adopted by American foreign policy which, by all appearances, are regarded as its credo. Here is one of them. A given region of the world is chosen at will—especially if it is rich in energy resources or important from the point of view of transport and communications, or simply if the Pentagon has taken a fancy to it—and that favoured area is declared with naked bluntness to be a United States "sphere of vital interest". And if, to boot, it is a sphere of American interests, not just anyone's, and on top of that—God only knows why—of "vital" interests, efforts are made simply to deprive the peoples who live in that area of the right to be masters in their own home and masters of their own wealth. It is even harder to understand that at the end of the twentieth century generally recognized rules of international law hallowed by time should be so blatantly and so rapaciously flouted.
101.	Another proposition is that any internal changes in any State—merely because they are not to Washington's liking—are considered to be a good enough pretext for United States interference in the affairs of that State, including the dispatch there of armed forces and commandoes. It is precisely these functions that have been assigned to the rapid reaction corps. And it is surely those countries which cannot defend themselves that become the first victims.
102.	And what about the treatment of Cuba? This is a striking example. Contrary to the legitimate demands of its Government and people, a part of Cuba's territory, Guantanamo, where a United States military base is located, is held by force. But at Washington they reason in the following way: we want this base—so that is that. It is of no importance to them that the sovereign rights of Cuba and its people are thus flagrantly ignored, once American interests stand to gain.
103.	And what a host of statements are made to justify such a policy. Those deal at length with human rights, the rights of States. It is simply amazing how such a policy can be combined with genuine respect for the rights of States, the rights of peoples, and human rights. If such statements are to be believed—and they are, incidentally, repeated with the importunity of commercial advertising—then all manuals and all books on international law, and indeed the United Nations Charter itself, which strictly protect the sovereignty of States, should all be discarded. But no verbal acrobatics, no diplomatic contrivances can conceal the real essence of such a policy.
104.	The methods of pressure and blackmail in foreign policy are making themselves felt in various parts of the globe. Blatant violence is employed against Iran. Everybody knows this. United States actions in the Persian Gulf area threaten the sovereignty not only of that country but of other countries of the region as well.
105.	A build-up of the United States military presence is under way in East Africa, where, most recently, new American military bases have been coming into being. This is taking place in particular in Somalia, a country whose leadership continues to make groundless territorial claims in respect of its neighbours. The Soviet Union fully supports those States which raise their voices in protest against the establishment of such bases. Surely, those who offer their homes for American military bases assist in the accumulation of inflammable material in that area, with all the ensuing dangers.
106.	The anti-Arab Camp David deal has as its direct consequence unabated tension in the Middle East, where the situation is fraught with perilous and unforeseen developments, That should not be overlooked. That deal, which runs counter to the interests of and slights the just demands of Arab States and the inalienable rights of the Arab people of Palestine, whose only legitimate representative is the PLO, is intended to satisfy Israel's annexationist claims and to affirm an American military presence in the Middle East.
107.	In short, since the time of the separatist collusion among the United States, Israel and Egypt, the situation in that region has proved to be further from genuine peace than ever before. It is for that reason that Camp David is rejected by Arab States and denounced by all those who are interested in a just and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East, not in a settlement dictated by imperialist interests. That has been graphically demonstrated by the recent resolutions of the seventh emergency special session of the General Assembly, on the Palestinian question, and by recent resolutions of the Security Council.
108.	In another region, the Far East, Washington is striving to strengthen its political and military position and is heating up militarist trends that are far from being on the wane in certain quarters in Japan. Beijing is acting in unison. Yet one would think that the Japanese leadership would display the ability to see things as they are and succeed in resisting the outside influences prodding that country onto the road of hostility towards the Soviet Union, a road that has already led Japan to catastrophe.
109.	The United States, whose troops, contrary to General Assembly resolution 3390 B (XXX), still remain on the territory of the Republic of Korea, shares with the puppet Seoul regime the responsibility for the fact that the Korean problem is still unresolved. It obstructs the normalization of the situation on the Korean peninsula and the reunification of Korea on a peaceful and democratic basis without any outside interference, as is proposed by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
110.	The United States adds to the destabilization of the situation in IndoChina and in the whole of South-East Asia. Here, too, the United States acts in league with the Beijing hegemonists who, having committed aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, continue their demonstrations of military force on the Sino-Vietnamese border and stage provocations against the People's Democratic Republic of Laos and the People's Republic of Kampuchea, whose voice, we are sure, will sooner or later be heard from this rostrum. Other countries of that region are also under constant pressure from Beijing and Washington.
111.	In recent years, the United States and some other Western countries have resorted ever more frequently to playing the "China card"—they love it—in order to use to their own advantage the great Power ambitions of Beijing, which is itself keeping pace with the most zealous proponents of the position of strength policy and is stubbornly and cynically advocating the idea of the inevitability of another world war—with never a thought of giving up this idea. I stress this idea of the inevitable nature of a new world war.
112.	While these countries are intent on having China follow ever more closely in the wake of their policy, Beijing, for its part, in seeking a rapprochement with them, attempts to put them on the track of the cold war and confrontation with the Soviet Union, although our country, I would note here, stands for the normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China, as has been repeatedly stated at the most authoritative level. Even if we leave aside the question of who is playing whose cards more, it must be emphasized that this game is dangerous to the cause of peace.
113.	The facts I have enumerated suffice to lead us to the conclusion that influential circles in some countries would like to squander away the substantial assets of the policy of detente that were accumulated, especially in the 1970s, as a result of prolonged and strenuous efforts by many States.
114.	Not long ago, at Vienna, where the SALT II Treaty was signed, there was a frank conversation between Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, and President Carter of the United States. The latter also recognized the need to maintain the existing approximate parity of military strength between East and West, the Soviet Union and the United States. This was recognized also by the leaders of other NATO countries. At present, contrary to their previous statements, the leaders of the NATO bloc are seeking to change the strategic balance of forces in the world in that bloc's favour. That is the root cause of the aggravation of the present international situation.
115.	Attempts to give a different interpretation of world developments and to cast aspersions on the foreign policy of the USSR by once again resorting to the myth of a Soviet military threat constitute a gross deception.
116.	Only the gullible could heed the groundless assertions to the effect that the aggravation of the world situation has been caused by the temporary introduction of a limited Soviet military contingent into Afghanistan. As has already been explained repeatedly, our move was made to assist the Afghan people in protecting their country's sovereignty and repelling armed incursions into its territory from the outside, as well as to prevent the emergence of a direct threat to the security of the USSR on its southern border. That assistance was rendered in response to repeated appeals by the Government of Afghanistan, and it is in full accord with the Soviet-Afghan Treaty of 1978 and the United Nations Charter. I believe that there still exist in the United States persons who signed the United Nations Charter, which contains a provision relevant to this. Now that the situation in Afghanistan is gradually returning to normal, some of our military units have been brought home by agreement with the Afghan Government.
117.	Not infrequently, and notably at the United Nations, one may hear persons speak in favour of a complete withdrawal of the Soviet military contingent. To that we reply that the USSR will withdraw its contingent by agreement with the Government of Afghanistan as soon as the reasons that made the introduction of a contingent necessary have been removed, but not before.
118.	It will be recalled that the Afghan Government has put forward a programme for a political settlement of the situation around Afghanistan. It is quite possible to achieve such a settlement on that basis and the Soviet Union is firmly in favour of that. But any attempts that run counter to the sovereign rights of Afghanistan are futile. The truth about the nature and essence of events in Afghanistan and around that nonaligned State is steadily gaining ground.
119.	The allegation being bandied about in certain Western countries that the Soviet Union is building up its military might on a scale that exceeds its defence requirements is also patently false. There are some experts who make such claims. Our country believes that the strategic parity of forces obtaining in the world is sufficient to protect its own security and that of its allies and friends. Our country aspires to nothing more.
120.	Let us take Central Europe, the area with the highest concentration of military forces confronting each other. There, the Soviet Union, unlike the NATO countries, has not for a long time now increased its forces by a single soldier, a single tank, a single aircraft. On the contrary, it has been reducing them.
121.	As for the medium range nuclear systems deployed in the European part of the USSR—we do not deploy them on the territories of other States at all—in terms of the number of launchers and the yield of their nuclear warheads, such systems have recently even been somewhat reduced. The leaders who, with a specific purpose in mind, are trying to mislead people are also fully aware of that. However, being at odds with the truth, they systematically feed public opinion with fraudulent propaganda whenever they talk about the foreign policy or the armed forces of the Soviet State. The products of such propaganda are often to be seen floating around this hall.
122.	Against that background, it is obvious that those who speak of some unprecedented build-up of our country's defence potential are in fact trying to turn attention away from their own plans to deploy hundreds of new United States nuclear systems on the territories of several West European countries.
123.	In order to prevent another round of the arms race, the Soviet Union has proposed negotiations to be held on the basis of equality and with observance of the principle of equal security. In order to remove the obstacles to negotiations arising from the NATO decision, we propose that discussions be initiated without delay on the question of medium range nuclear weapons in Europe and the question of United States forward based systems, concurrently and in organic interrelation. It is understood that eventual agreements would be implemented after the entry into force of the SALT II Treaty.
124.	The USSR has not so far received a substantive reply to its initiative. The Soviet proposal is talked and written about; various assessments of it are made, and it is sometimes alleged that it is unclear or even mysterious, But those who are supposed to respond to it have as yet said nothing intelligible. And the reason for all this is that the Soviet Union's proposal is designed to find a genuine solution to the problem of strengthening European security and to erect a barrier to prevent Europe from becoming an even more dangerous staging area for military confrontation, with enormous quantities of nuclear weapons in readiness day and night.
125.	It would seem that the delays in making a constructive reply to the substance of our proposal are intended to muffle the positive international response which it has evoked. We express the hope that common sense and a responsible approach to improving the situation in Europe will yet prevail. We would like to believe that. The Soviet Union is ready to start talks with its partners on the aforementioned just basis at any time,
126.	Of course, if there is any lack of clarity as to the substance of our proposal, we would not be averse to removing it through consultations and exchanges of views, but it is essential that the participants in such exchanges of views should join us at the negotiating table in good faith and not just to kill time. At the same time, it must be clearly understood that the Soviet Union and the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty will not allow the military strategic balance they have achieved between them and the States members of NATO to be upset. Any calculations aimed at disrupting this balance should be discarded.
127.	The USSR and other countries of the socialist community have never sought, and are not seeking, any military superiority. They have not had, and will not have, any strategic doctrine other than a defensive one. As Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev stated once again, with all clarity, in his recent speech in the city of Alma-Ata:
"Our country's foreign policy is a clear and honest policy of peace which is not directed against anyone else. We do not encroach on anybody's land; we do not interfere in anybody's internal affairs. But we shall always manage to defend our rights and legitimate interests".
128.	Peaceableness is an inherent feature of the foreign policy of socialism, which is a social system having no classes interested in war. A world without wars, said Lenin, is the very ideal of socialism. The source from which the policy of the socialist countries draws confidence in its strength is the identity of their objectives in constructing a new society, in defending the cause of peace. To this end, the perfecting of relations of full equality, fraternal unity, comradely mutual assistance and fruitful cooperation in all spheres of life is constantly in the forefront of their attention, and this was once again borne out by the results of the meetings held in the Crimea last summer between Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev and the leaders of fraternal parties and States.
129.	The Soviet Union and the socialist community have been and will continue to be in the vanguard of the struggle for international security. However, we do not claim a monopoly in this field. We shall stand in the same line with all States which consistently pursue a policy of peace and of averting the threat of another world war, a policy of detente.
130.	The concrete deeds of the socialist countries are shown in a whole series of initiatives, in particular those they have advanced since the previous session of the General Assembly. These are: the proposal put forward by the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty  for holding a top-level conference of the leaders of States of all regions of the world to discuss problems related to the elimination of hotbeds of international tension and to the prevention of war; the measures for curbing the arms race, for disarmament and for strengthening peace in Europe and throughout the world contained in the declaration which was adopted at that same meeting; the initiative of the USSR with regard to holding negotiations on medium range nuclear weapons in Europe in close interrelation with United States forward based systems; the recent withdrawal by the Soviet Union of 20,000 troops, 1,000 tanks and other materiel from the German Democratic Republic, a process which has been completed; the proposal submitted by the socialist countries at the Vienna talks" providing, among other steps recommended, for the reduction of United States military personnel by 13,000 and of Soviet military personnel by 20,000, in addition to the Soviet military contingent which has been unilaterally withdrawn from the territory of the German Democratic Republic; and the withdrawal of some Soviet military units from Afghanistan.
131.	A comparison of the list of the initiatives we have advanced during the past year alone with NATO's record immediately reveals the contrast between the two main lines in world politics. The facts are self-evident in showing which policy line is consonant with the aspirations of the peoples and which is in conflict with them.
132.	It certainly seems to be far from easy to create a distorted picture of our foreign policy in the minds of the peoples. Misinformation and, primarily of course, slander directed against it backfire on those who resort to them.
133.	Given the present state of international relations— when the policy of detente is being put to a severe test, when the danger of war is growing—it is essential to multiply efforts in order to arrest this course of developments. Even if the initial steps were not to be the most radical ones possible, they would still be steps which could infuse an invigorating spirit into the international political climate.
134.	Proceeding from this, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Urgent measures for reducing the danger of war", and we are submitting for the Assembly's consideration a relevant draft resolution What is proposed here is the adoption in the immediate future of the following measures.
135.	First, an important step would be for the States members of military alliances to renounce the expansion of existing military political groupings through the admission of new members, and for countries which are not members of such groupings to renounce joining them. All States, without exception, should avoid any action conducive to the establishment of new military alliances or to assigning military functions to regional organizations which have no such functions at present. At the same time, the statements repeatedly made by the USSR and the other socialist countries concerning their readiness to disband the Warsaw Treaty organization if, simultaneously, the NATO bloc were dissolved and, as a first step, to eliminate the military organizations of the two groupings, starting with a mutual reduction of their military activities, remain fully valid.
136.	Secondly, it is essential that all States, and, first of all, the permanent members of the Security Council and countries which have military agreements with them, undertake not to increase as from a certain date—say 1 January of the coming year—their armed forces and conventional armaments, as a first step towards their subsequent reduction.
137.	Thirdly, proceeding from the premise that an early conclusion of an appropriate convention, with the participation of all nuclear and nonnuclear States, would best serve to strengthen security guarantees for nonnuclear States, the USSR is also prepared to consider other possible solutions to this problem, provided the other nuclear Powers adopt a similar approach. We call upon all nuclear countries to make identical and solemn declarations concerning the non-use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States which have no nuclear weapons on their territories. Such declarations, if they serve the aforementioned objective, could be reinforced by an authoritative decision of the Security Council. At the same time, the Soviet Union reaffirms that it will never use nuclear weapons against those countries which renounce the production and acquisition of such weapons and do not have them on their territories.
138.	Fourthly, we are convinced that, if our partners in the negotiations, the United States and the United Kingdom, show corresponding readiness, it is quite realistic to expect a successful conclusion within a short time limit of the elaboration of an international treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests. We consider this to be possible. There are no insuperable obstacles.
139.	To this end, the USSR proposes that all nuclear Powers declare themselves ready to renounce within a period of one year, beginning on a date to be agreed by them, all nuclear explosions. The point is to have a one year moratorium while negotiations would continue with a view to achieving a more radical solution.
140.	A prompt implementation of all these measures would blunt the edge of some of the issues in international relations. It could be instrumental in easing the burden of military expenditures of States, strengthening the regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and creating favourable conditions for progress in the field of the arms race limitation. We hope that the General Assembly will give these proposals careful and due consideration, and that it will support them.
141.	In today's international conditions, the Soviet Union considers it an imperative duty of the United Nations Member States to intensify their efforts in all major directions of the struggle for peace. As hitherto, the Soviet Union will maintain and deepen the dialogue and cooperate with all States that display political will towards this end. By the way, with regard to "dialogue", this is a term often used nowadays. One way of reasoning goes like this: if there is something I do not like in the policy of a State, I will not speak with it. But to our mind such capriciousness, such vagaries, have been widely condemned, and rightly so. There should be no place for them in politics.
142.	At the current session, we consider it necessary to recall the United Nations decisions which have yet to be implemented, proposals put forward by the USSR and other countries, as well as to set forth our views on enhancing the efficiency of efforts in specific sectors of this historic struggle. To this end, the USSR is submitting at this session a memorandum entitled "peace, disarmament and international security guarantees" 
143.	There is hardly any need to prove that the greatest threat to peace on our planet is posed by the unabated nuclear arms race. There is, however, a need to say again and again that it is inadmissible to put up with a situation where people live under the burden of a constant fear of a nuclear disaster.
144.	While recognizing the complexities of the problem of nuclear disarmament, one should not toe the line of those who shirk even its discussion. It is for people to resolve this burning problem. People have created the nuclear weapon, and it is they who can and must outlaw and destroy it. There is no denying that man's mind is stronger than his fists. None the less, the fact remains that the negotiations proposed by the Soviet Union for ending the production of all types of nuclear weapons and gradually reducing their stockpiles until they have been completely destroyed have never started, owing to the negative position of certain Governments. We stand for the talks getting under way and for the Governments concerned to adopt a serious attitude towards them, so that the relevant decision of the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament may be fulfilled.
145.	The conclusion by States of an agreement on the renunciation of the use of force in international relations would be of great importance for the cause of peace and detente. In statements made from this rostrum the Soviet Union has repeatedly stressed the importance of such an agreement and of resolution 2936 (XXVII) adopted by the General Assembly in 1972 entitled "Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons". In the current situation, the duty of the United Nations to pronounce itself in favour of the prompt completion of efforts in this field is becoming ever more imperative.
146.	To lessen the threat of nuclear war, it is of decisive importance to check the further growth of the strategic potentials of States and subsequently to reduce strategic nuclear weapon systems quantitatively and to limit them qualitatively. And could anyone deny how significant would be the entry into force of the Soviet American Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, SALT II?
147.	The USSR is ready to ratify the SALT II Treaty and afterwards strictly to comply with all its provisions. It is also the intention of the Soviet Union to participate in the negotiations on the further limitation and reduction of strategic arms, with strict observance of the principle of equality and equal security. But it would not be out of place to say in this connection that, although the Treaty has not yet entered into force, the American side is already laying a mine under it in the shape of a plan whose implementation would open up the possibility of excluding from appropriate verification a large number of strategic nuclear missile systems. I think that this is well known to all representatives in this hall.
148.	Now that the nuclear missile arsenals of States are being constantly inflated, the question of elaborating and adopting more reliable measures to prevent the possibility of the accidental or authorized use of nuclear weapons is becoming ever more acute, and repeated false nuclear alarms in the United States armed forces give ground for serious thought in this regard. Indeed, the fact that the alarm was false becomes known later—afterwards. And this surely leads to certain conclusions. Such things should not take place if the leadership of a State deals with all questions pertaining to nuclear weapons with a sense of responsibility.
149.	It has always been the stand of the Soviet Union that the strengthening of the regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should be a subject of unfailing concern. The failure to see that transfers of nuclear equipment, materials and technology intended for peaceful purposes could serve as a channel for spreading nuclear arms is fraught with the most negative consequences. An important step would be taken if an international agreement were reached on the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of countries where there are no such weapons at the present time, regardless of whether or not these countries are allies of a given nuclear State. However, owing to the opposition of certain Powers, progress in negotiations on this question is slow, to say the least.
150.	The lethal power of such means of mass destruction as chemical weapons does not at all pale in comparison to the monstrous destructive force of nuclear armaments. The negotiations on their prohibition have been dragging on for many years, with the distance to the finishing line—the signing of a relevant international convention—remaining almost as long as ever. It will be impossible to cover the remaining distance without energetic efforts on the part of all participants in the negotiations. We, for our part, have been persistently working towards that end.
151.	The Soviet Union, as before, is fully in favour of observance of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. It has always been, and remains, faithful to the spirit and letter of the Convention, which constitutes a measure of real disarmament.
152.	Sometimes representatives of military quarters float allegations that the Soviet Union does not always respect the obligations it assumes under international agreements. But such allegations are a ploy that is as old as the universe. The reasoning of their authors is obviously as follows: if peoples are to be deceived, let the deception be huge to make an impression. But in the contest between truth and deception, truth has always been victorious sooner or later. The Soviet Union has not violated one single international agreement and it does not intend to do so.
153.	Those who resort to such allegations attempt to weave them into a thick shroud to cover their own unseemly deeds. Look at what is taking place in the country whose representatives indulge in such statements: plans are openly being discussed there for building new plants to produce chemical weapons. I said plans are being discussed there, but it would be more accurate to say that they are being discussed here, and this is being done at a time when representatives of that very country are sitting at the negotiating table where the question of banning chemical weapons is being discussed,
154.	And how often has the Soviet Union made representations regarding noncompliance with agreements by those who aim such allegations at the Soviet Union? Those for whom these words of ours are meant know that very well. That is how things are with attempts to cast a shadow on the attitude of the Soviet Union towards its international obligations,
155.	The world is not safeguarded from the possible emergence in the not too distant future of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction. This is particularly dangerous now, since forces have appeared that are counting on achieving military superiority. The USSR favours the adoption of additional measures to ensure the conclusion of an international agreement banning the development of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction, as well as the conclusion, as necessary, of special agreements on individual types of such weapons.
156.	Vigilance and perseverance are required in the struggle against the neutron weapon—that barbarous means of annihilation. The position of our country, which declared in the past that it would not begin production of neutron weapons unless the United States did so, remains valid and it also applies to the possible emergence of such weapons in any other State.
157.	Objectively, there is a basis for the early completion of work on a treaty banning one type of weapon of mass destruction—radiological weapons.
158.	Owing to the opposition if certain Powers, the question of what are called conventional armaments has actually been left outside the sphere of concrete negotiations. The solution of that question should be speedily moved to a practical plane. Representatives of certain countries wish to talk endlessly and willingly on that subject, while doing nothing, however, to facilitate agreement.
159.	The danger of war could also be reduced in no small measure by the limitation and cessation of the arms race in particular geographical areas as well. That applies first of all to Europe. Developments in Europe have always had a most significant impact on the state of world affairs. The Soviet Union, like other countries of the socialist community, is seeking to ensure a steady continuation of the process initiated by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and compliance with all the provisions and principles of the Final Act which it adopted.
160.	As we are staunch advocates of the Leninist principle of peaceful coexistence, we have always striven to ensure that no avenue in our relations with States belonging to a different social system, including the United States, should remain unexplored. We expect those States to do likewise. Indeed, an overwhelming majority of them do build their relations with us in that fashion.
161.	The course for maintaining and strengthening security in Europe and for reducing the level of military confrontation on the continent was convincingly demonstrated last May at the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty. It was also manifested during the recent talks held by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev with French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing and with the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Helmut Schmidt.
162.	In the series of proposals made by the countries of the socialist community with regard to Europe, a prominent place belongs to the initiative for the conclusion by all States participants in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe of a treaty on the non-use of either nuclear or conventional arms—I repeat, nuclear or conventional arms. Does anybody who stands for peace object to this proposal?
163.	The socialist countries have taken steps, some of them quite recently, which provide a solid basis for reaching agreement at the Vienna Talks on the Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. Success in that work is being obstructed by those who do not wish to give up attempts to gain unilateral advantage to the detriment of the security interests of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty.
164.	The holding of a conference on military detente and disarmament in Europe is a matter of paramount importance. We express the hope that all States concerned will contribute to the realization of this idea. This is a good idea.
165.	A significant role in achieving general agreement on the convocation and the subject matter of the conference is to be played by the Madrid meeting of representatives of States participants in the European Conference. We wish the meeting to be business-like and to be crowned with positive results on all sections of the Helsinki Final Act. We urge other countries to display the same constructive approach to the Madrid meeting.
166.	The problem of lessening tensions in the Indian Ocean is increasingly important. The Soviet Union has invariably supported the initiative of the littoral States to turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. For the purpose of implementing that initiative, we shall continue to cooperate with all States concerned, inter alia, at the Conference on the Indian Ocean scheduled for 1981. The same objective would be served by the resumption of the Soviet American talks, suspended by the United States, on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in that ocean. We are ready at any time to sit at the same table with the United States and to continue negotiations on that matter. It is now up to the United States.
167.	The States parties to the Warsaw Treaty favour discussion within the framework of the United Nations of the question of limiting and reducing the level of military presence and military activities, be it in the Atlantic, the Indian or the Pacific Ocean, in the Mediterranean or in the Persian Gulf. Agreements in that field would serve the interests of peace and stabilization of the international situation. The Soviet Union is prepared at any time to come to the negotiating table to discuss this issue with the States concerned.
168.	More than once the United Nations has tried its hand at achieving agreed decisions on the reduction of the military budgets of States. However, each time, it encountered resolute opposition and all means of misinformation are employed here to frustrate any progress towards agreement in this extremely important field. As a result, the military appropriations of States have been growing from year to year. And what a variety of methods have been devised by certain Governments to extract from the taxpayer ever greater sums to be fed into the grinder of military production. And this is taking place at a time when hundreds of millions of people in the world are suffering from starvation, have no access to proper medical services and education or have no roof over their heads. Resources which could be used for the benefit of people are being consumed by the arms race. Regrettably, the United Nations has not so far pronounced its weighty opinion on that score. It has great possibilities for speaking out.
169.	Now as before, the USSR is prepared to proceed to negotiations on specific reductions, in absolute figures or in terms of percentage points, of military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council as well as of other States with large economic and military potential. We are also prepared to reach agreement on the amounts which each State reducing its military budget would allocate for increased economic aid to developing countries.
170.	The Soviet Union believes that thorough preparations should be carried out for the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, which is to take place in 1982. That session should be followed by a world conference on disarmament to ensure that a profound consideration of disarmament issues may result not merely in recommendations, but in decisions to be implemented by States fully without any exception.
171.	There must be implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted 20 years ago on the initiative of the USSR.
172.	We welcome the emergence this year of new independent States. In southern Africa there is the Republic of Zimbabwe, which was born in the flames of the long struggle of its valiant people. We are convinced that the day will come when the people of Namibia, too, will win their freedom and independence. Everything must be done to bring nearer the moment when here in this hall of the General Assembly final victory will be solemnly celebrated over the monster which has taken the lives of or crippled many millions of human beings, which for centuries has mercilessly exploited many a people and whose name is colonialism.
173.	The Soviet Union has always shown respect for the legitimate aspirations of States which have freed themselves from the yoke of colonialism. We have good relations with most of them. We note with satisfaction the increasing role of these States in international politics and appreciate the peaceful anti-imperialist orientation of the movement of the nonaligned countries.
174.	Our country has consistently supported the developing States in their desire to attain economic independence, their inalienable right to dispose of their natural resources and their legitimate demand for the restructuring of international economic relations on the basis of equality, without any discrimination.
175.	Problems affecting all mankind are becoming ever more conspicuous in the broad spectrum of the concerns of our time. I shall make special mention of one of them: preservation of nature. The Soviet Union wishes to see man show greater care and concern for nature, and to see natural resources used in the interests of all nations on a scientific basis.
176.	However, everybody knows what immense material and intellectual resources are being deflected from the solution of this problem by the arms race, how ruinous and perhaps irreversible is the damage inflicted on the entire human environment by military activities of States such as tests of various types of weapons and, above all, of nuclear weapons, the stockpiling of poisonous chemical agents and so on, to say nothing of the disastrous consequences which a nuclear war would have not only for people but also for nature in general.
177.	It is the duty of the United Nations to draw the attention of the States of the world to their historic responsibility for preserving the nature of the earth, which is indispensable for the life of present and future generations, and to make its contribution to the development of international cooperation in this field. We have submitted an appropriate draft resolution for consideration by the General Assembly at the current session.
178.	Our views and specific proposals on important measures which should be adopted in the evolving situation stem from the peaceful nature of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union. We are convinced that the necessary possibilities for staving off the threat of war and putting international peace on a more solid foundation exist. There are forces able to do that. For it is the will of the peoples and the policies of States, not late, that determine the trend of world developments.
179.	No responsible politician in the world can remain indifferent to the course pursued by those countries in whose policies the cult of war is becoming the dominant factor. Indeed, even here and now in the host country of the Headquarters of the United Nations there is massive propaganda in favour of nuclear war—before our very eyes, it can be said, But it is not only a question of propaganda; plans for such a war are being worked out and discussed, and this is all being done at government level. In the atmosphere of militarist frenzy which has of late become so widespread in the United States, there is ever less room left for sound and sober assessments of the world situation and well considered conclusions on the conduct of policy.
180.	The United Nations would be right to issue a firm warning to those who seek a dangerous exacerbation of tension and war hysteria. It would be a good thing to say to those responsible: "Gentlemen, do not push the rock down the hill, for there is a risk that you will not be able to stop it later on".
181.	Saving mankind from the scourge of war is the goal towards which the States should direct their efforts, instead of preparing for war. If the General Assembly took that stand, it would add a bright page to the book of modern history.
182.	Despite all the differences in social systems, levels of economic development, national characteristics and historical destinies of the States represented in the United Nations, all peoples want to live with confidence in their future. No country, no Government, if it expresses the aspirations and will of its people, can remain aloof from the struggle for disarmament, for the relaxation of tensions and for peace.
183.	This is the basis on which the Soviet Union acts. "We shall continue to spare no effort", stressed Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, "to preserve detente, everything positive that was achieved in the 1970s, to ensure a turn towards disarmament, to uphold the right of peoples to free and independent development, to preserve and consolidate peace."
184.	Our country and its representatives are prepared to participate in a most constructive manner in the work of this session and to contribute actively to its success.
﻿Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. It is a recognition of your extraordinary diplomatic skills, but, more important, your election is a tribute to your country and to its contribution to international cooperation and understanding.
52.	On behalf of the United States delegation to this Assembly, I come here today to express anew the United States commitment to the United Nations. I come also to express our hopes for its future at a moment when the world is deeply troubled by tension and uncertainty. Peace is threatened by smouldering regional conflicts and by assaults of the strong upon the weak. Nations large and small are buffeted by steeply rising oil prices and serious economic strains. Within many countries poverty and oppression form an explosive combination.
53.	A few weeks ago I spoke to this Assembly about the international economy.  I stressed the obligation of nations to cooperate in facing world economic problems: payments imbalances, energy inflation, slowed growth in many developing countries, the spectres of environmental decay and even famine.
54.	Our inability to reach a consensus on procedures for global negotiations is a pause in the process, not a failure in our objectives. I do not mean to say that the differences that have kept us from finding a formula for global negotiations can be glossed over. They are real. They are substantive. But we are prepared to use the span of this General Assembly to continue discussions that can lead to procedures, to an agenda and to a negotiating structure that will foster broad agreement among all the nations here represented.
55.	Today I want to look beyond economic problems to the one condition that is a prerequisite for all material progress: peace. If we truly care about building a world in which peace and justice prevail, the world's nations, and this Organization, cannot ignore certain political and legal obligations also—obligations every bit as compelling as the economic obligations I spoke of earlier.
56.	These responsibilities are not new. They are proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations. But dangerous new circumstances require that we stress them anew, lest we betray the very purpose the United Nations is designed to serve.
57.	Our first obligation is to refrain from aggression and to deal with it vigorously. Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations provides for "the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace". Article 2 prohibits "the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State".
58.	Accordingly, the United Nations must confront the continuing assault upon Afghanistan. I raise this issue not to set off a rhetorical exchange, not in the interest of polemics, but in the interest of peace.
59.	Today, more than 1 million refugees attest to the human toll of the violence in Afghanistan. And more is at stake than the independence of one country. If this assault continues, the independence and integrity of every small defenceless nation will be called into question.
60.	Last January, at an emergency special session, this Assembly condemned by a large majority the assault upon Afghanistan. We strongly believe that at the thirty-fifth session also the General Assembly must work under the Charter to reinforce the principles of the United Nations. We must work for a total withdrawal of Soviet troops and a political settlement. We must support the principles of non-intervention, self-determination and non-alignment for Afghanistan.
61.	In Kampuchea as well, armed aggression continues. We welcome reports of some progress made under th4 leadership of the United Nations Secretary General and international organizations in relieving the conditions of deprivation and disease so prevalent a year ago. The threat of renewed starvation requires significant further contribution from the international community.
62.	Despite some improvement in Kampuchea's desperate human situation, no progress whatsoever has been made towards securing the withdrawal of occupying Vietnamese forces and the restoration of self-determination to the Kampuchea people, as called for in last year's resolution on Kampuchea, sponsored by the nonaligned nations. We strongly support the basis for a settlement, including the concept of an international conference, contained in that resolution, which was passed by a large majority.
63.	Above all, let us keep in mind two basic purposes for which this body exists: to oppose armed aggression and to assuage its consequences. No achievement could be more important to the future influence and effectiveness of the United Nations. No failure could be more damaging than a failure to deal firmly with these issues.
64.	Our second obligation, proclaimed by our Charter, is to settle international disputes by peaceful means. Achieving this goal remains urgently important in two key regions: the Middle East and southern Africa.
65.	In the Middle East, the United States is committed to a comprehensive peace—an enduring peace based on the principles of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We are determined to pursue to a successful conclusion the peace process begun at Camp David two years ago this month.  Already that process has achieved something once thought impossible: peace between Egypt and Israel. Now the negotiations are focused upon, a second goal: taking a significant first step towards resolving the Palestinian problem. The current autonomy talks have as their goal arriving at interim arrangements to establish full autonomy for the people of the West Bank and Gaza. After that, the process will proceed to negotiations which will determine the final status of those areas.
66.	As we seek to resolve this conflict, we are committed to finding a solution to the Palestinian problem in all its aspects and, at the same time, to permanent security for the State of Israel. We have no illusions about the difficulties of this quest. We are dealing with a conflict of long duration and intense feelings. There can be no short cuts.
67.	So today I call on all members of this Assembly to lend their support to these negotiations. Camp David has proved so far, and remains for the future, the most hopeful and productive avenue to peace in the Middle East. There is no alternative to negotiations except further conflict. Let us remember that differences are rivers to be crossed, not reasons to turn back.
68.	That persistence can bear fruit—that negotiations can yield peace—has been reaffirmed in recent months in southern Africa. Through arduous negotiations, the new nation of Zimbabwe has been born in peace. Today we have reason to celebrate not only this accomplishment, but also the way in which nations worked together to achieve it. And for the future, the Zimbabwe settlement offers hope—and a model—for peaceful settlements in southern Africa and elsewhere.
69.	The United States will continue its strong efforts to advance the United Nations plan for Namibia. There are no major substantive issues left to be resolved. I am convinced that the United Nations plan would be implemented fairly. All that remains is for South Africa to act in its own interest, in the interest of peace in the region, and in the interest of the Namibian people: to accept implementation of the United Nations settlement. If that does not happen soon, this chance for peace could be lost, and we would face a bitter future of protracted conflict and tragic human suffering.
70.	The settlement in Zimbabwe can also provide a precedent for peaceful change in South Africa. We will continue to urge the Government of South Africa to abandon the repugnant policy of apartheid. We consider it urgent that talks among representative leaders begin on the issue of peaceful, orderly change in South Africa—while there is still time.
71.	We must continue our search for peace and restoration of respect for international law in other parts of the world as well. In Lebanon, in Cyprus and elsewhere, we will lend our full support to the peace making and peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations.
72.	And although the holding of American hostages in Iran is not an item on the agenda of this Assembly, it remains a matter of extreme urgency that this tragic impasse be resolved—resolved in a way that strengthens peace and restores respect for international law. The continuing situation in Iran contributes to uncertainty about security and stability in Southwest Asia. The security of Iran itself and the stability of the area depend on a united, strong and independent Iran living at peace with its neighbours.
73.	With the end of the former regime and the death of the late Shah, a chapter in Iran's history has closed. As a new chapter opens, we emphasize that we recognize the reality of the Iranian revolution, and we respect the right of the Iranian people to choose their own form of government without intervention of any kind. With the emergence of a new constitution and governmental structure and the gradual consolidation of authority, the Islamic Republic of Iran can assume its obligations and independent role in this community of nations.
74.	An indispensable step will be the safe return to their families of the American hostages in Iran. Throughout the 324 days of their captivity, the Member States and institutions of the United Nations have expressed their concern for the hostages in numberless ways and channels. With their safe release, repeatedly called for by the Security Council and the International Court of Justice, Iran could end its isolation from those nations that live in accordance with international law, and sanctions would be terminated.
75.	Today I urge the nation of Iran, its Parliament, and its people also, to consider the human face of the hostage problem. These innocent people and their families have experienced acute suffering. I ask this community of nations to join us in urging that their ordeal be brought to a safe, honourable and prompt end. We also know that in Iran, as in the United States, there are deep feelings as a result of grievances and suffering perceived in the past. We are prepared to do our part in resolving fairly the issues between us. The Iranian Parliament has announced that it will name a commission to deal with the hostage question. We hope that this positive step will bring the Government of Iran closer to a decision on release of the hostages.
76.	The United States shares many common values with the people of Iran. When the safe return of all the hostages to their families is assured, we are prepared to deal on a basis of mutual respect and equality with all the outstanding issues and misunderstandings between Iran and the United States and to reach understandings on the principles which will govern our relationship.
77.	As we look to the future, 1 urge the United Nations, as soon as possible, to take firm and effective measures to counter the global menace of attacks upon diplomats and others. The danger it poses to civilized international life is growing; no institution of peace can afford to ignore it. For our part, the United States seeks peace with all nations. Whether it be with Iran or with the Soviet Union, we are eager to reduce tensions and to restore productive relations as soon as their actions allow.
78.	In all cases our policies will reflect our commitment to non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations. As the President of the United States, Mr. Carter, has affirmed, we shall not interfere in Poland's affairs and we expect that others will also respect the right of the Polish nation to resolve its own problems in its own way.
79.	Another obligation of nations is the control and limitation of arms. A period of heightened tension in the world makes this obligation more difficult to fulfil, but also more urgently important.
80.	For that reason, let me underscore anew today the commitment of my Government to arms control, to practical measures that contribute to world peace and enhance international stability. President Carter voiced this basic commitment when lie was sworn in as President in January 1977. It remains equally valid today.
81.	Let me give several concrete illustrations of that commitment. Some of the arms control efforts I shall mention involve active participation by the United Nations; others involve negotiations outside the United Nations framework. But all are of intense concern to the international community, for an unrestrained arms race would darken the horizon for all humanity.
82.	First, it is President Carter's intention to move forward as speedily as possible towards ratification of the SALT II Treaty.  Accordingly, the President intends to consult with the leadership of the United States Senate soon after the election with a view to resuming the ratification process as soon as is feasible. We consider it of cardinal importance to ratify SALT II and to move forward with the SALT process. The Soviet Union, however, must recognize that for many Americans recent Soviet actions have called into question the Soviet Union's commitment to international peace and cooperation. Accordingly, we call upon the Soviet Union to act in ways that will enhance, not damage, the prospects for SALT II and for other arms control efforts.
83.	Secondly, we are committed to the pursuit of meaningful and equal limitations on theatre nuclear forces in the framework of the SALT III negotiations. We are ready to begin talks with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union this week to discuss this subject and to seek agreement on the arrangements for beginning these talks promptly.
84.	Thirdly, we are committed to seeking an effective and verifiable comprehensive test ban treaty. Substantial progress has been made towards this goal and we are determined to continue pursuing these efforts vigorously.
85.	Fourthly, the United States is committed m the Vienna talks to achieving mutual and balanced force reductions and limitations to diminish the risks inherent in the massive presence of military forces in central Europe.
86.	Fifthly, we are prepared to develop further the security aspects of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. If the international situation permits and if there is balanced progress in all areas, including the human rights area, at the second review session of the Conference, to be held at Madrid in November, we are prepared to consider a post Madrid European conference of the signatory States to the Final Act of the Conference on developing militarily significant confidence-building measures.
87.	Sixthly, we support the effort of the newly expanded Committee on Disarmament to develop the provisions of an international convention on radiological weapons We also support its work towards a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons and we continue to pursue our bilateral negotiations with the Soviet Union on an effective prohibition against chemical weapons.
88.	Finally, the further spread of nuclear weapons would constitute a serious threat to international peace and security. We firmly support efforts, therefore, to reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation. The Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is a cornerstone of those efforts; we strongly urge non-parties to embrace the Treaty, for it enhances the security of all nations, nuclear weapon and nonnuclear weapon States alike. At the second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons there was unanimous agreement on the fundamental soundness of the Treaty and the desirability of universal adherence to it. For those nonnuclear weapon States that have not joined the Treaty, we attach particular importance to the goal of achieving comprehensive, full scope international safeguards coverage. We believe that acceptance of such coverage should become a condition of new nuclear supply commitments to such States. We shall continue to work for a world in which all nations can share in the peaceful use of nuclear energy without the danger of spreading nuclear weapons.
89.	Before I leave this subject, let me emphasize our deep concern over another arms control matter. If arms control is to be successful, agreements must be fully honoured. Questions such as those raised by persistent reports that chemical weapons have been used in Afghanistan, Laos and Kampuchea cannot be ignored by the international community. To do so would undermine both arms control and international law. The United States, therefore, welcomes the emphasis placed by the Committee on Disarmament at its most recent session on the need for international efforts to determine the facts behind those reports. We believe that an impartial investigation into those reports could most appropriately be launched under the auspices of the United Nations.
90.	Important as they are, the obligations I have mentioned by no means exhaust the responsibilities which rest upon us as nations, and as a community of nations, if we are to secure peace. By peace, I do not mean the fragile, artificial stability that comes with repression of a people by its Government; I mean the true stability of societies that are at peace with themselves because the rights of their citizens are protected and nurtured.
91.	So let me close by underscoring another obligation of nations: our obligation to uphold human rights and to concern ourselves compassionately with fundamental human needs.
92.	In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights the community of nations has nobly defined the concepts of human rights and human dignity, just as in the Charter of the United Nations we have outlined the precepts of peaceful cooperation.
93.	The failure of nations to live up to those human rights obligations is a continuing tragedy, made painfully manifest in the waves of refugees now sweeping across the world.
94.	Those suffering people present a dramatic challenge to the international community represented by This Assembly. Over the past five years the United States has welcomed more than 600,000 refugees—from Africa, from Asia, from Europe, from the Middle Last and from the western hemisphere. In the past five months alone we have received more than 120,000 people driven from Cuba to our shores—an influx which has presented extraordinary challenges to our resources.
95.	In recognition of the human need implicit in this worldwide wave of refugees, President Carter has made known the intention of the United States to accept an additional 217,000 refugees over the next year.
96.	Our country, of course, is only one of the many which have welcomed and helped refugees. More than 1 million Afghan refugees have fled to Pakistan; 400,000 Indo Chinese are in Thailand. More than 3 million are homeless in sub-Saharan Africa. Clearly this is a global problem; it requires a global response.
97.	The refugee resettlement efforts agreed upon at Geneva last year [see A/35/12, para. 6] demand our energy and our generosity. We must strengthen the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
98.	The humanitarian programmes of the United Nations and of the other agencies require a renewed commitment from all of us to their support and to their strengthening. But ultimately this human tragedy can be dealt with only by removing its root causes: by overcoming poverty, by ending the abuse of human rights within nations and by establishing peace among nations so that no person need be forced to flee from home and country.
99.	This is why my nation supports the growth of democracy and personal freedom in the Americas, in Africa and in every region of the world. Achieving these ultimate purposes remains a supreme challenge for the United Nations. Making progress towards them must be the work of this thirty fifth session of the General Assembly.
100. Let us not ignore the facts. Ours is a moment of worldwide economic difficulty and a time of tension between great Powers. At such moments, peaceful cooperation becomes even more difficult than usual. At such moments, our obligations as members of this Assembly of nations take on new importance. At such times, when a cloud of troubling events darkens our aspirations to ultimate peace, we can light our path by adhering faithfully to our Charter, to the international law that binds us, to the standards of international conduct that protect us.
101.	Let us hope that the light we generate by doing so will dispel the clouds of tension and discord that darken the world today.
102.	The United States will do its part. We will live up to our obligations to oppose aggression, to build peace, to limit arms, to support human rights and to foster economic justice, for us and for other nations, these endeavours can immeasurably improve life on earth and build the just and lasting peace for which all our peoples yearn.
﻿Mr. President, first of all allow me to extend warm congratulations to you on your being elected President of the thirty fifth session of the General Assembly. We believe that under your presidency the current session will achieve new successes in the noble cause of maintaining international peace and security.
81.	This year we are celebrating the thirty-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 1514 (XV) containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. On this occasion we note with pleasure that four more countries—Zimbabwe, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Kiribati and Vanuatu—have joined the ranks of independent countries since last year. We warmly welcome the admission of Zimbabwe and of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations. It is our sincere hope that these newly independent countries will play an active role in international affairs and make their contributions to the cause of world peace and to the progress of mankind.
82.	The past year has witnessed encouraging progress in the struggle to win national liberation, defend state independence and safeguard world peace. The brilliant victory of the Zimbabwe people marks a significant turning point in the course of the African people's struggle to root out colonialist and racist domination in southern Africa. The just demand of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples for the recovery of their lost territories and the restoration to the Palestinian people of their national rights has won increasingly extensive support throughout the world. Irresistibly, the national democratic movement of the Latin American peoples continues to develop in depth. The peoples of Kampuchea and Afghanistan, holding high the sacred banner of safeguarding national independence and fighting heroically against brute force, have upset the smug calculations of foreign aggressors for a quick decision in the war and exacted an ever heavier price from them. In 1980 the United Nations, the Islamic Conference, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN], the Organization of African Unity [OAU] and the European Community have made a series of very important decisions on the major international issues of today, giving expression to the urgent desire of all peoples for world peace, security and justice. The unprecedentedly strong reaction to the Afghan incident shows that the struggle of the people of the whole world against hegemonism and for world peace has reached a new level.
83.	However, we cannot ignore the fact that world peace and the independence and security of States are still facing serious threats. The international situation is more tense and turbulent than before. The danger of war is growing. Relying on its vastly increased military strength, the Soviet Union has stepped up its pace of expansion. It has launched a blitzkrieg against Afghanistan and occupied the country by armed force. With Soviet backing, the Vietnamese authorities have not only refused to withdraw their forces from Kampuchea but have invaded the border areas of Thailand, making threats of war against the Southeast Asian countries. Thus the resolutions of the United Nations on Afghanistan and Kampuchea have been grossly trampled underfoot.
84.	Prior to the Afghan incident, the Soviet Union had normally carried out its military invasion or subversion of third world countries through its agents. But this time, in Afghanistan, it dropped the mask and sent troops to fight the battle itself. Through its propaganda machine it openly declared that "under the new historical conditions, the internationalist missions of the Soviet armed forces have broadened". In other words, the Soviet Union may, under the pretext of fulfilling its "internationalist obligations", carry out armed intervention in other countries at will. It even advanced a theory to justify aggression by stating that, in the Soviet Union, "a hostile Afghanistan is unacceptable, because there is a common border 2,200 kilometres long". This "doctrine" of allowing no hostile neighbours means that all the neighbours of the Soviet Union must show complete obedience. It is even more peremptory and aggressive in nature than the notorious doctrine of "limited sovereignty". Based on such logic, would it not be all right for Israel to hold on to the Arab territories it has occupied by force and commit further aggressions against the neighbouring Arab countries that are opposed to its expansionism? Would it not be all right too for the racist regime in South Africa to continue its illegal occupation of Namibia and even send troops for aggression against southern African countries that are opposed to racism? Clearly, in spreading these fallacies, the Soviet Union is trying both to defend its present aggressions and to create theoretical justifications for similar acts in the future. Whether in theory or in practice, the Afghan incident marks a new stage of development in the external expansion of the hegemonists.
85.	In sending troops to Afghanistan and supporting the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the Soviet Union aims not only to enslave those two countries but also to turn them into springboards for further expansion. Both incidents are important steps taken by the hegemonists in their policy of a southward drive. With the dispatch of troops to Afghanistan, the Soviet armed forces have pushed more than 600 kilometres southward to press against the northern and western parts of the Pakistani border and the eastern part of the Iranian border. Another step forward will take them to the Indian Ocean and the shores of the Gulf. By supporting the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, the Soviet Union has strengthened its control over Viet Nam and moved into Cam Ranh bay, thereby advancing its military base in the Far East southward by more than 4,000 kilometres and pressing towards the Straits of Malacca. In driving south towards the Indian Ocean and along the Pacific Ocean, in coordination with its activities of expansion in the Red Sea and in the Horn of Africa, the Soviet Union aims to seize strategic sites in the vast area of crucial importance—from the Red Sea and the Arabian Peninsula in the west, through the Straits of Malacca in the middle and to the South China Sea in the east—encircle the oil fields in the Gulf and control key international sea lanes. In other words, while further threatening the whole Asia Pacific region, it intends to outflank western Europe and to hasten the completion of its global strategic deployment for world domination.
86.	Therefore, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and its support for the Vietnamese aggression in Kampuchea are certainly not "accidental" events, but premeditated acts; not "defensive" measures, but offensive and aggressive moves; not "local" problems, but major issues affecting the overall situation of the world. The threat they pose to world peace and the security of all countries is not "temporary". The hegemonists will never stop where they are. They will see how the wind blows and wait for an opportune moment to start new adventures in order to attain their strategic goals. In these circumstances, while the third world countries located along the route of the hegemonists' southward drive will no doubt bear the brunt of the attack, other countries, including the Western European countries and Japan, will also be facing gravest threats. Should the Soviet Union succeed in every step of its expansion and in its global strategic plan, it will be difficult for the world to avoid another holocaust.
87.	It is not without reason that, faced with the realities of intensified arms expansion and war preparations by the Soviet Union over the years and considering the change that has taken place and is going to take place in the global balance of military strength, many people have pointed to the mid1980s as a period of danger. This point of view is not devoid of foundation. That the 1980s opened with the Afghan incident was indeed a bad omen. The incident has further revealed the ambitions of the hegemonists and brought into relief their adventurous nature. Thus an alarm was sounded for the people of the world, awakening them to the fact that the international situation has now reached a crucial point. Faced with the war provocations by the hegemonists, the people of the world must promptly and decisively choose between a resolute counterblow or a steady retreat.
88.	We believe that the strategic offensive by the hegemonists should be countered with overall measures so that wherever they seek expansion, they will be held in check. It is not enough just to condemn and call for sanctions against the aggressors. We must also adopt effective measures to help the people of countries subjected to aggression, because in fighting for their national independence and liberty they are in fact struggling for international peace and security. Provided that the countries of the world strengthen their solidarity, coordinate their actions and persist in struggle, it is entirely possible to check the aggressive drive by the hegemonists, upset their global strategic plan and prevent their launching a new world war.
89.	But if we yield our positions one after another in the face of hegemonist onslaught, the hegemonists will become even more insatiable and unscrupulous in their expansion and aggression. In the end, we shall be backed against the wall with nothing but the choice between being forced into complete submission or being caught totally unprepared for a major war. The course of the Second World War has demonstrated to the full what a heavy price one has to pay for the failure to make the right choice in time. History does not simply repeat itself, but the lessons of the past are worth taking seriously.
90.	At present, the Soviet Union is playing the trick of "detente" with great fanfare in order to divert world attention and divide the anti-aggression forces. For some time it has been advocating "a summit meeting of leaders of States of all the regions of the world", making appeals to the parliaments and members of parliaments of various countries "to strengthen peace and detente", and so on and so forth. As a matter of fact, it has long been the established practice of the hegemonists to pursue aggression and expansion while trumpeting the slogan of "detente". Especially after massive aggression and expansion, they always strike a pose of defending peace and launch a big "detente" offensive. Was it not the Soviet Union which proposed in 1969, not long after its invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, that the question of so-called "strengthening international security" be considered by the United Nations General Assembly? Shortly after the Afghan incident, it was predicted that the Soviet Union would come forward with another round of the "detente" offensive. As it turned out, that was exactly what happened. The new item entitled "Urgent measure for reducing the war danger" proposed by Mr. Gromyko; the plenary meeting yesterday for consideration at the current session is precisely that kind of thing. The facts show that the armed aggression against Afghanistan being carried out by the Soviet Union constitutes in itself a grave threat to world peace. If the Soviet Union is really sincere about "reducing the war danger", is there any action more "urgent" and practical than the scrupulous implementation of General Assembly resolution ES6/2, endorsed by 104 countries, and the immediate and total withdrawal of its aggressor forces from Afghanistan?
91.	In the face of the current pressing international situation, the Chinese people are determined to keep up the struggle against hegemonism together with the peace-loving and justice upholding peoples all over the world. The Chinese Government will maintain its consistent foreign policy of peace and wishes to establish and develop State relations with all countries on the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. But we are resolutely opposed to any act of hegemonism. We take this stand not merely for the sake of our own security but, more importantly, with a view to safeguarding the overall interests o world peace.
92.	The question of how to check the naked armed aggression in Afghanistan and Kampuchea must have priority over other issues on the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly.
93.	More than eight months have elapsed since the sixth emergency special session of the General Assembly adopted a resolution by 104 votes, calling for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan. However, the Afghan people continue to shed their blood because foreign aggressor troops are still engaged in the massacre, over 1 million Afghan refugees have been compelled to flee the country and the number continues to rise. While intensifying its repression of the Afghan patriots, the Soviet Union instructed the Kabul regime to put forward a so-called "seven point proposal" for the settlement of the Afghan question, advocating bilateral negotiations between the Kabul regime and Governments of neighbouring countries. The aim of the Soviet Union is to legitimize the Afghan regime it has installed through military intervention and to confuse the public so that the crux of the Afghan question would appear to be a matter of relations between Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, and not one of Soviet armed aggression. Such a proposal has of course met with universal opposition.
94.	Viet Nam has behaved exactly the same way in Kampuchea as the Soviet Union in Afghanistan. Disregarding General Assembly resolution 34/22, adopted by 91 votes, Viet Nam has not only persisted in its aggression against Kampuchea but also extended the flames of war to Kampuchea's neighbour, posing an increasingly serious threat to peace and stability in Southeast Asia.
95.	After the recent setback in its armed incursion into Thailand, Viet Nam, acting as the overlord in IndoChina, has dished up a so-called "four point proposal" for defusing the tension along the Thai Kampuchean border. While evading the question of the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops from Kampuchea, the proposal calls for the establishment of a demilitarized zone along the Thai Kampuchean border and advocates negotiations between Thailand and the Heng Samrin regime. In essence, this is an attempt to force others to recognize the puppet regime in Kampuchea, installed and propped up by Viet Nam at bayonet point, and to divert attention from Vietnamese armed aggression, which is at the core of the Kampuchean issue.
96.	Thailand and other ASEAN countries have sternly rejected this unreasonable Vietnamese proposal. The Thai Government has sharply pointed out that the proposal represents "an attempt to legitimize the illegal presence of foreign forces in Kampuchea". Viet Nam has now sanctimoniously requested that the "Question of peace, stability and cooperation in Southeast Asia" be included in the agenda of the current session of the General Assembly. One cannot help asking: in Southeast Asia today, which country, in fact, has stationed its troops on foreign soil? Which country has tried to overthrow the Government of another country by means of armed aggression? Which country, after all, is sabotaging peace, stability and cooperation in the region?
97.	It is understandable that some countries hope to find a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions so as to ease international tension. China is in favour of a just and reasonable political settlement of the two questions. However, we are opposed to any political settlement based on the acceptance of the faits accomplis created by the aggressors. We should guard against their attempts to distract public attention in the name of seeking a political solution, and to turn negotiations for a political settlement into an endless debate so that they may buy time to step up their military actions and consolidate their gains from aggression. We should likewise guard against their attempt, in the course of a political solution, to exploit the desire of certain people in the world for momentary peace and security and to induce them to sacrifice the fundamental interests of the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples.
98.	The Afghan and Kampuchean incidents have the same characteristics. In the joint statement issued at Kuala Lumpur last March by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of ASEAN and the European Community, it was pointed out that the two incidents "have as a common denominator the imposition of will on small independent States by foreign Powers through the use of force in open violation of international law, thereby threatening international peace and security”. In the view of the Chinese delegation, a just and reasonable settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions requires that the following three basic principles be followed.
99.	First, the foreign aggressors must withdraw all their troops immediately and unconditionally from Afghanistan and Kampuchea in compliance with the relevant United Nations resolutions. This is a principle of key importance and the prerequisite of any settlement.
100.	Secondly, after the withdrawal of foreign troops, the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples should be free to decide their own destiny without any outside interference. In its resolution, the Eleventh Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at Islamabad from 17 to 22 May of this year, emphasized respect for "the Afghan people's inalienable right to decide their own form of government and to choose their economic, political and social system". Recently, the Government of Democratic Kampuchea stated that after the withdrawal of foreign troops from Kampuchea "the Kampuchean people may choose their own national government through a general election by free, direct or secret ballot, and, if necessary, under the supervision of the United Nations Secretary General or his representative". The Chinese Government supports the above propositions.
101.	Thirdly, Afghanistan and Kampuchea should be restored to their independent and nonaligned status.
102.	After the Afghan and Kampuchean questions are settled in accordance with the above three principles, China, in the interest of safeguarding the independence of these two countries and peace in Asia and the world, will be ready to join the other countries concerned in an international guarantee that the territory of Afghanistan or Kampuchea shall not be occupied or used to encroach on the independence and sovereignty of other countries in either region, nor shall there be any form of interference in the internal affairs of these two countries.
103.	At the current session the Assembly will also consider some other major international political and economic issues. We should act promptly, wisely and with farsightedness in our effort to find a just, reasonable and effective solution of these issues, not only on the merits of each case but also in consideration of their impact on the world situation as a whole.
104.	The Middle East question has been dragging on for several decades, gravely threatening regional and world peace and stability. At the seventh emergency special session of the General Assembly on the question of Palestine, held in July this year, speeches made by many representatives and the final resolution, adopted by 112 votes, expressed the demand of the people of the world for an early comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question. In this connexion, the declaration of the European Community issued at Venice on 13 June also has a positive significance in promoting a Middle East settlement. However, Israel has brazenly declared the above resolution "illegal", accelerated its plan of occupying Jerusalem and committed new aggression against Lebanon. This is an act of utter contempt for the international community and a direct challenge to the United Nations. Israel has been so intransigent and arrogant precisely because it feels secure in the knowledge that it has the backing of one superpower and that the other superpower, honey on lips and murder in heart, will not give genuine support to the Arab countries.
105.	The Chinese people strongly condemn Israel for its policy of aggression and expansion and for its dogged obstruction of a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question. We firmly support the just struggle of the Palestinian and other Arab peoples. We favour the position of many countries that Israel should withdraw from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, that the Palestinian people should regain their national rights, including the rights to return to their homeland, exercise self-determination and establish their own State, and that all the Middle East countries should have the right to independence and existence. We have always held that the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], being the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, should participate as an interested party in a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
106.	The people of Zimbabwe has finally shaken off the yoke of colonialism and racism after protracted armed struggle. This has greatly changed the outlook of southern Africa and will undoubtedly expedite the great historical process of eradicating colonialism and racism from the entire African continent. After independence, the Zimbabwe Government has made creative efforts in handling racial relations at home. This will have a far-reaching impact on future developments in southern Africa. However, to this day the racist regime of South Africa still refuses to end its illegal rule over Namibia; what is more, it has further intensified its repression of the people of South Africa. This is intolerable. We firmly support the correct views of the frontline States on the question of southern Africa. Like Zimbabwe, Namibia should achieve genuine national independence in conformity with the aspirations of its people and on the basis of territorial integrity and national unification. Apartheid and the system of racial discrimination in South Africa should be completely abolished. The United Nations should make its due contribution to the termination of the colonial and racist rule in southern Africa.
107.	The developments on the Korean peninsula call for close attention. The military junta in South Korea is intensifying its Fascist dictatorship by every ruthless means. Recently, in defiance of world condemnation, this regime has brazenly pronounced a death sentence on the well-known democrat, Kim Dae Jung. All this has not only created new obstacles to the North South dialogue and the peaceful reunification of Korea, but has also added to the destabilizing factors in the Korean situation. A reasonable solution of the Korean question will be of major significance to the maintenance of peace in East Asia and the Pacific region. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has put forward a series of formulas and proposals for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea and has worked tirelessly to this end. On its part, the international community should help to create favourable conditions for its realization. It is necessary to implement as soon as possible the relevant resolution of the General Assembly adopted five years ago by dissolving the "United Nations Command", withdrawing all the United States military forces and equipment from South Korea and converting the Korean armistice agreement into a peace agreement through negotiations between the parties concerned.
108.	We are deeply concerned over the recent military conflict between Iraq and Iran. We sincerely hope that the two parties will cease hostilities speedily and settle their disputes through peaceful negotiations so as not to be exploited by those harbouring ulterior motives.
109.	The current session, moreover, cannot shut its eyes to the stark economic situation prevailing in the world today. Most developing countries, poor in the first place, are now finding their economic situation deteriorating further. The disparity in wealth between North and South is in fact widening. An important reason for this is that, though politically independent, the third world countries are hampered by the old international economic order. This inequitable international economic order must be reformed if the economic development of the developing countries is to be promoted. The recently concluded eleventh special session of the General Assembly reached consensus on the international Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, which, to a certain degree, reflects the desire of the developing countries. However, on the question of global economic negotiations, the session has failed to achieve the progress it should have achieved. In this connexion, we hope that the current session will take a bigger step forward to make a good start in the global economic negotiations and guide them in the direction of strengthening economic cooperation between nations on the basis of equality and mutual benefit. The key to this hinges on the renewed efforts on the part of the developed countries, which would hardly be able to expand their own economies without economic ties and cooperation with the third world countries. What is more, the present international situation requires them to look farther ahead from a vantage point and approach the North South relations from an overall strategic perspective. Improvement in the economic situation of the third world and better North South economic relations will contribute not only to world economic stability and growth, but also to the cause of world peace and security.
110.	Thirty-five years have elapsed since the founding of the United Nations. During this period, the international Organization itself has undergone great changes. A large number of newly independent countries have become Members of the United Nations. This has so changed the composition of the Organization that it is better able to reflect the aspirations of the people of all countries to the maintenance of international peace, security and justice as well as their desire to promote economic development and social progress. Today, it is no longer possible for any big Power to control and manipulate the United Nations. The United Nations traversed a tortuous road before it became what it is today. This has not come about easily, but through the joint efforts of all countries and peoples that love peace and uphold justice.
111.	However, we must not fail to see that the United Nations is facing a grave challenge. It is expressly provided in the Charter that the primary task of the United Nations is to suppress acts of aggression. But actually a good number of correct resolutions adopted by the General Assembly for this purpose have been brazenly violated and undermined by certain Member States. The Charter clearly stipulates that all Members shall refrain in their international relations from the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State; yet, certain Member States have deliberately violated these provisions. Again, the Charter stipulates in explicit terms that international disputes must be settled in conformity with the principles of justice and international law; yet, certain Member States attempt to replace these principles by the law of the jungle and "recognition of faits accomplis created by aggression". The overwhelming majority of the Member States demands that the United Nations effectively fulfil the noble obligations placed on it by the Charter; yet, a tiny minority attempts to lead it onto the tracks of the League of Nations. This is an intense struggle, which can be won by the overwhelming majority of the Member States only if they persevere in opposing and suppressing by deeds as well as words, both inside and outside the United Nations, any violation of the United Nations Charter.
112.	This is the first session of the General Assembly in the 1980s. The coming decade will be a complicated and volatile decade, fraught with crises. Therefore, people have every reason to expect the current session to make a new contribution to opposing aggression, preventing war, safeguarding peace and promoting progress, so that a good start may be made in the work of the United Nations in the 1980s. We must not disappoint the people of the world. China is ready to work together with other Member States for the success of the current session and for the implementation of the purposes and principles of the United Nations as laid down in the Charter
﻿Mr. President, first of all I should like to congratulate you most sincerely on your election to the highest office in the United Nations and to commend you on your impressive inaugural address. Your election is for us a token of recognition of six years' constructive work as the Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations. We also feel that it can be seen as a recognition of the active participation of the Federal Republic of Germany in the world Organization. This participation is of great value to our policy, which is directed towards peace.
79.	I should like to express our thanks to your predecessor, Ambassador Salim, one of the great representatives of the African continent.
80.	I am also very pleased to be able to welcome Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as a new Member State of the world Organization.
81.	This first regular session of the General Assembly in the 1980s is dominated by anxious questions about the future of our world. We commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV) which contains the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. But the recollection of that Declaration also calls to mind the contrast between then and now. In 1960, newly independent African States became Members of the United Nations. At the same time, the economic development of the third world emerged as a task for the community of nations as a whole. By proclaiming the First United Nations Development Decade, the United Nations launched a great effort to cope with that task as well.
82.	At the beginning of the 1960s mankind was resolutely setting out for new horizons, and the rate of progress did indeed increase. The process of decolonization has almost been completed. The number of Members of the United Nations has increased from 100 in 1960 to 154 this year. A number of developing countries became new industrial countries or threshold countries. The per capita income of the third world rose at an annual rate of 3 per cent. And though this average rate may conceal the disparities between individual developing countries, it was an unprecedented growth which only few had thought attainable at the beginning of the 1960s.
83.	In 1966 the General Assembly adopted the two International Covenants on Human Rights  and, by specifically defining those rights, imbued them with a force which, despite all resistance, has begun to leave its impression on the lives of nations all over the globe.
84.	And, finally, as the 1960s drew to a close, the climate of cold war between East and West gave way to a newly emerging detente. To many it seemed that the time had already come for the States of the world acting as equal partners to concentrate on the great task of our age: the development of the third world.
85.	But now, on the threshold of the 1980s, it has become increasingly clear that the path towards this goal is paved with obstacles: the designs of power politics are threatening detente; there is the threat of a new arms race; unresolved conflicts weigh heavily on the third world and the quest for power creates new sources of crisis; and in the mid-1970s the world economy experienced its first grave setback since the war. Oil price explosions are having devastating effects on the industrialized countries and are plunging many oil importing third world countries into a development crisis.
86.	Is this the end of the endeavours for a world community of equal States initiated in 1945, with the foundation of the United Nations, and reaffirmed so impressively in 1960? Has the third world struggled for its independence, only to lose it in the face of new challenges? Is economic advancement in parts of the third world grinding to a halt? Will poverty be with us for ever?
87.	In view of these challenges it remains our historic task to establish a world of equal partners based on the right of nations to self-determination and on respect for the inalienable rights of the individual.
88.	The fundamental task is to secure—through an active policy for safeguarding peace—the political conditions for mankind's resumption of steady progress.
89.	What is required in the first place is to continue undiminished efforts to reduce tensions and foster cooperation between East and West. This policy, on a basis of equality, is of vital importance not only for peace between East and West but also for peace and peaceful economic development in the world as a whole. A policy for safeguarding peace is inconceivable without a general determination for detente and cooperation. Such determination cannot do away with the fundamental conflict inherent in contrasting values and political systems. But it can help to prevent avoidable conflicts and to keep unavoidable conflicts under control by means of diplomacy. It can also build bridges to span the gulf and promote cooperation for mutual benefit. Seen in this way, detente and cooperation constitute a realistic and long-term policy for peace.
90.	My country, firmly embedded in the European Community and the North Atlantic defence alliance, has from the outset been among the chief protagonists of detente in Europe. Acting on the basis of shared convictions of freedom and human dignity, these two communities have long been champions of freedom, stability, security and peace in the world. We firmly abide by the policy of detente and cooperation—aware that we share responsibility for peace and that the Germans who have to live in two separate States would be especially affected by a relapse into the cold war.
91.	The basic tenet of our policy continues to be to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self-determination. We know that history is on our side.
92.	The Treaty on the Basis of Relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic" has established the conditions for cooperation which take account of the responsibility of Germans for peace and pave the way for improvements in the humanitarian sphere for all Germans. We are guided by the goals of this Treaty in our efforts to develop further, wherever possible, our cooperation with the German Democratic Republic.
93.	Federal Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and the Chairman of the State Council of the German Democratic Republic, Erich Honecker, have both expressed the view that never again should war originate on German soil.
94.	We want to play our part in keeping the situation in and around Berlin stable and peaceful. Berlin is the barometer of detente in Europe.
95.	Ten years ago the Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet Union laid the foundation for the development of fruitful mutual relations. Chancellor Schmidt and I went to Moscow on 30 June and 1 July 1980; that visit was an expression of our will to maintain direct contacts in difficult times and to do everything to keep the way clear for a policy which we regard as long term. We consider the signal given by our visit, after months of stagnation, for the commencement of talks on medium range weapons to be an incentive to continue our efforts.
96.	We shall also maintain our efforts to develop cooperation with the Polish People's Republic and the other Eastern European countries.
97.	Furthermore, we attach great importance to the multilateral process of detente in Europe. At the Second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, soon to be held at Madrid, we shall discuss the implementation of all parts of the Final Act of Helsinki in all its parts, in a sincere and realistic manner, but we shall also talk about what remains to be done. We want to achieve even progress in all fields. The Conference should be neither a tribunal nor a forum for empty rhetoric.
98.	In the economic field we advocate an East West conference on energy, and in the field of human relations we urge the solution of humanitarian problems, the fostering of contacts .between people in the East and West and a wider exchange of information.
99.	Considering the importance which the Madrid Conference holds for the future, we hope that all participating States will, by their policies, make it possible to achieve progress.
100.	Disarmament is the great task of the 1980s. We must not be discouraged, despite all the disappointments and setbacks. We know that detente and cooperation between East and West can be lasting only if they are founded on military equilibrium. Seeking a position of superiority only serves to create instability and, hence, insecurity. Disarmament cannot, therefore, mean the preservation of superiority, but rather must mean a stronger commitment to disarm on the part of those in a position of superiority. In the field of armament and disarmament, all States must be judged solely by what they actually do. My country and its allies are striving to achieve equilibrium at the lowest possible level of armaments.
101.	The defence efforts of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] are determined exclusively by its own security requirements. The Federal Republic of Germany is not seeking superiority, nor are the other European members of the Western defence alliance, the United States of America or Canada.
102.	We are disturbed by the superiority in conventional weapons of the Warsaw Pact countries in central Europe, and we are particularly concerned about the rapid build-up of the Soviet Union's new SS20 medium range nuclear missiles, which are not trained solely on Western Europe. That arms build-up goes beyond the Soviet Union's own security needs. That is a fact which nobody can deny.
103.	Since it is our serious intention to achieve equilibrium at the lowest possible level of armaments, the Western defence alliance put before the Warsaw Pact countries, in December 1979, a comprehensive package of arms control and disarmament proposals.
104.	The Western defence alliance also linked its decision to modernize its nuclear systems to the offer of negotiations on limiting the medium range land based missiles of the two sides. It is now a question of getting those negotiations under way as quickly as possible.
105.	I am glad that the United States Secretary of State and the Soviet Minister for Foreign Affairs will be discussing here in New York tomorrow the commencement of the preparatory talks on this subject. I am also glad that the President of the United States has stated his intention to seek ratification of the SALT II agreement at the earliest possible date.
106.	The second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, to be held at Madrid, should decide on the establishment of a European conference on disarmament with the clear mandate to agree on confidence-building measures for the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Urals. Confidence is indivisible, also, in geographic terms. The achievement of concrete results at the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in central Europe can also help to stabilize the situation in all of Europe.
107.	Verifiable arms limitation and disarmament are among the primary objectives of German foreign policy. We pursue that objective in Europe and we pursue it worldwide.
108.	Success in arms control negotiations is dependent upon openness and sufficient information about military capabilities in the world. For that reason, we should like to see all nations disclose their military expenditures. In that connexion, the United Nations has worked out a matrix designed to make military budgets comparable. The Federal Republic of Germany, other Western States and third world countries have reported on their military expenditures on the basis of that matrix and given an example of its practical application.
109.	It is now necessary to encourage all countries to disclose their military expenditures according to that system.
110.	Just as in Europe, so also on a global scale confidence-building measures are necessary. In response to a suggestion for which we were responsible, the General Assembly last year appointed a working group to study the possibility of confidence-building measures in various regions and throughout the world. 
111.	One crucial task of our active policy for safeguarding peace is to frustrate all hegemonic aspirations. This must apply worldwide. Hegemonic policies and resultant military intervention destroy the right of nations to self-determination. The East West confrontation must not be transferred to the third world.
112.	In an interdependent world, one of the foundations of which is respect for the right to self-determination, interventionism is not a matter which concerns only those who intervene and their victims; it is a challenge to the entire community of nations. This is also the essence of the principle of the indivisibility of detente.
113.	The signatory States to the Helsinki Final Act expressly declared their intention not only to base their relations with one another on the principles embodied in the Final Act, which include the renunciation of force and respect for equality of rights and for the right of nations to self-determination, but also to conduct their relations with other States in the spirit of those principles.
114.	Accordingly, the Federal Republic of Germany and France, in their joint declaration of 5 February 1980, described as unacceptable the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan and stated clearly that detente would not be able to withstand another blow of that kind.
115.	The nonaligned movement is becoming an increasingly important force in international politics. The more all its members associate themselves with the aim of true non-alignment, the greater will be their contribution to stability in the world.
116.	The conflicts in the third world must also be resolved through negotiations.
117.	The agenda for this session of the General Assembly includes four major crisis areas: the Middle East, southern Africa, Afghanistan and Cambodia. To these must be added the Iraqi Iranian conflict, a source of great concern.
118.	In the Middle East, new obstacles have been piled up on the road to a comprehensive peace settlement. The positions of the parties concerned have hardened and tension has again built up to a dangerous level.
119.	The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, Mr. Thorn, who is currently presiding over the European Community, has explained the position of the nine member States on all aspects of the Middle East conflict. Together with our European partners, we shall do everything in our power to bring about a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The Palestinian people must be enabled to exercise fully its right to self-determination. That right must be implemented, just as much as the right to existence and security of all States in the region, including Israel.
120.	We are convinced that the Middle East problem can only be solved if all the parties concerned forgo exclusive territorial demands. There must be no "all or nothing" attitude. On none of the issues should one side confront the other with a fait accompli. That applies to settlements in the occupied territories, and it applies especially to Jerusalem, of whose importance for the three major religions we are particularly aware.
121.	A necessary step on the road to comprehensive peace is the renunciation of force or the threat of use of force by all the parties concerned. This is the only way to create in the area the climate of confidence that is indispensable to a settlement.
122.	Our intention to give a new impetus to the Euro Arab dialogue by adding a political dimension to it, and the continuing willingness of the Europeans to participate in international guarantees, indicate our determination to take our share of the responsibility for peace.
123.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany views with grave concern the armed confrontation which has flared up in the past few days between Iraq and Iran. We appeal to those involved not to add yet another conflict to those already existing in the Middle East, but rather to settle matters at the negotiating table. And we appeal to all States to exercise the greatest restraint so as to prevent the conflict from spreading. The United Nations must shoulder its responsibility for peace.
124.	In Africa, the year 1980 has brought crucial progress towards eliminating the remnants of colonialism.
125.	The people of Zimbabwe have exercised their right to self-determination through free elections under international supervision, and have obtained their independence. This shows that negotiated solutions to even the most difficult subjects are possible.
126.	In Namibia a solution will only be possible, in our view, if based on the United Nations plan for Namibia. Attempts to achieve an internal settlement would have no chance of bringing peace and freedom to the country; Zimbabwe has confirmed that. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) must now be implemented without delay.
127.	At the sixth emergency special session of the General Assembly, held from 10 to 14 January this year, the international community condemned by an overwhelming majority the armed intervention in Afghanistan and called for the immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of the foreign troops. It urged that the people of Afghanistan be enabled to determine their own form of government and choose their economic, political and social systems free from outside intervention, subversion, coercion or constraint of any kind whatsoever. This resolution must now finally be implemented.
128.	We welcome the endeavours of the Islamic and other third world States to find a political solution to the Afghanistan problem.
129.	It is also necessary to find a political solution to the crisis in Cambodia. Here, too, the United Nations has categorically called for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops. Here, too, it has demanded that the people of Cambodia be enabled to choose their own government by the democratic process—without outside intervention, subversion or coercion.
130.	The conflict must not now be carried even beyond Cambodia's borders. The people of my country are shocked by the terrible fate of the Cambodian people. My Government and the private relief organizations in my country will continue to render humanitarian assistance as best they can. I appeal to all responsible: open up all channels necessary to allow assistance to reach the starving people in all parts of Cambodia.
131.	We must tackle the problem of the world's refugees at its roots. It constitutes a growing challenge to our conscience, an increasing disregard for basic human rights and a growing threat to good neighbourly relations between States and to the international order as a whole.
132.	Today, all over the world, people are fleeing their home countries and seeking refuge in camps. Their number is estimated at about 15 million. Anyone who has visited a refugee camp is aware of the abject misery suffered by these millions.
133.	I refer to the mass exodus from Indochina, Afghanistan and Ethiopia, which has greatly aggravated the refugee problem. In Somalia 30 per cent of the population are refugees, according to government estimates. The development of that country threatens to collapse under this tremendous burden. In the border region between Thailand and Cambodia, refugee problems have led to an acute clanger of war. These examples indicate that the refugee problem has become a threat to peace in many parts of the third world and a threat to the political stability and economic development of the countries receiving the refugees.
134.	So far the United Nations has concentrated on the humanitarian task of mitigating the consequences of flight and expulsion. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has rendered an outstanding service in this field.
135.	We must increase further the humanitarian assistance for refugees and make it more effective. But we must also face up to the political task of counteracting the causes of their flight and expulsion. We must work together to avert new refugee flows. We must elaborate rules governing the conduct of States. We must prevent racially and ideologically undesired minorities from being forcibly expelled by their Governments or compelled to flee as a result of unbearable living conditions. This, too, is part today of a comprehensive and active policy for safeguarding peace. I therefore suggest that this session of the General Assembly include in its agenda a new and urgent item entitled "International cooperation to avert new refugee flows".
136.	Without development of the third world there can be no lasting and secure peace. Nor is peace in the world possible if the gap between the rich and the poor countries grows larger, if hunger and want in the developing countries spread further. What we need is accelerated economic development in the third world and the recovery of sustained growth in the industrial countries. Cooperation in the development effort is an indispensable part of a world order based on partnership.
137.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly that has just ended and at which I presented my Government's views unfortunately met only some of our expectations. Admittedly, agreement was reached on the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade. It was also agreed that the aid extended to the least developed countries must be stepped up considerably. This consensus is a good starting point for the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries to be held in 1981.
138.	The special session was not, however, able to complete the preparations for the global negotiations. It is precisely in view of the difficult world economic situation that my Government considers such negotiations important and urgently necessary. At the present session, therefore, a consensus must be attained on the procedure and the agenda for the negotiations so that they can start in January 1981 as planned. The Brandt Commission has presented an important document on North South issues.' We advocate a North South summit meeting, as recommended by the Brandt Commission. Such a meeting can give important impetus to the negotiations in the United Nations.
139.	Resolution 34/138 establishing the global negotiations relating to international economic cooperation for development, specified five main subjects: commodities, energy, trade, development, money and finance. In all of these fields we must recognize the common interests of industrialized and developing countries. We shall establish a new international economic order not by destroying the existing one but by developing it further. We must preserve free world trade as the driving force behind growth and development. We must solve the world's energy problems and thus safeguard the basis of economic growth and development. We must ensure a stable world monetary system and safeguard the effectiveness of the competent institutions. We must step up the flow of resources to the third world so as to accelerate development and thereby provide important stimuli for growth in the industrial countries and create new jobs there.
140.	Despite its adverse budgetary situation, the Federal Republic of Germany has, between 1977 and 1979—that is, within two years—doubled its official development assistance from 3.2 to 6.1 billion deutsche marks. In absolute terms, my country is therefore, together with France, the second largest donor country. Furthermore, its official development assistance amounts to 0.44 per cent of its gross national product and thus exceeds the average of the industrial countries.
141.	An indispensable part of the global negotiations is a comprehensive dialogue on energy between oil importing and oil exporting countries. The energy issue has now become so crucial and has such far-reaching effects on all other economic sectors that the aim of global negotiations would not be achievable without an energy dialogue.
142.	Successful cooperation for development in the new decade will also depend, to a decisive extent, on whether all countries participate to the best of their ability. Support for the development of the third world cannot be seen as the responsibility of the Western industrial countries alone. It is the responsibility of the entire international community, and everyone must shoulder his portion.
143.	Here 1 appeal particularly to the Communist industrial countries. In recent years their assistance has amounted to only about 0.1 per cent of their gross national product. Almost three quarters of that aid went to just two developing countries.
144.	The world's total arms expenditure will exceed $500 billion this year. Military spending is increasing everywhere— in the East and the West and not least in the third world. The success of development depends more and more also on whether it proves possible to halt the global arms race. What the world needs is not an arms race, but a race in the provision of aid for the developing countries.
145.	I consider it necessary to set up two registers in the United Nations. The first should record how much every industrial country spends per capita on armaments and how much on development assistance. The second register should cover worldwide exports and imports of weapons.
146.	We must not look on passively while arms expenditure is growing and while expenditure on development aid is lagging behind or even stagnating. We must not remain idle when weapons are poured into developing countries which need not guns but schools and hospitals, tractors and lathes.
147.	A world of partnership and an active peace policy call for worldwide respect for human rights. We know how far we still are from this great goal. We have witnessed, especially in recent years, a number of massive violations of human rights. The United Nations has introduced procedures and institutions with a view to promoting the effective implementation of human rights throughout the world. These procedures are still comparatively weak, although their effectiveness is increasing as evidenced by the work of the Human Rights Commission.
148.	It is now necessary to strengthen and develop the instruments of the United Nations for the protection of human rights. These instruments must include a United Nations court of justice for human rights.
149.	Nobody can overlook the appalling abuse in the imposition of the death penalty in many parts of the world. In his annual report, Secretary General Kurt Waldheim condemned the summary execution of individuals without regard for due process of law.
150.	Article 6 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights limits the death penalty. Today, 14 years after the signing of the Covenant, it is time to seek the abolition of that penalty. My Government will therefore propose a convention to eliminate capital punishment. This convention could be given the form of a second optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
151.	It is stated in the Constitution of my country that "Capital punishment shall be abolished". This important decision is the result of painful experiences in our recent past. We know that different historical developments, legal traditions and religious beliefs have prompted different attitudes towards the death penalty in other countries. But this should not make anyone less conscious of the frequent abuses in the imposition of capital punishment. Such abuses can only be eliminated by the total abolition of the death penalty.
152.	Our world is in a state of transition. It is moving towards a new order, the first truly global order in history to be founded on the concept of equality and partnership. The outlines of this new order are already discernible, even though reactionary trends are blurring the picture. I should like to emphasize two basic principles of the new order: the self-determination of all nations and the regional integration of equal States to form larger communities.
153.	Self-determination means the full development of each country's own potential and independent political, economic and cultural development. This aim must be realized today especially in the third world. There would be no genuine and sustained development in Africa, the Arab States, Latin America and Asia if these vast cultural regions merely tried to copy Western or Eastern industrialized countries. Development must build on a country's own culture and, with due respect for inalienable human rights, must use modern science and technology to enhance these cultural values.
154.	Anyone who opposes such independent development and seeks to impose alien, prefabricated concepts upon the third world acts against the interests of the developing countries and the world as a whole. The national, religious and cultural identity of nations must remain intact. Mankind needs a variety of cultures to prevent its creative forces from dwindling. To reject a pluralistic world and to force humanity under the yoke of a single ideology would be tantamount to halting progress.
155.	Regional integration is becoming increasingly important as a means of creating political and economic areas in all parts of the world which will ward off hegemonic designs by foreign Powers and permit the development of modern economies. The European Community provides a model of a regional grouping of States on a basis of equality, a union in which no one dominates. We consider the emergence of regional communities of States in all parts of the world, including Africa, Asia and Latin America one of the most important international developments.
156.	The European Community promotes this development wherever it can. It has already instituted special forms of cooperation with most of these groupings which provide forward-looking models for cooperation between industrialized and developing countries in a spirit of partnership.
157.	The increasing regional cooperation in the third world, the large groupings of the nonaligned countries and the Group of 77 is also developments of great consequence for our work in the United Nations. Without these groupings the political opinion forming process and agreement on solutions in the United Nations would today be almost unthinkable.
158.	It is clear that regional and interregional cooperation supplement and facilitate global cooperation, but do not replace it.
159.	The universal Organization of the United Nations will be more than ever the centre of a new world order based on equality and partnership. It is our task to strengthen it, to make it more effective and, above all, to make use of it for the good of the whole world and not merely to safeguard individual interests. This is a task which my country will help to accomplish to the best of its ability.
﻿In electing you Sir, to the presidency of the thirty-fifth session of our General Assembly, the United Nations wished to pay tribute to the great democracy of the Federal Republic of Germany and to Europe, of which it forms one of the pillars. The United Nations has conferred a distinction on a diplomat whose competence, experience and human qualities are appreciated by one and all. In the name of the friendship which unites our two nations and the trustful cooperation which they have established, allow me to say. Sir, how glad I am to see you presiding over the work of this Assembly.
161.	I should also like to express once again my gratitude to our Secretary General for the distinguished services he has constantly rendered to the United Nations, and for his skill, his authority and his talent.
162.	Finally, I am happy to greet the young State of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines as it enters our Organization.
163.	Last year I began my address here by stating that in spite of the upheavals and dangers that had threatened it. The global peace of the world had been preserved for over 30 years. In addition to being a statement of fact, my words were also grounds for hope and an act of faith in the future.
164.	Why does this observation today appear almost unseemly? Why has the hope it brought us given way to a mute feeling of uneasiness?
165.	The reason is of course, the events taking place at this very moment on the Iranian border which, quite rightfully, are in our minds and deeply concern each and every one of us. But in reality—since the uneasiness reaches further back—it is above all because the world has witnessed a number of serious events over the past year, because disturbing trends have developed and, although world peace has not been broken, the confidence we placed in the soundness of its foundations has been shaken.
166.	In fact nothing, unless it be peace itself, is more important than that confidence. It is that confidence that has deteriorated. It is that confidence which must be restored; no task is more urgent.
167.	Never, perhaps, have our peoples and our States been more keenly aware of the solidarity of their destinies and the fragility of peace. Similarly, never before has it seemed so necessary to counter the blind workings of fate with clear-sighted analysis, courageous action and effective structures for international cooperation: a clear-sighted analysis in order to assess, without empty complacency, the gravity of the crises besetting us, and also to acknowledge that, directly or indirectly, those crises affect us all; courageous action in order to reject the dangerously simple recourse to force and to seek with determination the only solutions that are valid, namely, those of law and justice; lastly, effective structures for international cooperation in order to ensure that, at all levels of responsibility and organization within the international community, selfish interests and ideological preferences make way for the higher needs of peace.
168.	It is to this threefold aim of clear-sightedness, courage and cooperation that I have come here to make France's contribution.
169.	It would be both simplistic and incorrect to attribute the critical world situation to a single factor. The new element introduced into the situation by the current military confrontation between Iran and Iraq should be sufficient to remind us of this. We know well that whether longstanding or recent, political or economic, there are many causes of tension. We are aware that they are responsible for the proportions and gravity of the critical world situation. We should not, we cannot ignore any of them.
170.	The critical situation has taken on a very special significance since the intervention of the Soviet army in Afghanistan. The Afghan crisis is not simply an addition to other crises; it is of a different order of gravity and so are its implications, for three main reasons.
171.	Looking beyond the tragic suffering it is inflicting on 15 million Afghans, the crisis calls into question, first and foremost, respect for a fundamental and universal principle, namely, national independence, the right of a people to determine its own destiny. This cannot be concealed, however artfully the situation is presented.
172.	The issue is also the fate of a country and a region whose security and stability are essential to world equilibrium and peace.
173.	Lastly, the issue involves the conduct of one of the two Powers which alone have the means to start a global conflict and on which special obligations devolve by virtue of this fact.
174.	The crisis in Afghanistan also has other implications. One has only to look at its consequences in East West relations: the course of detente has changed for the worse and momentum has been lost; a shadow has fallen over the prospects of the Madrid Conference; efforts towards disarmament are at a standstill in some places and have been interrupted in others.
175.	It is pointless to think that the crisis in Afghanistan can be reduced to local or regional proportions. By degrees it has come to affect international relations as a whole. It has repercussions on other crises; it increases their dangers and makes them more difficult to resolve.
176.	I am thinking in the first place of the Middle East. The conflict which continues there and which is growing more acute is as old as our Organization itself. How many hopes have been disappointed over the past 30 years, how many paths explored that led nowhere? To limit myself to the last 12 months, how can one fail to note once again, with sadness, that in spite of the efforts made and even in spite of the progress accomplished, thanks to the evacuation of a large part of the Sinai, when it comes to fundamentals the end is far from being in sight.
177.	What is more, the unilateral and illegal decisions of the State of Israel, whether in regard to the West Bank or more recently to Jerusalem, are new impediments to the search for a peaceful settlement.
178.	Lastly, what can one say of the attacks on Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and on the mission and authority of the United Nations Force in that country? The friendship that links France to Lebanon and my country's role in UN IFIL make these actions all the more abhorrent to France.
179.	Is it conceivable to imagine the situation in that region of the world continuing without presenting the gravest dangers to peace?
180.	As regards Southeast Asia, last year we deplored the occupation of Cambodia by the Vietnamese army. This occupation continues. The Cambodian people have escaped annihilation only thanks to the massive humanitarian effort by the international community. The conflict of which they have been the unfortunate object has even recently threatened to spill over Cambodia's very borders.
181.	Concerning southern Africa, the satisfaction we feel at welcoming the presence of the delegation of an independent Zimbabwe to our Assembly should not blind us to the slow pace of progress in Namibia's decolonization nor to the obstacles still blocking its path. Moreover, it should not cause us to forget that in South Africa the system of apartheid maintains millions of human beings in a state that is an offence to human rights and to the dignity of Africa.
182.	I shah not dwell on the latest developments in the crisis between Iran and Iraq, except to say that it is vital to avoid interventions that might widen the conflict, to prevent interference in freedom of navigation in the Gulf, which is of worldwide importance, and lastly to foster the «;arch for a political solution. That is what France requests. That is what the European Community requests. That is what we expect of the consultations currently taking place on the initiative of our Secretary General.
183. Afghanistan, the Middle Fast. Cambodia, southern Africa, those major areas of crisis are by themselves sufficient to warrant the most serious concern.
184.	The picture would, however, be incomplete if I did not mention the formidable problem which forms the backdrop to them all, namely, the problem of hunger and development.
185.	The recent debates of the special session of the General Assembly on that subject are fresh in all our minds. They did not enable us to reach complete agreement. That was a serious disappointment. We must not resign ourselves to that setback, however. What is at stake is, indeed, far too important. It commits us all, morally, economically and politically.
186.	Hunger, poverty and underdevelopment do more than breed misery. They feed frustration and lead to despair. They are felt to be the worst injustices of all and are a permanent factor of instability.
187.	Such, then, is the state of the world. We should not be lulled by the comforting illusion that crises will take care of themselves and problems will be solved of their own accord. But we must not give way to discouragement either.
188.	Because there are, indeed, solutions to those problems. I should even venture to say that they are within our grasp. They are based on the principles that form the foundation of our international community. Those principles are embodied in our Charter. They give us the law as our rule, and dialogue and consultation as our methods.
189.	Law implies self-determination for peoples, independence and security for States, dignity and equality for mankind. Dialogue and consultation mean the refusal to accept unilateral action and the condemnation of recourse to force.
190.	In the light of current events, those time-honoured words, which we mistakenly view as worn out acquire an immediate practical value. They provide a much needed compass that can guide us through the turbulent waters the world has entered. That compass will show us that, despite differing circumstances in the four crises that, in the long term, weigh most heavily on international relations—I refer here to Afghanistan. Cambodia, the Middle Cast and Namibia—the same causes lead to the same effects, the same obstacles stand in the way of the same goals, the same problems call for the same solution.
191.	In Afghanistan the goal is the right of the Afghan people freely to determine its own future. What are the obstacles? The first is the intervention of a foreign army; the second is the temptation to turn that country into a stake or a threat. The first obstacle must be removed and the second avoided. The two things must go hand in hand. So the States that are in a position to influence Afghanistan's destiny by virtue of their close proximity or power must agree to eliminate those two obstacles. If they pledge to respect Afghanistan's sovereignty, if they cease trying to bring it into their zone of influence and. more importantly, if they refrain from introducing military forces into that country on maintaining them there, that will be enough to restore to the people of Afghanistan their freedom and independence, to give equilibrium and calm to the region, and to give security and hope to the world.
192.	In Southeast Asia the goal is to lead ill-fated Cambodia out of the hopeless impasse in which it has been locked by a conflict that is beyond its control and foreign to it. The Khmer people did not escape the barbaric oppression of a bloodthirsty tyranny in order to submit to the protector-ship of someone else. That people is entitled, after all its tribulations, to live in freedom and stand on its own feet. The countries of the region are entitled to have among them a partner that wants to practise peace and friendship with all its neighbours. France has known that people long enough to realize that, left to itself, it would aspire to no more than that. The military occupation still has to end and an agreement has to be reached if Cambodia is to re-emerge free, peaceful and neutral. Providing those two conditions are met, the accumulation of physical and human ruin can be rebuilt and a lasting peace restored throughout Southeast Asia.
193.	As far as Namibia is concerned, no one can any longer dispute the fact that that country is entitled to accede to international sovereignty, or that the genuine independence it seeks can come only from the free choice of the peoples living there. To create the conditions to make that possible, here again, the obstacles standing in the way must be cleared. In this case, that means neutralizing those forces which, by their presence or their action, could unfairly influence the outcome of the national elections. The example of Zimbabwe shows that stability in southern Africa could only gain thereby.
194.	What is true in all those cases is also true of the Arab Israeli conflict. Complex though the many factors in that situation may be, the basic facts are still analogous. Two rights are in conflict in the territories now under military occupation—which occupation neither confers legitimacy nor provides a basis for peace: they are the State of Israel's right to security and the Palestinian people's right to self-determination. Neither can be affirmed by negating the other. Passionate and violent confrontation must be replaced by rational and fair reconciliation. It will then become clear that those rights, far from being incompatible, can become complementary, providing that the guarantee of one and the exercise of the other are equally ensured in the framework of an overall settlement based on withdrawal from the territories occupied since 1967 and the universal recognition of Israel's boundaries. The way must be paved for the indispensable negotiations in which all the interested parties, and therefore the Palestine Liberation Organization must necessarily participate.
195.	In every case, in view of the dangers raised by crises, there can be only one response: the rule of law, and not the rule of force, is the key to peace.
196.	That applies just as clearly to the threat weighing on the future of the world in the shape of underdevelopment which is persisting and in some cases, is growing worse.
197.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly, which was held in this same hall a few weeks ago, made no mistake about that subject. True, the session did not come to an agreement; but lei us at least give it credit for having emphasized the importance of the subject and for having pointed the way for us to proceed on the crucial subjects.
198.	While there was no formal adoption of a text, the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade won a consensus. Aims were defined, main lines mapped out and pledges made. There is no need for these to be modified. France, for its part, will uphold them firmly.
199.	Next, resolution S-11/4 which was adopted by the Assembly with regard to the least developed countries expressed a deep-rooted, widespread conviction. The new international economic order must operate to the benefit of all but primarily to that of the poorest and the most impoverished. This priority and the concrete measures it implies can no longer be forgotten. They will serve to guide France's actions.
200.	There remains a last obstacle before global negotiations can be opened and the balanced text proposed by the Chairman of the negotiating group provides us with the means to overcome it. My country, which within the framework of the European Community has consistently directed its efforts towards compromise, believes this text should be acceptable to all. It invites this General Assembly not to disband without arriving at the agreement that is indispensable on this point if global negotiations are to begin by 1981. Indeed, my country could not understand how procedural differences could prevent or delay what must constitute a major step in the construction of a new international economic order.
201.	The critical period we have entered calls for a longer term effort to strengthen the structures of international cooperation at all levels: first, the world level, then the level of East West relations and. lastly, the level of regional cooperation.
202.	The world level is pre-eminently the level on which, within the framework of our Organization, universal law is both defined and affirmed. All States are equally called upon to play a part in shaping that law. No State can escape its duties.
203.	That is why it is so important for the membership of our Organization to be enlarged by the entry of new States and why its activities benefit from their participation. In particular, that is win my country is glad to see China playing a more and more active role in the work of our Organization after having been for too long unjustly kept outside.
204.	The law we want to see become the norm must henceforth be a universal one.
205.	This law must be universal with regard to human rights, which it defines and protects and whose progress it untiringly ensures, That is also why the World Conference on the status of women, "held at Copenhagen, has evoked such a wide response in all quarters. That is also why so many countries, among them France, have taken and are continuing to take a stand—in spite of the friendship they continue to bear towards the Iranian people—against the violation of law constituted by the holding of American diplomats as hostages in Teheran. By liberating them, Iran will once again assume its place within the international community.
206.	This law is universal, also, with regard to defining a new international economic order and with regard to the question of disarmament. It applies even beyond the context of the global negotiations which, as 1 have already said, France firmly expects to see started in 1981, and the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea is a good and important example of this universality. On this subject, I should like to welcome and express the great hopes aroused by the progress that has recently been achieved in this area and that augurs well for a favourable conclusion in the near future. By the same token, France, which has pleaded more strongly than any other country for disarmament to become the concern of us all, is extremely pleased with the new impetus given to the work of the Committee on Disarmament at Geneva, from 5 February to 29 April and from 12 June to 9 August this year, and with the birth of the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research, which is now assured.
207.	Finally, the law is universal in the political area. False realism cannot make us accept as irreversible situations which have been created by force alone. When law is violated, silence acts as an accomplice. One cannot support the self-determination of peoples in one area and show indifference to it in another.
208.	Law, like peace, is indivisible. It would be a mistake to think it is powerless when it expresses itself through the unanimous voice of the international community. In this respect, the role of our Organization is one that cannot be replaced. Its effectiveness is in direct proportion to the support we give it.
209.	However important it may be to strengthen the structures of international order on a world level, we cannot forget that the relationship between Fast and West remains, in many respects, one of the key elements of that order.
210.	At this level the main factors hinge on two States, which are called superpowers precisely because they alone have the power to thrust the world headlong into general conflagration. These factors hinge first on their conduct and next on their relations with each other.
211.	As far as their conduct is concerned, my country is the friend and ally of one of them. Looking beyond ideological differences, it has with the other relations of cooperation which it values and hopes to be able to maintain and develop. In the past my country did not conceal its feelings about United States policy in Viet Nam. Today it is compelled to say that the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan is unacceptable; that no security considerations can justify such action and that it is essential, in the interests of everyone—and that includes the Soviet Union itself—to find a political solution to the crisis that is consistent with the legitimate aspirations of the Afghan people and the requirements of international peace.
212.	Next, as far as the relations between the two superpowers are concerned, it is in the first place up to those that possess the most formidable arsenals and are constantly striving to increase and perfect them to put an end to the arms race. Last year, the conclusion of the SALT II agreement offered some hope in this direction. Although this undoubtedly was not genuine disarmament, it at least constituted a beginning, and I said at the time that France recognized the importance of the step that had just been taken. Even though I understand the extent to which the international climate puts a strain on that agreement, I should like to repeat here that my country hopes to see it take effect as soon as possible.
213.	In addition to the world dimension and the East West dimension of international relations, there is increasingly nowadays a regional dimension.
214.	There are, of course, large continental organizations such as the Organization of American States and the Organization of African Unity, and they are constantly reaffirming their vitality and usefulness.
215.	But there are also other new associations which arc demonstrating their solidarity and taking common initiatives and actions on a more limited scale. The phenomenon is too widespread not to reflect a profound need. We may rest assured that these groupings, associations and communities will be the pillars of peace and the relay stations on the road to the development of the world of tomorrow. Many examples show that they have already begun to do just this and that the hope is already in the process of becoming a reality.
216.	We all remember that the so-called frontline States made an essential contribution to the decolonization of Rhodesia at its most delicate stage. We all remember the initiatives taken by the Islamic Conference and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN). I also have in mind the efforts made by a number of West African countries to help recreate the conditions needed for national reconciliation and civil peace in Chad. I should also like to pay a tribute to the appeal made recently by the President of the Republic of Djibouti for a truce and a negotiated settlement in the Horn of Africa.
217.	Lastly, in mentioning the role of the European Community, I should like to recall that France was one of its founding members. The nine member countries are not satisfied merely to cast a brotherly look towards those new associations. They have established direct contacts with several of them, with ASEAN in particular and the Andean Pact.  The nine Community members are preparing to take new initiatives. As a European community, they have long devoted the main part of their efforts to contributing to development. They will continue to do so. But their action is increasingly directed also towards detente and peace. They are less able than ever before to retreat into indifference or a wait and see attitude in the face of the increased dangers. They are no longer satisfied simply to make their voice heard. They have decided to make their presence felt. The mission that Mr. Thorn, current President of the nine members of the European Community, recently undertook to the Middle East on their behalf both implies and announces that decision.
218.	Periods of crisis are not the time to stay on the sidelines or abdicate responsibility; they are, on the contrary, a time for responsibility and initiative. The State on whose behalf I speak is the first to be aware of this. France is committed to the free determination of peoples, both for itself and for others; it has shown this many times over the past 20 years. It respects the free choice of the peoples for which it has responsibility. It did so only recently by terminating, on the date arranged, the condominium it had administered with Great Britain in the New Hebrides. It would not allow this free choice to be dictated by others either. France would not allow predetermination to take the place of self-determination.
219.	France has experienced the oppression and the trials of war. It understands the suffering caused by violence, intolerance and poverty, and it opens its borders wide to refugees of all origins who seek asylum on its soil.
220.	France is party to no conflict and has claims against no one. But it knows the price of security and it is determined to pay it. Having formed many faithful friendships on five continents over the course of a long history, France is open to cooperation with everyone. But it will never compromise on its independence.
221.	Do not be surprised if France speaks in grave tones today. Conflicts are multiplying and becoming entrenched; international dialogue, when it is not actually interrupted, does not even manage to get started; and whether the subject is detente, disarmament or peace, it looks as if the world does not dare either to deny these principles or to advance them further.
222.	In concluding today on a note of warning and an appeal. France is remaining true to its tradition and its calling. France, like every other State, has national interests to protect, but it recognizes no higher interests than those of peace, justice and progress for mankind.
﻿Mr. President, may I first congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at this thirty-fifth session. You have taken on a task which demands many qualities, not least stamina, firmness and tact. It is a task for which your distinguished record at the United Nations has shown you to be well qualified. I offer you the best wishes of the British Government and of its representation at the United Nations in the weeks and months ahead.
2.	In so doing, I wish also to join those who have expressed their appreciation of the efficient and statesmanlike way in which your predecessor, Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania, conducted the business of the presidency over the past year.
3.	Since I last addressed this Assembly 12 months ago, many terrible things have happened in the world. There has been much cruel and cynical defiance of the principles on which our Charter is based. It would be difficult to say that the world is a safer, more prosperous or happier place today than it was a year ago. Indeed, within the last few days the emergence of a fresh conflict in the Middle Eastern region has given us further cause for anxiety. The tasks confronting all of us remain formidable.
4.	But what has happened during the last 12 months has not all been bad. The great majority of the States Members of this Organization have observed the Charter. And things have happened to inspire us and to persuade us, if persuasion were needed, that conflicts can be resolved; that peaceful negotiations can uncover compromises on which warring parties can settle their differences; that perseverance, goodwill and realism, here at the United Nations and elsewhere, can end wars and save human lives.
5.	When I last addressed the Assembly, war was still raging in that country which is now called Zimbabwe and which, last 25 August, was welcomed as the one hundred and fifty-third Member State of this Organization. That conflict had been going on for 14years— some, I suppose would say longer. But long, complex and, at times, painful negotiations succeeded in finding a basis on which it could be ended and on which the people of Zimbabwe could be given the opportunity to decide for themselves how and by whom they should be governed. I should like to suggest that, as we enter this thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly, the example of Zimbabwe should inspire us to search all the harder for peaceful, practical and realistic— and I cannot emphasize the last adjective too much— solutions to the major problems that confront the world today.
6.	Before briefly surveying those problems, I should like to say a word about the eleventh special session, devoted to development and to international economic cooperation that has just ended. The United Kingdom supported that collective attempt to set a framework for development over the next decade. It was a positive act that accorded well with the ideals of our Charter. Britain accepts, as we all do, that many developing countries face immense social and economic problems. A common effort is essential to ensure that the world economic system evolves to meet the needs of all. But, in making that effort, we must not weaken the foundation of the world's trading, monetary and financial system which has been built up gradually over the years and which has seen an increase in world prosperity unprecedented in human history.
7.	I am glad that the special session was able to agree on an International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade and on a resolution concerning the least developed countries . I am disappointed that it proved impossible to reach agreement on procedures for global negotiations. But discussions will continue during this General Assembly. We shall work for a successful launch of the global negotiations on a generally acceptable basis.
8.	Meanwhile, I should point out that, despite our own domestic economic problems, the aid programme of my own country is substantial. It is the fifth largest among the aid programmes of the industrialized countries and the seventh highest as a percentage of gross national product. But aid is only one factor in the development process. Private investment and private flows are also essential. In 1978, for example, net private flows from the United Kingdom to developing countries amounted to $8.7 billion, or 2.8 per cent of our gross national product. Trade too is vital. In 1979, 18 per cent of Britain's total imports came from developing countries. They were worth $19 billion, or 4.6 per cent of our gross national product. In addition, we continue to work with our partners in Europe to increase aid, trade and investment for the benefit of developing countries. For example, through the Second ACPEEC Convention of Lome signed at Lome on 31 October 1979, the European Community has given to 59 countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific guaranteed access to our markets for an assured quota of their products. That Convention has also provided and does provide aid and. technical cooperation on a very large scale.
9.	I should now like to refer to some of the major conflicts which are on the agenda of this session and to offer some ideas, which I promise will be brief, about how, in the view of the United Kingdom Government, progress can be made towards peaceful solutions.
10.	The Middle East conflict is, above all, one which, in our view, cries out for negotiations leading to a peaceful solution. The violence has gone on far too long. Negotiations are bound to be a lengthy and complex process, and they can hardly succeed unless a calmer atmosphere can be created than that which prevails today. Britain appeals again to all concerned to refrain from inflammatory acts and statements. Such restraint would be a major contribution to the attainment of the goal of peace.
11.	The British Government welcomes the news that the leaders of Egypt, Israel and the United States are to meet again before long. In the meantime Europe has not been inactive. Britain and its partners in the European Community committed themselves to search for common ground and to gain acceptance of the principles set out by their Heads of Government in the declaration which they issued at Venice on 13 June this year. We believe that these principles, and only these principles, can form the basis for a just and lasting settlement.
12.	I said earlier that the great majority of States Members of the Organization had been faithful to the Charter. I wish I could say "all". We are pledged to respect the sovereignty of others. We are pledged to refrain from the threat or use of force in international relations. Nine months ago both of those principles were violated by a country which is a permanent member of the Security Council. I refer, of course, to the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union. One hundred and four Member States voted in this Assembly to condemn it. Nine months later, no end to the conflict is in sight. One million Afghans have sought refuge outside their own country. Tens of thousands of Soviet troops remain there; but they have failed to subjugate the people of Afghanistan. Here, too, let there be a political solution—a solution which will remove Soviet forces from Afghanistan restore to the people of that country their sovereignty and their independence and enable them to choose for themselves how they shall be governed.
13.	The occupation of Afghanistan is not the only violation of the United Nations Charter that we have seen in Southwest Asia in the past 12 months. The detention of the American hostages in Iran is another. International law and common humanity require their immediate release. I take this occasion to remind the Iranian authorities of their obligation under international law to protect the rights of all foreigners residing in their country. I am, of course, especially concerned for those British subjects who are at present detained in Iran and to whom my country's representatives have been denied any access.
14.	Speaking of violations of the Charter, the United Nations surely cannot ignore the grave situation that has developed in the past 48 hours between two Member States. Judging by what they themselves have announced, Iran and Iraq are now in a state of undeclared war. I share the view and the fear expressed yesterday by the Secretary General that this conflict could have serious and unpredictable consequences and I echo his call for the utmost restraint, for an end to the fighting and for a negotiated settlement. This surely is no more than the United Nations has a right to expect from two of its Members. Therefore I welcome the fact that, on the Secretary General’s initiative, the Security Council will be meeting in informal consultations here this afternoon.
15.	Acts of terrorism against diplomatic and consular premises and staff have increased alarmingly in recent years. They threaten the basic fabric of international relations. It is our common duty and our common interest to condemn such acts and to ensure that international terrorism, whatever form it may take, is never allowed to achieve its objective. The British Government is glad that this session's agenda includes proposals to enhance the safety of diplomatic and consular representatives.
16.	An increasingly worrying phenomenon in recent years has been the mass exodus of refugees from their own countries. When the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees was set up as a "temporary" organization nearly 30 years ago, there were 1.2 million refugees in the world, mainly in Europe; there are now nearly 16 million refugees and displaced persons, principally in Africa and Asia—three decades of achievement by the international community. We cannot undo the tragedies that have occurred, but it is not too late to remedy their consequences.
17.	Let us take just one case, that of Cambodia. That country is a picture of the human misery that results if the Charter of the United Nations is not respected. The Vietnamese invasion and occupation of Cambodia have created tension and conflict in Southeast Asia. The stand taken by the countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations [ASEAN] has my Government's full support. We believe that there must be a political solution but that there cannot be such a solution without the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Cambodia. That must be the first aim of any negotiations.
18.	Meanwhile, the United Nations is doing what it can to alleviate the plight of the people of Cambodia and of the refugees. I pay a tribute to the efforts of the United Nations agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross [ICRC] and the many nongovernmental organizations which have mounted the relief programme in Cambodia, often in conditions of personal danger. By the end of this year, the joint UNICEF/ICRC operation alone will have spent some $500 million, or $100 for each Cambodian. But there are limits to what we can achieve by humanitarian means. So long as there is no political solution, so long will the suffering continue.
19.	Another area of tragic armed conflict is Namibia. Here too a political solution must be found by negotiation. But, unlike the position in the other area, here there already exists a plan approved by the Security Council and negotiations are already well advanced. The British Government remains firm in the belief that the United Nations plan provides the only sure route to a peaceful and democratic settlement with general international recognition. We shall continue to work with the Secretary General and the African States most closely involved to achieve the long overdue agreement on implementation of this plan.
20.	I have already referred to Zimbabwe's advance to independence and to membership in the United Nations. That has given my Government great satisfaction, which 1 know is shared by every Member of this Organization. But this new Member of our Organization needs more from us than congratulations. It needs substantial aid to rebuild its economy from the ravages of civil war. My own Government has pledged $180 million of aid to Zimbabwe over the next three years. We have cancelled $53 million of official debt and rescheduled the remainder on favourable terms.
21.	Although a number of other offers of assistance have been made, I do not believe that the international community as a whole has yet done enough to put Zimbabwe back on its feet. The damage resulting from years of isolation and of war is enormous. The expectations raised by the peace settlement are high. An international effort to underpin the political and economic stability of Zimbabwe during its first few years as an independent State could secure its future prosperity and enable it to play an influential part in Africa. I believe it to be of the highest importance that such an effort should be forthcoming in the months ahead.
22.	As regards South Africa, the British Government's view is clear. We consider apartheid to be morally indefensible and politically unworkable. But if change is to come peacefully in South Africa, it will have to be a step-by-step process. We shall not achieve change, peaceful change, by increasing South Africa's isolation, or by ostracism, or by threats. We cannot know how fast changes will come to South Africa, but there are voices inside the country calling for change and we should not ignore them. What the United Nations can and must do is to continue to remind South Africa that apartheid is a system repugnant to all Members of the Organization and incompatible with its ideals and those of the international community as a whole.
23.	I should like to turn now to the efforts which are being made to deal with the larger and more general threats to international security.
24.	Mr. President, a few days ago you made an eloquent appeal for new efforts to halt the arms race. As you reminded us, the hopes attached to the Disarmament Decade of the 1970s were cruelly disappointed: global military expenditure continued to grow and arsenals of weapons multiplied. This is a field in which there are no short cuts. In arms control, above all, realism is called for. A comprehensive and step-by-step programme of attainable measures covering both nuclear and conventional weapons is the only realistic approach. Declaratory measures are of very little value; what matters is concrete results. The British Government will continue to work for agreements based on balanced and verifiable agreements. As we do so, we shall remind those with whom we negotiate that in military matters the key to building confidence between nations often lies in a readiness to publish information on such matters as budgets and force levels. The more is known, the less is feared; the more is concealed, the more is suspect.
25.	Arms control agreements depend on the existence of a climate of trust; they cannot create it. That too is a matter of realism. Arms control must go hand in hand with security. This hard fact is reflected in the outcome of the Second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.  I know that progress in negotiations on nuclear disarmament has been slow, and that is frustrating. But I see no reason why our common interest in preventing nuclear proliferation should be diminished in any way. The British Government remains fully committed to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and is playing a full part in the search for solutions to the outstanding problems and for a renewed consensus.
26.	We remain committed to the undertakings we gave in 1975 under the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.  We believe that the Conference process can and should play a valuable role in the management of international relations in Europe. But popular faith in this process has been shaken by the actions of the Soviet Union, not least its invasion of Afghanistan, which violated at a stroke all the principles of the Final Act. We approach the second review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, due to begin at Madrid in November, determined, first, to conduct a thoroughgoing review of the way in which the Final Act has been implemented and, secondly, to examine proposals for its future development.
27.	It should be clear from what I have said that the British Government continues to believe that the United Nations has an important role to play in the search for political solutions to the many problems that we all face. But if the Organization is to play that role, we must pay due regard to its structure and its management. We must be careful not to tamper with its institutions in such a way as to impair their ability to perform the functions assigned to them by the Charter.
28.	The Organization must set itself the highest standards of good management and economy. Here, obviously much depends on individuals. The United Nations is fortunate to have in its Secretary General someone who justly enjoys the respect of all Members and who in his tenure of office has set the highest standards. We must ensure that efficiency, competence and integrity remain the prime considerations in every appointment to the Secretariat. We must exercise restraint over the proliferation of meetings, which often only consume money and effort with no hope of practical results. We must make the best use of the institutions we have. And, at a time of worldwide economic difficulty, we must eliminate wasteful expenditure and curb the constant expansion of the Organization's budget. If new programmes are to be set up, we must find room for them by first identifying and then bringing to an end other programmes which are now obsolete or of little value.
29.	It is easy to expect too much of the United Nation, and it is too easy to decry its achievements. The United Nations provides the forum where ideals and realities come face to face. Our Charter embodies the ideals to which we should continue to aspire. The world supplies the yardstick by which to measure our progress. Our task is simple but gigantic: to seek year by year to bring the reality closer to the ideal.

﻿I extend to Mr. von Wechmar the warm felicitations of my delegation on his unanimous election to the presidency of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly. His nomination to that high office is a tribute to his personal qualities as an experienced and skilful diplomat. It is also fitting testimony to the dedication of his great country to the ideals of the United Nations, and his opening address amply demonstrated his personal devotion to the fundamental principles and purposes of the Charter. I wish him every success in his challenging assignment and pledge my delegation's full support in his endeavours.
138.	It is a matter of particular satisfaction for me to place on record the sincere appreciation of my delegation for the outstanding work performed by his predecessor, Mr. Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania. His presidency of the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session, as well as of the three special sessions during the past 12 months, was indeed an eventful one. The patience, skill, sincerity and unfailing courtesy displayed by him will long be remembered in the annals of the General Assembly.
139.	It is a pleasure for me to greet once again our distinguished Secretary-General. We admire the way in which he has been discharging the onerous and delicate responsibilities which the complexities of the international situation impose upon him. His travels and efforts straddling the globe, covering points of crisis and explosive situations, have helped defuse tension in our troubled world.
140.	I already had the opportunity at the eleventh special session to extend my congratulations to the freedom-loving people of Zimbabwe on the achievement of their hard-won independence and their membership in the United Nations. I should like once again to welcome Zimbabwe to our midst and to wish it all success in its exciting and difficult task of nation-building.
141.	It also gives me great pleasure to extend our warm and sincere felicitations to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, which has now become the one hundred and fifty- fourth Member of the Organization. We rejoice with them in their hour of triumph and joy and trust that their aspirations to a better and brighter future will be amply fulfilled in the years to come. India looks forward to establishing mutually beneficial relations with the new nation.
142.	The Indian delegation participates in this General Assembly in the context of a transformed domestic political perspective. India has had another general election since the General Assembly met last year. The people of India appraised the challenges that they had faced, reassessed the nature and quality of leadership required to meet them and massively reaffirmed their conviction in the leadership of Prime Minister Mrs. Indira Gandhi.
143.	The new Government in India is engaged in the difficult and enormous task of national reconstruction and regeneration of a pluralistic multilingual, multi-religious and diverse society, and this by democratic means. Intractable though our problems may seem, our national efforts to resolve them since our independence have borne results to a great extent. This has imbued our people with a sense of confidence and inspired them to the objective that India shall emerge as a strong, self-reliant and modern nation.
144.	It is also an abiding conviction of my Government and my people that India's future stability and development depends on the success of the international community in creating a world order characterized by durable peace. There is a national consensus, therefore, on the content and objectives of India's foreign policy. There is unanimity of opinion in India about the relevance of the principles of non-alignment and the imperative need for friendship towards all nations based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence.
145.	Developments during the past year have not been such as to bring credit to the international community as a whole. The collective behaviour of nation-States in recent months has only deepened the sense of insecurity and distrust in the world. New and ever more ominous strategic doctrines are being propounded, bringing the world closer to the cataclysmic outbreak of an all-out nuclear conflagration. The scientific genius of mankind is being exploited for the perverted purpose of manufacturing means of destruction, perhaps in the search for the "ultimate weapon" which, it is believed, I think quite erroneously, would enable one or the other group of States to impose its will on the others. Increasing recourse is being made to might in a manner which has threatened the national independence and integrity of small and medium States. The principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States has been observed more in breach in a variety of ways, covert and overt. All means are considered legitimate in the pursuit of the objective of expanding spheres of influence. International economic relations continue to be marked by inequity, selfishness and short-sightedness, particularly by those who possess the means to bring about a change and to start the process to usher in a New International Economic Order. The wisdom which was evident last year when certain significant decisions were taken in the sphere of the North- South dialogue seems to have lost some of its momentum this year.
146.	Living as we do in this small and increasingly interdependent world, no one can completely escape responsibility for the current atmosphere of gloom, fear, frustration and diffidence. But the primary responsibility must rest with those who literally possess the power of life and death over all of us and who do not hesitate to wield that power, without caring too much for the consequences of their action. A few powerful nations are claiming and blatantly exercising what they consider their right to cause destabilization in any place and at any time and with any means of their choosing. It is obvious that the weak and poor nations cannot look upon this unenviable lot of theirs with equanimity. They have, therefore, to be eternally vigilant if they are to survive, if they are to preserve and promote the well- being of their peoples and if they are not to become pawns in the game of great-Power manipulation. They have to speak up on behalf of their mute millions, assert that they have no intention of acquiescing in the dangerous activity of big- Power brinkmanship and that they do not wish to face annihilation either by the deliberate design of callous Powers or by accidental errors of mindless machines.
147.	It is in this context that the policy of non-alignment assumes greater validity. Non-alignment is the embodiment of the aspirations of the vast majority of nations and peoples to protect their existence, their freedom, honour and dignity. The non-aligned movement is not directed against one or the other bloc. Over the decades it has come to represent a positive force—a force of life and not of death—in international relations which is now recognized even by those who had at one time ridiculed it. At the same time, the non- aligned movement has had to pass through certain vicissitudes. The general atmosphere of doubt and recrimination seems to have contaminated the movement to some extent. Internal problems within the movement have tended to affect its unity. We have to examine these problems closely and devise ways and means of ensuring the unity and continued effectiveness of the movement. While reserving these tasks for discussion at the forums of the non-aligned movement itself, I shall only express my confidence that, both by positive determination and by sheer necessity, non- alignment shall be restored to its original concept and sweep when it was devised to deal with global issues of detente, disarmament, decolonization and development.
148.	There is an organic relationship between these four issues. Progress in any one of them would help create the proper atmosphere for forward movement in the others. By the same token, setback in one leads to increasing difficulty in the others. The present international situation vividly illustrates their interrelationship. The collapse of detente has led to stalemate in disarmament negotiations and absurd increases in defence expenditures which, in turn, have prevented the developed nations from achieving what was expected of them in international economic co-operation and development or, at any rate, tended to provide them with an alibi for falling far short of expectations.
149.	It is a matter of considerable anguish to my delegation that the continent of Asia, which has given the world all its major religions and served as the main cultural pathfinder over several millennia, is at present the scene of most of the conflicts and much of the suffering caused by these conflicts—West Asia, South-West Asia and South-East Asia. The Indian subcontinent, I am happy to say, has been free from conflict for some years now, and it is my earnest hope and the constant endeavour of my Government to see genuinely peaceful and co-operative relations continue to develop in this area.
150.	In West Asia, the threat of a conflagration will continue to persist so long as the Palestinian problem is treated as a refugee problem and as long as the commitment of the United Nations to establish an independent State for the Palestinians in their homeland remains unfulfilled. Far from heeding the call of the United Nations to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories, Israel has unabashedly colonized Arab lands and illegally annexed the Holy City of Jerusalem in total disregard of its sacred heritage. I firmly believe, as I said a few weeks ago during the seventh emergency special session,  that a comprehensive solution to the problem of West Asia entails the following elements: the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national and human rights, including the right to establish an independent State; the total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from all Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem; and the guarantee of the right of all States in the region, including Arab Palestine, to live within secure and recognized borders. A peaceful solution cannot be attained without the full and equal participation of the PLO, the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people, in any negotiations. Experience has shown that attempts at partial solutions without the participation of the PLO have neither succeeded nor contributed to peace in the region.
151.	The people and Government of India are saddened by the recent and continuing conflict between Iran and Iraq, two close neighbours of ours. Our cultural and economic ties with the peoples of the two countries are as old as history itself. Since our independence in 1947 those ties have become even closer and acquired new dimensions.
152.	Iran and Iraq are both developing countries, as in India. We cannot but express regret that the conflict will inevitably lead to retarding the process of economic and social development which is so vital to the needs of the peoples of the two countries. At the same time the conflict weakens the solidarity of the non-aligned and developing countries. We therefore urge Iran and Iraq to settle their differences peacefully, in accordance with the principles and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
153.	The developments in Afghanistan have been engaging the serious attention of the Government of India. India has historical and traditional ties with the people of Afghanistan. We are deeply concerned and vitally interested in the security, independence, stability and tranquillity of our friendly neighbour. Over the past months the Government of India has been in touch with the countries of the subcontinent, as well as other countries, in order to prevent the aggravation of these dangers and heightening of tension.
154.	We have consistently emphasized the inadmissibility of the use of force in international relations or intervention or interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States. It is also our firm belief that only by upholding the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States can peace and stability be preserved in the area. Observance of those principles would not prejudice the legitimate security interests of any State and, in fact, would go a long way towards safeguarding them. What is required is a dialogue among the parties concerned, without pre-conditions, so that the contours of a political settlement, acceptable to all, can emerge. I am satisfied that such a dialogue is possible, since most of the difficulties are essentially notional and at best technical and non-substantive. If the countries of the region are left in peace to work out their own destiny, without the competitive attention of great Powers, that will permit them to embark on relationships based on mutuality and a developing trust in bilateral negotiations as the best means of settling outstanding problems.
155.	India's relations with Kampuchea go back several centuries. Indeed, the temples of Angkor Wat bear testimony to the close interconnections between the cultures of our two countries. The gentle and peace-loving people of Kampuchea have suffered very greatly through no fault of their own. The world will not forget nor condone the calculated and heinous crimes perpetrated in the recent past by a cruel regime against the innocent and defenceless people of Kampuchea. It is a great irony that, while emphatic references are being made time and again to human rights, the first and foremost right of the Kampuchean people, namely, the right to live, has been glossed over conveniently. Politically motivated callousness seems to have crossed all limits when it is realized that remnants of the very same despotic regime are representing, as it were, their own victims of Kampuchea in this Assembly.
156.	The countries of Indo-China have been subjected to conflict, destabilization and war for far too long and should be allowed now to concentrate on the development of their economies and societies. The Government of India has decided to establish diplomatic relations with the Government headed by President Heng Samrin. This is an expression as much of the overwhelming majority of public- opinion within India as of our general policy of recognizing the reality of the political situation inside Kampuchea.
157.	We value highly our relations with countries of ASEAN and believe that the development of our relations with all our neighbours in South-East Asia will enable us to assist in the solution of the problems that confront them at the present time.
158.	Every objective analyst of the situations in South-West and South-East Asia must be convinced by now that extreme positions have not helped ease tensions in either region; on the other hand, they have only hardened attitudes and prolonged the sufferings of the concerned peoples. India's approach is based on the conviction that the search for a solution in both cases lies in political means and not through military force.
159.	There should be no illusion that India is seeking merely momentary peace. As we have repeatedly stated, we are against the presence of foreign troops or foreign bases in any country. But if we desire to move towards finding a positive solution, what is required is an assiduous and continued effort to devise suitable package solutions which take care of the concerns of all and succeed in eliminating outside intervention and interference. Willingness in this regard on the part of the concerned, howsoever partial, should be taken advantage of for furthering a solution and not being spurned out of hand. If only the efforts of influential countries had been bent in this direction, these problems would, I am sure, have already been well on the way to satisfactory solution. That has been India's approach, and I am glad to say that it has over the months begun to receive at least grudging approval by many. In this connection, I should like to make special mention of the beginning of a dialogue between Viet Nam and Thailand, with the good offices of the Secretary-General. This is the right direction, and I hope it will proceed to ultimate success in that region as well as elsewhere.
160.	The Indian Ocean has become over the past decade and a half the arena of increasing great-Power confrontation. The stresses and strains of their relationships have often been reflected in the corresponding arithmetic of their military presence there. That the littoral and hinterland States have expressed their unified and determined opposition to such military presence and called for its elimination in the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace in resolution 2832 (XXVI) is a fact of history which is often sought to be conveniently ignored.
161.	The current uncertainties in the political and security climate in the Indian Ocean as well as its environs, as evidenced by the frantic efforts to develop the Diego Garcia base, further underline the urgency of addressing ourselves to this central preoccupation. Both in the recently enlarged Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean, where we have welcomed the participation of the great Powers and major maritime users, and at the Conference on the Indian Ocean, to be convened during 1981 in Sri Lanka, India will clearly identify the key concern of the littoral and hinterland States in securing the effective implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. We are firmly committed to the convening of the Conference in 1981 in Sri Lanka and expect that the decision of the present session of the Assembly will contribute to that goal.
162.	On 1 October 1980 the President of Pakistan in his statement before the General Assembly [18th meeting] referred to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India. That reference, attacking as it does the territorial integrity of India, was unfortunate. Three times in 24 years Pakistan attempted to detach the State of Jammu and Kashmir from India by the use of force. It received a befitting response on each of the three occasions. In 1972, India and Pakistan signed the Simla Agreement, which provides for the settlement of all issues between the two countries through bilateral negotiations. But since 1977 Pakistan has repeatedly raised the issue of Jammu and Kashmir at the United Nations and other international forums. References are made to relevant United Nations resolutions on the subject, quite forgetting the fact that those resolutions have become irrelevant because of the action of Pakistan itself. In the face of such references, I am constrained to wonder whether Pakistan's adherence to the Simla Agreement has undergone a change. There is a clear contradiction between the expressed desire of Pakistan to normalize relations with India in accordance with the Simla Agreement and its pronouncements in various forums which attempt to set the clock back. India's stand, on the other hand, has remained constant, and we continue to be prepared to settle all matters with Pakistan through bilateral channels.
163.	There is an old Indian metaphor likening the world to a frog resting in the shadow of a cobra's hood. Such is the plight of peace in our age. The question of the relationship between ethics and power in international politics has long engaged the attention of both the philosopher and the practitioner of foreign policy in the nation State. Our principal concern in this nuclear age is, however, that the leadership of the most powerful nations of the world should consider not only the political appositeness of their foreign policy prescriptions but their consequences for the very survival of the world. We run the risk today of being carried on the wings of a collective paranoia. The situation calls for restraint and responsible behaviour so as to bring the world away from the edge of a nuclear catastrophe.
164.	Yet, judging by the current climate of international relations, the shadows of such a catastrophe have become darker. Not only have the expectations of the first Disarmament Decade, and especially those of the tenth special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, been belied, but there has been a staggering, almost quantum leap in world military expenditure, which today totals nearly $US 500 billion. Familiar arguments of "deterrence" and doctrines of "balance of terror" are adduced to justify the continued escalation in the build-up of nuclear weaponry. New doctrines of limited nuclear war are being postulated which, by making nuclear war credible, increase the risk of such a war and even give it a semblance of respectability.
165.	All too often we are reminded of the dangers of an accidental nuclear holocaust being triggered off by human or technological error or by computer malfunction. The very existence of such weapons makes the possibility of system failures resulting in outright catastrophe frighteningly real. Over the years India has consistently argued that the only effective guarantee against the use, threat of use or accidental use of nuclear weapons is the total elimination of such weapons. Their use has been declared a crime against humanity and contrary to the Charter of the United Nations. Pending, however, the total elimination of nuclear weapons, all States possessing nuclear weapons should give a binding commitment not to use them under any circumstances.
166.	India is firmly of the view that, like the Geneva Protocol of 1925, which completely forbids the use of biological and chemical weapons, a convention on the total prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would be a most desirable objective which should be pursued energetically by the international community.
167.	We understand that the United States and the USSR are scheduled to resume shortly their dialogue on some aspects of the question of curbing the arms race. This is a welcome development.
168.	We have noted the proposals put forward by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union on urgent measures for reducing the danger of war. My delegation will give those proposals its most serious consideration.
169.	It is pertinent to recall that it was India which first brought the problem of the proliferation of nuclear weapons to the attention of the United Nations in 1964 by inscribing in the agenda an item entitled "Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons". Our approach was based on the premise that both horizontal and vertical proliferation were integral parts of a problem which had to be dealt with as a whole. This concept was endorsed by the General Assembly in resolution 2028 (XX), which declared, inter alia, that any treaty "should embody an acceptable balance of mutual responsibilities and obligations of the nuclear and non-nuclear Powers".
170.	Unfortunately, this concept was deliberately altered in the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, concluded in 1968. If the Treaty has become an unworkable document, it is only because it has adopted the narrow and illogical approach of addressing itself only to the question of horizontal proliferation. The conclusion of cartel-type arrangements, the attempts to impose full-scope safeguards and discriminatory constraints on the peaceful nuclear activities of non-nuclear-weapon States are all aimed at perpetuating a kind of nuclear feudalism which is unrealistic, illogical and unacceptable.
171.	India is opposed to nuclear weapons. On the other hand, the Government of India is firmly committed to the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. We would oppose any moves or measures which are discriminatory in nature and which come in the way of our programmes to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The question of non- proliferation of nuclear weapons should not be confused with the right of all States to develop, acquire and use nuclear energy and to determine their peaceful nuclear programmes in accordance with their national priorities, needs and interests.
172.	As we prepare to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the United Nations can legitimately be proud of its record of achievements in the field of decolonization. Except for a few pockets where colonialism and racism are desperately fighting the forces of nationalism, the world today is free from colonial domination and exploitation. While the independence of Zimbabwe and Vanuatu was first and foremost the result of the freedom struggle of their peoples, the contribution made by the United Nations has been significant.
173.	We were hopeful that the independence of neighbouring Zimbabwe would set an example for a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia. The United Nations plan for Namibia contained in Security Council resolution 435 (1978) had established a framework for the early independence of Namibia. Its acceptance by the parties concerned had marked a step in the right direction. But the racist South African regime has continued its dilatory tactics by raising extraneous issues and by questioning the very impartiality of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. We should certainly support every effort for a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia which would be to the satisfaction of the people of Namibia. However, we regret to note that even the most recent communication, dated 22 September 1980, received by the Secretary-General from the South African Government does not indicate that South Africa has any intention to implement the United Nations plan. The only means left to the United Nations in the present situation is for the Security Council to impose mandatory sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, so as to compel South Africa to abide by the wish of the international community. Meanwhile the Member States should continue to provide moral and material support to SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the people of Namibia, in its struggle for national liberation.
174.	Permit me to refer briefly to the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, which concluded its ninth session at Geneva recently. The Conference has been in session since 1973 and before that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction had reviewed the law of the sea and done preparatory work for about six years. During that long period, understanding was reached on a number of significant issues, including a 12-mile territorial sea, a 200-mile exclusive economic zone, limits of the continental shelf, a regime for marine environment and marine scientific research, and a regime and international machinery for the exploration and exploitation of the international sea-bed area and its resources, which have been recognized and acknowledged by all States as the common heritage of mankind.
175.	We note with satisfaction that the Conference was able at its last session to make progress on some more critical questions and we hope it will successfully conclude its work of finalizing a comprehensive convention on the law of the sea in the near future.
176.	The year 1980 marked the mid-point of the United Nations Decade for Women. Considerable progress has been made during the first half of the Decade in focusing the attention of Governments and peoples on the need for improving the status of women. Women in India have traditionally enjoyed pride of place in our society. Long before the International Women's Year and the Decade for Women, the Indian people had enacted into law equality of women in all respects. That was no accident, for it flows from the best traditions of our history and culture, and in particular of our struggle for independence, when men and women together accepted sacrifices and rejoiced in the dawn of freedom, I hope that the Programme of Action adopted at Copenhagen" will provide the guidance and framework for action-oriented programmes to work towards the implementation of the objectives of the Decade through the United Nations and other international forums.
177.	The year 1981 will be the International Year of Disabled Persons. There is a vast segment of mankind, estimated to be around 400 million, which, being handicapped in one way or another, is unable to live with the dignity which is the right of all human beings. The bulk of those unfortunate beings is in the developing countries. We in India intend to reinforce our efforts in the rehabilitation of the disabled and, more important, in the prevention of disability. We have already taken several steps, including the establishment of a National Committee, in preparation for the International Year of Disabled Persons.
178.	We have just emerged from the frustrating processes of the eleventh special session and the agonizing memory of its disappointing ending is still fresh in our minds. However constructively one may try to look at the outcome of the special session, one is unable to escape the conclusion that the failure was not so much because of the complexity of the task but because of the absence of political will and the incomprehensible stubbornness of a few—to be precise, just three States Members of this Organization. In their incessant quest for an orderly and co-operative approach towards a new international economic order, the developing countries were persuaded to accept a compromise text on procedures for the global negotiations. That was the irreducible minimum for securing a process that would have provided hope of finding solutions to the critical problems facing the world economy as a whole and the economies of the developing countries in particular. A vast majority of the affluent nations, whose fortunes are interlinked with the destiny of the developing world, also accepted the procedures worked out through extremely difficult negotiations during the special session. Not all of them could have found those procedures entirely satisfactory, but they responded to the imperative of interdependence and to the obligations implicit in it. And yet, in the final analysis, all those endeavours ended in total collapse and the international community was at the end left chasing the wisp of international co-operation and interdependence. It would be less than candid on my part not to affirm that those who prevented a consensus being reached must bear the entire responsibility for the failure of the special session.
179.	It would be appropriate to ask why the concept of interdependence does not seem to have received acceptance in practice, particularly in all developed countries. There is a view that the fact of interdependence either is not quite apparent or is not urgent enough to be taken into account in formulating current economic policies and decisions of developed countries. The dialogue as well as the argument based on interdependence, therefore, takes on a rather academic and unreal character and does not seem to carry conviction with the people of developed countries. That is the distinct impression one gets from their media, whatever the pronouncements of their political leadership. It is time that this hiatus in understanding was seriously taken note of.
180.	Of course the position is not the same in all developed countries or on all occasions in the same country. It would therefore not be correct to lump all developed countries together in that respect. There are distinct variations in the perceptions of the Governments and peoples of those countries and it would be both relevant and prudent to analyse them closely. The extent of the genuine realization of interdependence on the part of the Governments and peoples of the developed countries is the real measure of success which the North-South dialogue will achieve.
181.	Until three days back India was the Chairman of the Group of 77 in New York and, as such, articulated the aspirations of the developing countries. India will continue to endorse the stand taken by the Group of 77 as before and contribute its mite for the success of the global negotiations. The Group of 77 has taken a reasonable and balanced stand. We hope that in due course it will find a favourable response from developed countries, mainly through a process of appraisal of their own long-term interests, which can be achieved only through co-operation with developing countries. That process obviously needs a persuasive and positive effort on the part of all right-thinking and sober elements in both the developed and developing camps. The attitude of charity would be just as unreal and fallacious as the approach of obligatory expiation would be impracticable and counterproductive.
182.	The nature of the phenomenon that we witnessed at the eleventh special session is disturbing and its consequences ominous for the future of economic co-operation among nations. My delegation is concerned to hear arguments of domestic pressure inherent in a democratic set-up preventing adherence to or fulfilment of international covenants and agreements. Whether it is the law of the sea, where difficult negotiations over long years are promising to come to fruition soon, or multilateral trade negotiations on which agreement was reached last year at Tokyo, or other internationally binding agreements, their sanctity is being breached in the name of national compulsions and with increasing impunity. Is it very difficult, I ask the members of this Assembly, to infer from all this that a wilful departure is being made by those countries from the concept of inter-dependence and from the process of international co-operation?
183.	Thirty-three years ago, when we achieved our political independence, we deliberately chose the democratic path of government. Democracy to us became a way of life, permeating the intricate political process as well as the methodology of development. Like most other nations, we too faced the conflict between national sovereignty and international obligations implicit in our existence as a member of the world community. To the best of our ability and belief, we have never turned away from our international obligations, nor can we be accused of violating the sanctity of international agreements freely entered into by my country. Such a course often involved domestic sacrifices, but our democratic structure gave us sustenance and strength in remaining true to our international or multilateral obligations. It would be particularly unfortunate if the leadership of a democratic country were to plead helplessness in fulfilling valid international obligations on the ground of opposition in its legislature. This helplessness would, in fact, detract from the credibility of the democratic system itself in international relations. So those who are having recourse to this argument, for whatever reason or short-term exigency, are in reality undermining the validity of their own cherished system. My earnest appeal would be that this tendency be eschewed.
184.	So far as India is concerned, we are determined to continue our efforts to bring about an early resumption of the North-South dialogue. For our part, we would expect the few developed countries which have still not fully accepted the logic of global negotiations to join in the process that would make the resumption of the North-South dialogue possible. It is also my expectation that we should be able to see this movement in the course of the current session of the General Assembly so that the preparatory work for the launching of the global negotiations could be completed before the end of this year.
185.	The eleventh special session of the General Assembly did manage to reach a consensus on the text of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade, embodying the goals and objectives of an integrated process of economic and social development during the 1980s and the policy measures required to achieve those goals and objectives. It remains to be seen to what extent the commitments undertaken in the Strategy when it is adopted during this session, will represent unambiguous and unanimous agreements. This is true particularly in regard to official development assistance, industrial redeployment, international trade and monetary issues. Having said this, I would like to underline our satisfaction at the consensus that exists in regard to measures to meet the critical situation in the least developed countries.
186.	At this session the General Assembly is expected to consider and take appropriate action in regard to the suggestions made by the Secretary-General last July for overcoming the critical economic situation of many developing countries. We await the elaboration by the Secretary- General of his suggestions and trust that it will be possible for him to go into all relevant details, such as the feasibility of raising the amount required for additional assistance and operational arrangements for its disbursement among low- income countries most seriously affected by the current economic crisis.
187.	I should also like to refer to the policy measures for the most seriously affected countries that have been agreed to in the context of the International Development Strategy. The General Assembly resolution on the subject last year called upon the Secretary-General to submit an analytical report at the special session in 1980 and called upon all donor countries to consider in the meantime extending relief and assistance to the most seriously affected countries. While the special session was unable to consider the report of the Secretary-General in detail, the International Development Strategy does refer to agreed measures that will need to be urgently considered by the international community and this Assembly.
188.	Many years ago Jawaharlal Nehru, reflecting on the dilemma of his time over the futile attempts at disarmament, wrote:
"The real difficulty ... has been that there are two classes of countries—the satisfied Powers and the unsatisfied Powers, the dominant Powers and those that are suppressed, the Powers that want the present state of affairs to continue and those that want a change. Between the two there can be no stable equilibrium, just as there can be no real stability between a dominant class and a suppressed class .... Nothing proves the unreality and mockery of international politics today so much as the failure of all attempts at disarmament. Everybody talks of peace, and yet prepares for war."
189.	These words, written more than 40 years ago, have a ring of tragic prophecy. They are symptomatic not only of disarmament negotiations but of the entire gamut of international relations today. Sometimes, looking at great stretches of history, it is difficult to believe that the ideal of co-operation and working together for the common good has made much progress. And yet, if we are to avert a catastrophe, we should resolutely continue on the path of dialogue and co-operation and turn away from sterile polemics and confrontation. All of us perhaps perceive the danger and recognize the challenge, but the will to act has so far been sadly lacking. Let us, therefore, so readjust our sights and conduct our affairs that future generations may not condemn our times as yet another barren stretch in the history of man.
﻿Mr. President, at the outset I should like to express to you our congratulations on your election to the high office of President of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly. Your vast experience and the outstanding qualities that you have exhibited in the realm of multilateral diplomacy ensure your ability to keep a firm grasp on the helm of the Assembly during this stormy period.
53.	Al the opening of this session a new State joined the ranks of the United Nations: Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. On behalf of the Government and people of Israel, I should like to welcome it to the Organization and wish it all prosperity and success as an independent and sovereign Stale.
54,	To my very grout regret, it is not possible to express satisfaction at the condition of the United Nations today, cither in general or from the specific perspective of my country. Indeed, it is questionable whether there remains much similarity or correlation between the noble ideals, principles and purposes which guided the founding fathers of the United Nations and the reality prevailing in the Organization today. The founders of this Organization saw in their vision a forum and a framework for the achievement and maintenance of peace between nations after the horrific experience of the Second World War, a horror which they had experienced at first hand.
55.	Perhaps the most cynical expression of the gap between the original vision and the reality prevailing in the United Nations today has been the refusal of this Organization, ostensibly dedicated to the peaceful settlement of disputes, to adopt and encourage the Camp David accords' and the subsequent Peace Treaty, which brought to an end decades of hostilities between Israel and Egypt and raised the possibility of expanding the peace process to embrace all of Israel's neighbours. This Organization, whose principal purpose is the promotion of peace among nations, has thus betrayed its own raison d'etre by rejecting an historic step towards peace and by playing into the hands of the enemies of peace, the rejectionists and the warmongers.
56. This unhappy phenomenon is not confined to the General Assembly. Out of the 18 debates which have been conducted thus far during 1980 in the Security Council, nine were devoted to subjects involving my country. Is there anyone who seriously believes that half of the world's international problems today are connected with Israel? We need only glance at a map of our region, the Middle East—which is just one region of the world—to sec that it is riddled from length to breadth with countless conflicts between States, between ethnic minorities and between different religious groups. Virtually all those conflicts have a history and a dynamic of their own, totally divorced from the Arab-Israeli conflict.
57. By way of illustration. I need only mention the situation in Afghanistan and. of course, the full-scale war between Iran and Iraq—a worrying outbreak of hostilities which has wide-ranging implications. That war between two States ruled by extremist, irresponsible and trigger-happy regimes threatens both regional and international security by putting at risk much of the world's regular supply of oil, That war, a struggle between two Moslem States, demolishes, in our opinion, the naive and groundless belief that the world's oil supply is dependent on a pro-Arab solution to the dispute between Israel and its neighbours. It has become all too clear that the solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict will not provide any miracle cure for the region as a whole or eliminate the many other grave conflicts raging in it. The ability of the United Nations to work for an end to the bloodshed in Iraq and Iran will be a yardstick of the Organization's ability to continue to fulfil its role for the encouragement and maintenance of peace.
58.	Important tasks have been allotted to the United Nations. Besides its role in the preservation of international peace and security, it also has a vital role to play in other spheres which require our earnest attention, in particular through the specialized agencies established for various purposes. But even the specialized agencies have been gravely compromised by the plague of politicization. Business-like debates and deliberations in them have become increasingly difficult—if not all but impossible to conduct—to the grave detriment not only of the agencies themselves but also of those whom they were set up to serve.
59.	While I am bound to express deep regret at the condition of the United Nations today. I must also express the hope that all Members of the Organization which share our concern and feelings of responsibility for its future will intensify their efforts both to bring the United Nations back to the ideals of its founders and to channel the specialized agencies back to their specific areas of concern.
60.	Among the subjects which have rightly been given a prominent place in the agenda of the United Nations are the state of the world's economy and the relations between the industrialized and the developing nations. The convening of the recent eleventh special session of the General Assembly attests to this fact. Israel took part in that special session with the intention of making a constructive contribution to its work. We therefore share the disappointment over the results of that event, which were not adequate. We sincerely hope that in the near future the efforts to have a constructive dialogue rather than confrontation will be resumed, so that those whose needs are greatest will not suffer the most.
61.	Despite our small size and limited resources, we have for decades devoted far greater efforts than might have been expected to assisting nations of the third world in the development of their economies and societies. Israel has shared freely the know-how which it has developed, as well as its experience as a small State in an arid and subtropical region, which has enabled us to make great strides over a period of a few short years.
62.	The problems encountered by Israel in the course of its social and economic development are similar to the problems facing much of the developing world today. Many of the solutions worked out in Israel can be applied directly by others. Despite the disappointments which my country has experienced, Israel continues to have deep sympathy for the struggle of the developing countries to ameliorate and advance the condition of their peoples and economies. Israel stands ready to continue to give of its know-how and to take a vigorous and constructive part in the efforts of the international community in the spheres of health, social services, agriculture, development of new and renewable sources of energy, and in every other sphere to which we can contribute.
63.	From this rostrum I should like to give expression to the anguish of our Jewish brothers in various parts of the globe. There is. it would seem, no end to the pain of the Jew in history. The suffering and persecution continue even today. And we, the people of Israel, feel responsible for the lot of every Jew who suffers anywhere.
64.	In the last year additional harsh limitations have been imposed on Jews who seek to leave the Soviet Union and emigrate to the State of Israel. Those restrictions conflict with the most basic human and national rights of peoples, and we are in duty bound to echo the cries of the Jews in the Soviet Union and appeal to the Government of that country to remove the restrictions and facilitate the immigration of Jews to Israel.
65.	We must also express anxiety over the condition of the tortured Jewish community in Syria, whose human rights are severely curtailed, and many of whom have been imprisoned and have had their property impounded. I would thus also appeal to the Government of Syria to respect the basic-human rights of its Jewish community, which it holds as hostages and which it prevents from leaving.
66.	The Jews of Iran have suffered painfully in recent months, and their situation is deteriorating from day to day. Many Jews have been thrown in gaol; others have been given the death sentence, in most cases on "charges" of contact with Israel. We know of the difficulties in dealing with the present regime in Iran, to which fundamental concepts of human rights and the norms of international relations seem foreign. But we hope that sight will not be lost of the situation of the Jews there who are perhaps among the most vulnerable of the minorities in that troubled land.
67.	Two years ago a development took place in the Middle East—a breakthrough which can appropriately be called historic. After serious negotiations between the parties, with the active and important participation of the United States, the Camp David framework and the subsequent Israeli-Egyptian Peace Treaty were signed by the leaders of the two countries and witnessed by the President of the United States. Israel made major concessions and took considerable risks by signing those agreements, l.et me cite only our withdrawal from the oilfields in Sinai, for there is no need for me to waste words on the significance and implications of that step in this day and age. Similarly I need only point to the strategic depth in Sinai which Israel has relinquished, as well as to the advanced air bases located in Sinai, the evacuation of which will be implemented in due course in accordance with the terms of the Peace Treaty.
68.	Israel believed that its concessions and sacrifices would be met with appreciation and understanding by the world community and that a long-awaited breakthrough would be achieved on the international scene. Not only has that not 06itte about, but many countries in the world have spared no effort to destroy that hard-won peace, and Israel continues to be the object of unending accusations and attacks.
69.	Nevertheless, the decision and determination of Israel remain firm to continue on the road to peace. Thus, in accordance with the Camp David framework, negotiations have taken place for the attainment of full autonomy for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judaea. Samaria and the Gaza District.
70.	Substantial progress has been achieved in these talks in certain fields, but the talks have, it is true, had their tips and downs and have even been suspended a number of times by Egypt. There is nothing exceptional or extraordinary about the difficulties encountered thus far in the progress of the talks. They reflect the complexities inherent in the subjects under discussion. The difficulties are familiar to any country which, at one time or another, has been engaged in complex negotiations involving multifaceted and long-standing problems.
71.	One area in which progress has been achieved in the negotiations is the modalities of the free elections to be held in the territories concerned. These procedures would make the proposed autonomy into one of the few—all too few— examples of free democratic process in the Middle East. Progress has also been achieved in the area of powers and responsibilities of the autonomy covering many aspects of the everyday life of the inhabitants of the territories in question.
72.	We certainly believe that autonomy can and must be established. All the parties to the Camp David framework are convinced that the process set out in that framework is the only one which is within the realm of the possible. All alternative suggestions for the solution of the problem at hand—ideas such as the holding of an international conference or the like—are devoid of real prospect or purpose. No one can really believe that the various elements in the Middle East which arc so much at odds with each other would attend a peace conference and achieve a positive outcome that would lead to a solution acceptable to all. Thus too the ideas entertained by the European Community, which do not take Israel's position into account, are only likely to encourage those who are opposed to peace.
73.	Those who genuinely seek peace should encourage the progress which has been achieved through the Camp David process. Let them also bear in mind and give due regard to the fact that, by proposing the idea of autonomy in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, Israel has taken on itself great risks for the sake of peace.
74.	We hope that the autonomy talks will be resumed in the near future. We also hope that the process of normalization of relations between Israel and Egypt will be intensified and will serve as the best possible proof and a living symbol of the fact that peace can and must take the place of war. The full significance of these peaceful relations should be grasped for what they are—and for what they may lead to—as the very corner-stone for peace in the region.
75. The leaders of Israel and Egypt have reiterated time and again their mutual commitment to the proposition that there will be no more war. Let us hope that the change which has come about in the Middle East with the signing of peace will be the opening for a positive and long-lasting transformation in the history of our conflict-ridden area. The strict adherence to the agreements by Israel, in accordance with their letter and spirit alike, is a guarantee of the continuation of the peace process. However, by itself it is not enough. We hope that all the others involved will act in the same way.
76. Much has been alleged against Israel in the name of the principle of self-determination for nations. We favour that concept, and we have proved that in the support that we extended to many States which have achieved their independence in our generation, in Africa, Asia and elsewhere. The Governments of those States and their peoples know that full well. But there is no connection between that principle and the perverted attempt to turn self-determination into the basis for the destruction of the Stale of Israel, as certain States are endeavouring to do. Anyone who is familiar with the ideology and the terminology of the murder organization that calls itself the PLO, as well as with the declarations of the various Arab rejectionist States, can see beyond all doubt that the term "self-determination", as they use it, is nothing more than a euphemism for the destruction of Israel.
77.	It should not be forgotten that the Palestinian Arabs have achieved their self-determination in Jordan, a State which is the Arab State in Palestine, by virtue of its history, territory, population, culture and all aspects of its national life. The establishment of a second Palestinian Arab Slate by distorting the principle of self-determination means the creation of an extremist and hostile base opposed to the very-existence of Israel. Hence we will not agree to a distorted form of self-determination, which in reality implies self-destruction for our ancient nation deeply rooted in its own land.
78.	The programme of autonomy which we have proposed for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, as accepted in principle in the Camp David frameworks, is the first practical proposal to be advanced to provide a dignified solution for the needs of the Arab population of those areas. It comes in place of all the empty declarations with which the Palestinian Arabs concerned have deluded themselves and have been deluded by other States and organizations over the years.
79.	One of the most vivid expressions of the rejection of all peace proposals by the Arab rejectionist States is to be seen in their unprecedented military build-up and in the armaments which they have received in recent years from the Soviet bloc or purchased from the United States and Western Europe. In the course of the last three years, orders for arms purchases by the larger Arab States have reached astronomic sums. The quantities of arms that were actually supplied have been equally staggering. There is no precedent for the amassing of arms on this scale in our region. Those arms are designated first and foremost for use against Israel. But the implications of that vast array of armaments ait not confined to my country alone. It also serves to inject war into the area at large.
80.	We call upon the United Nations to take due note of the military build-up by the Arab rejectionist States and to urge them to decrease their armament. For our part, we are prepared to lend a hand in any joint effort to bring about the limitation of arms in our region which is poised on top of a volcano.
81. I should like to address myself to another crucial aspect of disarmament. Israel has consistently supported resolutions of the General Assembly aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. This global problem, we believe, can best be solved by means of negotiated regional arrangements. Hence, since 1975, Israel has consistently advocated the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East on the Tlatelolco model. Israel believes that an international conference of all the Slates in the region and adjacent to our region should be held, leading to the conclusion of a formal, contractual, multilateral convention among all States of the region.
82.	We hope that in the course of this General Assembly, we shall find a suitable opportunity to give concrete expression to our views on this matter. In the meantime, I should like to reiterate my Government's position, which is that Israel will not be the first to introduce nuclear weapons into the Arab-Israeli dispute.
83.	In the last months, Jerusalem has been the object of attacks on Israel in various international forums. There has been much hypocrisy and cynicism in those attacks, For, truth to tell, never has the situation of the various religions represented in Jerusalem been better than that prevailing since the unification of the city by Israel in 1967. For 19 years, between 1948 and 1967, the eastern part of the city was under Jordanian occupation and barbed wire divided it in two. Places holy to the Jews were maliciously desecrated. Ancient synagogues and cemeteries were destroyed in a barbaric manner, and Jews were denied access to the Holy Places which are the spiritual life-blood of the Jewish people. It is not out of place to remark that the Moslem Arab citizens of Israel were also denied access to their Holy Places during that ignoble period. And where, I am bound to ask, was the voice of this Organization during that period".' Not once was it raised in condemnation of those illegal acts.
84.	On the other hand, since 1967. all—irrespective of religion and nationality—have been accorded free access to the city of Jerusalem and the possibility of worshipping at the Holy Places and shrines revered by them. Israel has assured the free and unfettered observance of the religious rites of all members of all faiths, who also administer their religious lives and their Holy Places without any outside interference. That is the truth well known to everyone who lives in Jerusalem and to everyone who has visited the city. There is no substance or basis to any claim to the contrary.
85.	There is no need for me to dwell at length on the bond between the Jewish people and Jerusalem. The Jewish people is the only people which has made Jerusalem its capital since it appeared as a nation on the stage of human history. Throughout the many years of exile inflicted on it. The Jewish people prayed three times a day, every day, for its restoration to Jerusalem.
86. For the last 150 years there has been a Jewish majority in Jerusalem. Whoever seeks to sever Jerusalem from Israel seeks to decapitate the Jewish people. We hope that nations that seek peace and know the reality which prevails in Jerusalem today will respect the city as the sovereign capital of Israel; a city which will not be divided again, in the same way as Israel respects the Holy Places of all religions and their freedoms in the city.
87.	I wish to conclude with a call in the spirit of the Prophets of Israel, who were a light and an inspiration for much of mankind. My call is for peace—peace which is at the very basis of the existence of the United Nations.
88.	We in Israel yearn for peace. We have done so since the first day of the restoration of our national sovereignty—in our Declaration of Independence, which was issued on the very day that the State of Israel was founded in 1948. In that Declaration, we extend the hand of peace and good neighbourliness to all the States around us and all their peoples. We have taken far-reaching steps and have made huge sacrifices for the sake of peace. But peace with Israel does not mean peace without Israel, or peace at its expense. Nor does it mean peace with a weak Israel deprived of its capital and with its wings clipped from the security and geostrategic viewpoints. With such an Israel peace will not be attained, because a weak Israel will be an object of unceasing attacks and destructive designs.
89.	I wish to call upon the Arab States which are our neighbours, and also upon the Palestinian Arabs living in Judaea, Samaria and the Gaza District, to follow the dictates of reason and to join the peace process. I wish to call upon the other nations of the world to support this course and to prevail upon the Arab States to adopt it. The world at large, and not merely our region alone, will benefit from this.

﻿Sir, may I congratulate you on your election to the presidency. I know that, like your predecessor, Ambassador Salim of the United Republic of Tanzania, you will carry out your responsibilities with firmness, courtesy and skill.
74.	As a Commonwealth member, New Zealand welcomes to the Assembly the delegations of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Zimbabwe. They bring, from different parts of the world, special perspectives which will help us all in considering the serious problems which face us.
75.	In welcoming these two new Members, we should not forget that other peoples are also moving rapidly towards independence. In our part of the world Vanuatu, in the most difficult circumstances, came to full nationhood. As a neighbour we were delighted to welcome the new Republic into the fellowship of the South Pacific Forum. We have watched with great sympathy the moves to greater autonomy by the island groups that make up the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. New Zealand's immediate partners, the people of Tokelau, are assuming increasing responsibility for the government of their tiny country.
76.	The South Pacific is coming to the end of a long period of constitutional change. Twenty years ago, when the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples was adopted , New Zealand and Australia were the only independent countries in our region. Now there are some 13 independent or fully self-governing States. Some are represented here. In the course of time more will come, and the voice of the Pacific will be heard more insistently.
77.	As the United Nations has grown, its ways of doing business, as well as the scope of its activities, have changed. To some it seems a less effective, less purposeful Organization than it was. I know that this body is itself a reflection of the world around us—and that has been troubled enough. And yet it is difficult not to be pessimistic when we assess what has been achieved over the past year.
78.	Only last month the General Assembly met in special session to discuss development and economic issues. The session was convened against a background of mounting concern about the world economy. Every speaker at that session talked of the gravity of the present situation. Every speaker called for rapid change. Every speaker supported the launching of a new round of global economic negotiations.
79.	This was not mere rhetoric. During the past month I have spoken to many political leaders, especially from Asian and Pacific countries. It was crystal clear that all of us shared an overriding preoccupation with economic issues. Time and again I heard the same themes: terms of trade have deteriorated rapidly; inflation, most of it imported, is far too high; deficits are expanding at an unprecedented rate. The conventional answer—retrenchment—exacts a high economic price in terms of contraction of trade and stagnation of production. The political cost, not least in jobs lost and social disruption, is prohibitive. To cover their share of the total oil deficit, countries in our area have had to borrow heavily. For many of them, debt servicing burdens are already crippling. High interest rates and a good deal of nervousness on the part of the private banking system compound the problems of financing economic development in the face of the growing deficit problem.
80.	It is not surprising that Governments of developing countries—and quite a few in the more affluent world—are apprehensive, for tensions produced by economic forces induce political reactions.
81.	Yet at the recent eleventh special session the Assembly failed even to agree on procedures for carrying out the global negotiations, let alone to discuss an agenda. I can well understand the scepticism of those who ask whether the Assembly, or a derivative of it, is the best place in which to discuss complex international economic issues. I tend to agree with them. However, the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has shown that it is possible to resolve a wide and complicated range of such issues in a forum in which all Member States are represented. If we can draw some encouragement from that example, we should not forget how long the process has taken and how much had to be done outside the main meetings to develop a consensus about legitimate objectives and priorities. Above all, we should remember that the Conference on the Law of the Sea is succeeding because it organized its negotiations on the basis of actual situations and shared interests—not on the basis of political alignments and regional groupings. I must emphasize that we do not have a decade to make progress on the world's urgent economic problems. We now have less than one year.
82.	If we are to make similar progress on global economic issues, we must tackle them with new urgency. We shall have to accept that there is not going to be a revolutionary change of attitude on the part of the wealthy industrialized countries—whether of West or East. Progress will come gradually and probably most effectively by using the specialist bodies. A central forum may well—and should—give drive and coherence to those negotiations. However, let us not expect too much from it. It simply is not realistic to believe that some supranational forum can direct and determine the course of negotiations in bodies like IMF, GATT and FAO. It is for these specialized bodies to take the immediate steps that are so essential. Here again, progress has been much too slow.
83.	We could speed up the global negotiations more effectively if we were first to call together a more limited but broadly representative informal summit, as proposed by the Brandt Commission.  It may be that the outlines of a broad consensus on the way forward are more likely to emerge from such a meeting than from a gathering of 150 or more. That was the view of the regional Meeting of Heads of Government of Commonwealth Countries, which I attended last month, at New Delhi. The Meeting of Finance Ministers of Commonwealth Countries in Bermuda was even more convinced of the need for action.
84.	What we discuss is at least as important as where we discuss it. It has concerned me that recent discussions in New York have become bogged down in proposals for an agenda which is all-encompassing and unselective. The consensus of the heads of Government and Finance Ministers I have listened to in the past month is that the international oil situation and its flow-on problems, especially in financing, is the major issue to be faced if the longer-term difficulties in the world economy and in the North-South dialogue are to be dealt with adequately.
85.	I do not want to be misunderstood by oil producers when I say that the central issue is to solve the problem of international balances of payments, particularly of developing countries. That means we must find an effective means of recycling the surpluses of the oil producers. I do not deny that oil was under-priced in the past. Nor am I suggesting that the large increase in oil prices since 1973 is the sole cause of the world's present economic woes. I am simply saying that this is a major and immediate problem which requires international action—now.
86.	Look at these facts. The forecast is that the combined deficit of developing countries over the next three years will be about $US 160 billion. There are only two possible ways of covering those deficits: one is through grant aid; the second is through borrowing, whether at commercial or concessional rates. Grant aid is not going to cover deficits of that size, even in the unlikely event that official development assistance performance improves dramatically. Whether the private banking system can cope is equally open to question. The previous round of recycling subjected it to considerable stress. In my view, greater involvement by international financial institutions and greater flexibility in their approach are now a necessity if global payments imbalances are not to widen, with grave economic consequences for us all.
87.	Institutions, no less than Governments, have to adapt to new circumstances. If they show no capacity to adjust, the pressures to set up new bodies to replace them will become irresistible. That is why at recent meetings New Zealand supported calls for IMF to play a much more positive and dynamic role in the recycling process in support of the private banking system. I am convinced that IMF has the skills and expertise which will enable it to respond to the needs of the world today.
88.	I believe that the decisions taken at the annual World Bank and IMF meetings last week in Washington bring those institutions closer to grappling with the recycling problem. New Zealand has continued to advocate the concept of symmetrical surveillance, so that the capacity of surplus countries and the needs of deficit countries can be matched. The adjustment burden is a problem for the international community operating through its public as well as its private institutions. The surplus nations must realize the serious difficulties which confront the oil-importing nations of the developing world. They must—and, I believe, will- acknowledge that their economic power can be used through increased commitments and guarantees for IMF in order to avert a series of national bankruptcies.
89.	The international community has the power and ingenuity to act quickly on critical economic issues. It must do so. If we are to bring new urgency and purpose to the economic negotiations of the Organization, then we have to ask ourselves whether a more functional negotiating format is called for. Does the group approach to negotiations still serve us well? On the evidence of those major United Nations economic conferences held during the past two years, I would have to say that I doubt it. The Brandt Commission reached a similar conclusion. Its report says:
"The process of reconciling differences within each group has often led to extreme positions driving out moderate ones: maximum demands elicit minimum offers." 
90.	But that is only one of the weaknesses of our present system. Another is that the specific interests of individual countries, or groups of countries, are often subordinated to the cause of group solidarity.
91.	The small island communities in the South Pacific are a case in point. Their economies are small and their resources limited. Dependent on a narrow range of exploitable commodities, highly sensitive to price fluctuations, handicapped by high transport costs and uncertain services to their main export markets, they are especially vulnerable to external influences which they cannot control. The fragility of their economies is increased by their isolation from each other and from neighbouring regions. No other factor so persistently hampers Pacific countries in the struggle to develop their resources and provide better lives for their people.
92.	Clearly, the island States of the Pacific have special needs, and the international community must be responsive to those needs. It is not just that they require development assistance, though that is essential. It is also a question of providing the mechanism by which small countries can express their concerns and get them dealt with effectively.
93.	It is not enough in the long run to label developing island countries as a separate category meriting special treatment. I believe that what those countries want, and what other countries in the so-called special categories want, too, is to take their place in the mainstream of international life. They do not want to be set apart for ever as societies which do not fit into some preconceived pattern. Regrettably, the international community seems to have settled for this option in drawing up an international development strategy for the 1980s.
94.	We in New Zealand have also suffered from the rigidities imposed by bloc diplomacy. Our specific economic circumstances and interests are obscured when the membership of the Organization is divided by shorthand expressions like "North" and "South", or labelled by groups.
95.	For years the world community has ignored the questions of food production and market access which are central to New Zealand's economic well-being. The group system of negotiation has effectively blocked our efforts to have these issues given greater priority. Now, it seems, they are beginning to receive due attention. There is a new awareness that it is all too easy to undermine the confidence of rural communities. No one knows this better than the developing countries which, during the past decade, have changed from being exporters to importers of food. More and more countries are coming to see that the double standards governing the international food trade have got to go. Unless that happens it will be an uphill battle to restore and sustain the confidence of farmers, and they are the people we look to if we are to feed the hungry of this world.
96.	In the struggle to overcome agricultural protectionism in the industrialized world, New Zealand's interests are essentially the same as those of the developing countries. With them, and with many others, we also have an interest in bringing about a more liberal trading system in all sectors. In the global negotiations, in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, in UNCTAD, in GATT we shall work to that end with all who want a fairer trading system. If we achieve that, we may then see that expansion of world economic growth rates which is an essential ingredient of political stability and security.
97.	In your opening address, Mr. President, you reminded us that the vision of the men who established the Organization was one of a world at peace. You rightly said that that could be achieved only if the United Nations was determined to apply those principles for which it stands: to promote the self-determination of all peoples; to protect the sovereign equality of nations, especially the weak and the small; to promote human rights and freedom,
98.	It is chastening to think how far we have to go before we can say we have reached those goals which, by our membership, we have all set ourselves. That is all too clear from the political as well as the economic tensions that rock the world today. The principles that the Organization was established to defend have been persistently defied.
99.	Afghanistan is one crisis area that calls out for a speedy and just solution. Earlier this year New Zealand joined more than 100 Member States in supporting resolution ES-6/2 in which the Assembly deplored the armed intervention in that country. Immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of all foreign troops was called for. That resolution was ignored. Soviet troops remain in Afghanistan. They are there because the regime they installed cannot survive without them. The people of Afghanistan have, by their resistance, shown their rejection of that regime and the alien forces which continue to prop it up.
100.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan violated the basic principles of the Charter. It threatened the security of neighbouring States. It increased tension in West Asia and the Indian Ocean region, and it has thrown into disarray the process, of detente to which the Soviet Union has so often pledged its commitment.
101.	There is only one sure way to reverse that dangerous situation and that is for the Soviet Union to display that respect for the principles of international behaviour which it champions so earnestly when the actions of others are concerned. It must withdraw its troops. It must allow the Afghan people to decide their own future freely and without interference.
102.	That assault on the sovereignty of a small neighbouring State has its parallel in South-East Asia. There a client Government has been imposed on the people of Kampuchea and maintained by force of arms. The situation in Kampuchea has implications for peace, stability and progress in the whole of South-East Asia.
103.	At the thirty-fourth session, the Assembly called for the immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces from Kampuchea. That call was disregarded. Those forces are still there and they are involved in fighting along the Thai-Kampuchean border and elsewhere. It is a matter of grave concern to New Zealand that there has been so little improvement in the situation since the Assembly last met in regular session. The longer the fighting goes on, the greater is the risk that the conflict could spread. Until there is a political settlement, there can be no regional stability and no sure end to the hardships of those ordinary people for too long caught up in a conflict in which they want no part.
104.	Relief efforts will be needed for a long time to come. It is essential that the relief operation should be able, without hindrance, to distribute supplies to those in greatest need, wherever they are. It is no less important that Kampuchea's agricultural production should be restored. Its economy must be revitalized so that the victims of the conflict can return to their homes and to a normal way of life.
105.	I know that the countries of South-East Asia want peace and stability. They want to pursue their economic development free from threats to their security. The Association of South-East Asian Nations [ASEAN] countries, with broad support from the international community, have consistently sought a durable political settlement. The resolution adopted last year set out the principles that must form the basis for a settlement.
106.	The Assembly needs to give stronger support to the search for a settlement. New Zealand welcomed the visit of the Secretary-General to Bangkok and Hanoi. Clearly, he can play a major role. We, like others, look to him to help get productive talks under way between Viet Nam and its ASEAN neighbours and to facilitate the holding of an international conference which is needed to reduce tension and achieve a just and lasting settlement.
107.	Another area in Asia which is subject to severe strains is the Korean peninsula. New Zealand will continue to support measures aimed at reducing tension in that area. We have been encouraged by the recent series of preliminary meetings between representatives from North and South Korea which have had as their objective the development of north-south contacts. We urge both sides to maintain the momentum of those meetings and to continue in good faith the search for a peaceful and lasting accommodation.
108.	The conflict between Iraq and Iran is also a matter of great concern to us. It has caused loss of life and damage in both countries and could, if fighting continues, have serious consequences within the region and beyond. We are anxious that the fighting should be halted so that the differences between the two countries can be resolved peaceably and soon. We support the appeal made by the Security Council to that end in its resolution 479 (1980) and welcome the efforts being made by others to bring about a peaceful settlement.
109.	It is no less urgent that a settlement should be negotiated in the Middle East. That dispute is a continuing threat to world peace and security. The peace treaty between Egypt and Israel  was a conspicuous step forward, but it was only a beginning. The hopes that it would lead to a comprehensive and durable peace based on the principles embodied in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) have not been realized. They will not be until Israel acknowledges the rights and aspirations of the Palestinian people. Those include the right to self-determination and the right to establish a separate State, if that is their wish. Equally, the unilateral declaration on Jerusalem and the continued establishment of settlements in occupied territories can hardly be construed as anything but obstructions to a negotiated settlement.
110.	The continuing detention of people from the American Embassy in Teheran is another grave cause of tension. New Zealand's position is clear. We deplore Iran's refusal to release the hostages. A speedy and honourable solution must be found—first for the sake of the people concerned, but also if we are to respect the principles of international law. We are certainly willing to join others in efforts to get a peaceful solution.
111.	A year ago New Zealand welcomed two major advances in the search for a peaceful settlement of the conflicts in southern Africa: the London conference on Zimbabwe and the resumption of negotiations on Namibia.
112.	Zimbabwe's presence here today is testimony to the determination of its people and of all those who have worked so hard for a just and equitable settlement. It is a particular pleasure to me that the Commonwealth was able to play a formative part in the peaceful transfer of power in that country.
113.	A similar transfer of power must also be the objective in Namibia. There is no good reason why the few issues that remain outstanding should not be settled quickly. It has long been time for the South African authorities to end their illegal occupation of Namibia. They must, if they want a peaceful settlement, co-operate with the Security Council in bringing independence to the people of Namibia. Just as in 1980 we welcomed the independence of Zimbabwe so in 1981	we should welcome that of Namibia.
114.	If there is to be lasting stability, however, the South African Government must move ahead with the dismantling of the apartheid system in South Africa itself. If there are signs that the present rulers of South Africa are beginning to understand the need for change, there is less evidence of serious commitment to this course. They must now demonstrate clearly and unequivocally by their actions and policies that institutionalized racism and the injustices and suffering that apartheid has inflicted on generations of Africans are being brought to an end. There is no other way to a peaceful future. The alternative, a vicious and bloody conflict, must be avoided. It can be, but only if the South African Government will promptly set about overturning the detestable system of apartheid.
115.	Increased tension in many parts of the world and, above all, the invasion of Afghanistan have had grave consequences for relations between the great Powers. Detente is in jeopardy.
116.	Nowhere has that been more clear than in negotiations on arms control and disarmament. Here the central need is for confidence that obligations assumed will be fully met, so it is no surprise that there has been no real forward movement. The SALT II Treaty remains un-ratified. The Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe are stalemated. The sessions of the Committee on Disarmament have, by and large, been unproductive. The second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons ended without agreement on a final declaration. Many countries, my own among them, rightly criticized the two super-Powers for lack of progress in their negotiations on arms control and disarmament.
117.	There is nothing in the relationship of those superpowers to suggest that we can expect quick progress on those arms control and disarmament issues which are essentially bilateral in nature. But that should not mean that movement must be held back in other areas. A fresh impetus is needed to get negotiations under way again.
118.	One such issue is a comprehensive test-ban treaty. No disarmament measure is more urgent. No one disputes the need for a treaty. The report presented to the Committee on Disarmament at the end of the latest round of bilateral talks showed that the negotiating States had made limited progress on many elements of critical importance. In our view, it is essential that a draft comprehensive test-ban treaty should be ready for consideration at the second special session on disarmament, in 1982. We believe, too, that a working group of the Committee on Disarmament should be established next year to begin negotiations on a treaty. One of its first tasks should be to devise a framework within which an international seismic detection system could operate to monitor adherence to the treaty.
119.	Many of these issues will continue to haunt the inter-national community throughout the i980s. There are others. What progress will we make in dealing humanely with the mass movement of displaced persons across borders? Will we be able to say, when it ends, that the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination has achieved its goals? The United Nations Decade for Women is already at mid-course. Will we be able to say in five years’ time that the lot of half the world's population has been greatly improved, when we know from the evidence given to the World Conference at Copenhagen in July, that the impact of the first five years has been so limited?
120.	The same question—whether achievement will match objectives—can be asked of many items on the Assembly's agenda. The answers, I believe, depend in large degree on whether we are willing to use the Organization sensibly, to seek genuine agreement to negotiate rather than declaim. Above all, it depends on whether we are able to break away from old rigidities and preconceptions and seek new ways of working together, ways which are imaginative and realist? That is the way for the world body, and for all of us, to face the challenges of this decade.
﻿Mr. President, I should like to congratulate you on the occasion of your election to your highly responsible position and to express my conviction that your activities will contribute to the fruitful work of the present session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
93.	Speaking today from this rostrum, I should like to emphasize at the very outset the great importance which this session of the General Assembly would have if its work were successful. In view of the specific character of the situation in the world arena today, it is essential for the work of the session to be conducted in a constructive atmosphere. Its participants will have to display to an even greater extent than before a sense of realism, a considered approach to key international issues and a genuine interest in finding solutions to them.
94.	Thereby the States Members of the United Nations would demonstrate their commitment to the principles and purposes of this world Organization and awareness of their responsibility for the destinies of peace. Indeed, this is now a vitally important task for them individually and collectively.
95.	We focus attention on this because the state of affairs in the world has lately become more complicated as a result of a sharp turn in the policies of the United States of America and some other members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO].
96.	Let us look at the facts—they are more eloquent than words.
97.	Back in May 1978, the NATO countries decided automatically to increase their annual military expenditures almost to the end of this century. Last December, they took a decision to produce and deploy in Western Europe new American medium range nuclear missile systems designed to change the military and strategic situation to the unilateral advantage of the NATO bloc. Simultaneously, Washington also announced its own multibillion dollar build-up programme.
98.	The course chosen by the United States of America, which cannot be called anything but militaristic, is expressed in the so-called "new nuclear strategy". Under the cover of arguments that have nothing to do with reality concerning the possibility of some "limited" or "partial" use of nuclear weapons, the architects of this strategy seek to instil in the minds of people the idea of the admissibility and acceptability of a nuclear conflict. This foolhardy concept exacerbates the risk of a nuclear catastrophe, which cannot but cause concern throughout the world.
99.	And is it not contrary to the expectations of the peoples of the world that Washington should have indefinitely postponed ratification of the Soviet American treaty on the limitation of strategic offensive arms, SALT II?  It has demonstrated that it sets a low value on the assurances and promises it gave earlier.
100.	Several theses have recently been adopted by American foreign policy which, by all appearances, are regarded as its credo. Here is one of them. A given region of the world is chosen at will—especially if it is rich in energy resources or important from the point of view of transport and communications, or simply if the Pentagon has taken a fancy to it—and that favoured area is declared with naked bluntness to be a United States "sphere of vital interest". And if, to boot, it is a sphere of American interests, not just anyone's, and on top of that—God only knows why—of "vital" interests, efforts are made simply to deprive the peoples who live in that area of the right to be masters in their own home and masters of their own wealth. It is even harder to understand that at the end of the twentieth century generally recognized rules of international law hallowed by time should be so blatantly and so rapaciously flouted.
101.	Another proposition is that any internal changes in any State—merely because they are not to Washington's liking—are considered to be a good enough pretext for United States interference in the affairs of that State, including the dispatch there of armed forces and commandoes. It is precisely these functions that have been assigned to the rapid reaction corps. And it is surely those countries which cannot defend themselves that become the first victims.
102.	And what about the treatment of Cuba? This is a striking example. Contrary to the legitimate demands of its Government and people, a part of Cuba's territory, Guantanamo, where a United States military base is located, is held by force. But at Washington they reason in the following way: we want this base—so that is that. It is of no importance to them that the sovereign rights of Cuba and its people are thus flagrantly ignored, once American interests stand to gain.
103.	And what a host of statements are made to justify such a policy. Those deal at length with human rights, the rights of States. It is simply amazing how such a policy can be combined with genuine respect for the rights of States, the rights of peoples, and human rights. If such statements are to be believed—and they are, incidentally, repeated with the importunity of commercial advertising—then all manuals and all books on international law, and indeed the United Nations Charter itself, which strictly protect the sovereignty of States, should all be discarded. But no verbal acrobatics, no diplomatic contrivances can conceal the real essence of such a policy.
104.	The methods of pressure and blackmail in foreign policy are making themselves felt in various parts of the globe. Blatant violence is employed against Iran. Everybody knows this. United States actions in the Persian Gulf area threaten the sovereignty not only of that country but of other countries of the region as well.
105.	A build-up of the United States military presence is under way in East Africa, where, most recently, new American military bases have been coming into being. This is taking place in particular in Somalia, a country whose leadership continues to make groundless territorial claims in respect of its neighbours. The Soviet Union fully supports those States which raise their voices in protest against the establishment of such bases. Surely, those who offer their homes for American military bases assist in the accumulation of inflammable material in that area, with all the ensuing dangers.
106.	The anti-Arab Camp David deal has as its direct consequence unabated tension in the Middle East, where the situation is fraught with perilous and unforeseen developments, That should not be overlooked. That deal, which runs counter to the interests of and slights the just demands of Arab States and the inalienable rights of the Arab people of Palestine, whose only legitimate representative is the PLO, is intended to satisfy Israel's annexationist claims and to affirm an American military presence in the Middle East.
107.	In short, since the time of the separatist collusion among the United States, Israel and Egypt, the situation in that region has proved to be further from genuine peace than ever before. It is for that reason that Camp David is rejected by Arab States and denounced by all those who are interested in a just and comprehensive settlement in the Middle East, not in a settlement dictated by imperialist interests. That has been graphically demonstrated by the recent resolutions of the seventh emergency special session of the General Assembly, on the Palestinian question, and by recent resolutions of the Security Council.
108.	In another region, the Far East, Washington is striving to strengthen its political and military position and is heating up militarist trends that are far from being on the wane in certain quarters in Japan. Beijing is acting in unison. Yet one would think that the Japanese leadership would display the ability to see things as they are and succeed in resisting the outside influences prodding that country onto the road of hostility towards the Soviet Union, a road that has already led Japan to catastrophe.
109.	The United States, whose troops, contrary to General Assembly resolution 3390 B (XXX), still remain on the territory of the Republic of Korea, shares with the puppet Seoul regime the responsibility for the fact that the Korean problem is still unresolved. It obstructs the normalization of the situation on the Korean peninsula and the reunification of Korea on a peaceful and democratic basis without any outside interference, as is proposed by the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
110.	The United States adds to the destabilization of the situation in IndoChina and in the whole of South-East Asia. Here, too, the United States acts in league with the Beijing hegemonists who, having committed aggression against the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, continue their demonstrations of military force on the Sino-Vietnamese border and stage provocations against the People's Democratic Republic of Laos and the People's Republic of Kampuchea, whose voice, we are sure, will sooner or later be heard from this rostrum. Other countries of that region are also under constant pressure from Beijing and Washington.
111.	In recent years, the United States and some other Western countries have resorted ever more frequently to playing the "China card"—they love it—in order to use to their own advantage the great Power ambitions of Beijing, which is itself keeping pace with the most zealous proponents of the position of strength policy and is stubbornly and cynically advocating the idea of the inevitability of another world war—with never a thought of giving up this idea. I stress this idea of the inevitable nature of a new world war.
112.	While these countries are intent on having China follow ever more closely in the wake of their policy, Beijing, for its part, in seeking a rapprochement with them, attempts to put them on the track of the cold war and confrontation with the Soviet Union, although our country, I would note here, stands for the normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China, as has been repeatedly stated at the most authoritative level. Even if we leave aside the question of who is playing whose cards more, it must be emphasized that this game is dangerous to the cause of peace.
113.	The facts I have enumerated suffice to lead us to the conclusion that influential circles in some countries would like to squander away the substantial assets of the policy of detente that were accumulated, especially in the 1970s, as a result of prolonged and strenuous efforts by many States.
114.	Not long ago, at Vienna, where the SALT II Treaty was signed, there was a frank conversation between Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, and President Carter of the United States. The latter also recognized the need to maintain the existing approximate parity of military strength between East and West, the Soviet Union and the United States. This was recognized also by the leaders of other NATO countries. At present, contrary to their previous statements, the leaders of the NATO bloc are seeking to change the strategic balance of forces in the world in that bloc's favour. That is the root cause of the aggravation of the present international situation.
115.	Attempts to give a different interpretation of world developments and to cast aspersions on the foreign policy of the USSR by once again resorting to the myth of a Soviet military threat constitute a gross deception.
116.	Only the gullible could heed the groundless assertions to the effect that the aggravation of the world situation has been caused by the temporary introduction of a limited Soviet military contingent into Afghanistan. As has already been explained repeatedly, our move was made to assist the Afghan people in protecting their country's sovereignty and repelling armed incursions into its territory from the outside, as well as to prevent the emergence of a direct threat to the security of the USSR on its southern border. That assistance was rendered in response to repeated appeals by the Government of Afghanistan, and it is in full accord with the Soviet-Afghan Treaty of 1978 and the United Nations Charter. I believe that there still exist in the United States persons who signed the United Nations Charter, which contains a provision relevant to this. Now that the situation in Afghanistan is gradually returning to normal, some of our military units have been brought home by agreement with the Afghan Government.
117.	Not infrequently, and notably at the United Nations, one may hear persons speak in favour of a complete withdrawal of the Soviet military contingent. To that we reply that the USSR will withdraw its contingent by agreement with the Government of Afghanistan as soon as the reasons that made the introduction of a contingent necessary have been removed, but not before.
118.	It will be recalled that the Afghan Government has put forward a programme for a political settlement of the situation around Afghanistan. It is quite possible to achieve such a settlement on that basis and the Soviet Union is firmly in favour of that. But any attempts that run counter to the sovereign rights of Afghanistan are futile. The truth about the nature and essence of events in Afghanistan and around that nonaligned State is steadily gaining ground.
119.	The allegation being bandied about in certain Western countries that the Soviet Union is building up its military might on a scale that exceeds its defence requirements is also patently false. There are some experts who make such claims. Our country believes that the strategic parity of forces obtaining in the world is sufficient to protect its own security and that of its allies and friends. Our country aspires to nothing more.
120.	Let us take Central Europe, the area with the highest concentration of military forces confronting each other. There, the Soviet Union, unlike the NATO countries, has not for a long time now increased its forces by a single soldier, a single tank, a single aircraft. On the contrary, it has been reducing them.
121.	As for the medium range nuclear systems deployed in the European part of the USSR—we do not deploy them on the territories of other States at all—in terms of the number of launchers and the yield of their nuclear warheads, such systems have recently even been somewhat reduced. The leaders who, with a specific purpose in mind, are trying to mislead people are also fully aware of that. However, being at odds with the truth, they systematically feed public opinion with fraudulent propaganda whenever they talk about the foreign policy or the armed forces of the Soviet State. The products of such propaganda are often to be seen floating around this hall.
122.	Against that background, it is obvious that those who speak of some unprecedented build-up of our country's defence potential are in fact trying to turn attention away from their own plans to deploy hundreds of new United States nuclear systems on the territories of several West European countries.
123.	In order to prevent another round of the arms race, the Soviet Union has proposed negotiations to be held on the basis of equality and with observance of the principle of equal security. In order to remove the obstacles to negotiations arising from the NATO decision, we propose that discussions be initiated without delay on the question of medium range nuclear weapons in Europe and the question of United States forward based systems, concurrently and in organic interrelation. It is understood that eventual agreements would be implemented after the entry into force of the SALT II Treaty.
124.	The USSR has not so far received a substantive reply to its initiative. The Soviet proposal is talked and written about; various assessments of it are made, and it is sometimes alleged that it is unclear or even mysterious, But those who are supposed to respond to it have as yet said nothing intelligible. And the reason for all this is that the Soviet Union's proposal is designed to find a genuine solution to the problem of strengthening European security and to erect a barrier to prevent Europe from becoming an even more dangerous staging area for military confrontation, with enormous quantities of nuclear weapons in readiness day and night.
125.	It would seem that the delays in making a constructive reply to the substance of our proposal are intended to muffle the positive international response which it has evoked. We express the hope that common sense and a responsible approach to improving the situation in Europe will yet prevail. We would like to believe that. The Soviet Union is ready to start talks with its partners on the aforementioned just basis at any time,
126.	Of course, if there is any lack of clarity as to the substance of our proposal, we would not be averse to removing it through consultations and exchanges of views, but it is essential that the participants in such exchanges of views should join us at the negotiating table in good faith and not just to kill time. At the same time, it must be clearly understood that the Soviet Union and the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty will not allow the military strategic balance they have achieved between them and the States members of NATO to be upset. Any calculations aimed at disrupting this balance should be discarded.
127.	The USSR and other countries of the socialist community have never sought, and are not seeking, any military superiority. They have not had, and will not have, any strategic doctrine other than a defensive one. As Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev stated once again, with all clarity, in his recent speech in the city of Alma-Ata:
"Our country's foreign policy is a clear and honest policy of peace which is not directed against anyone else. We do not encroach on anybody's land; we do not interfere in anybody's internal affairs. But we shall always manage to defend our rights and legitimate interests".
128.	Peaceableness is an inherent feature of the foreign policy of socialism, which is a social system having no classes interested in war. A world without wars, said Lenin, is the very ideal of socialism. The source from which the policy of the socialist countries draws confidence in its strength is the identity of their objectives in constructing a new society, in defending the cause of peace. To this end, the perfecting of relations of full equality, fraternal unity, comradely mutual assistance and fruitful cooperation in all spheres of life is constantly in the forefront of their attention, and this was once again borne out by the results of the meetings held in the Crimea last summer between Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev and the leaders of fraternal parties and States.
129.	The Soviet Union and the socialist community have been and will continue to be in the vanguard of the struggle for international security. However, we do not claim a monopoly in this field. We shall stand in the same line with all States which consistently pursue a policy of peace and of averting the threat of another world war, a policy of detente.
130.	The concrete deeds of the socialist countries are shown in a whole series of initiatives, in particular those they have advanced since the previous session of the General Assembly. These are: the proposal put forward by the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty  for holding a top-level conference of the leaders of States of all regions of the world to discuss problems related to the elimination of hotbeds of international tension and to the prevention of war; the measures for curbing the arms race, for disarmament and for strengthening peace in Europe and throughout the world contained in the declaration which was adopted at that same meeting; the initiative of the USSR with regard to holding negotiations on medium range nuclear weapons in Europe in close interrelation with United States forward based systems; the recent withdrawal by the Soviet Union of 20,000 troops, 1,000 tanks and other materiel from the German Democratic Republic, a process which has been completed; the proposal submitted by the socialist countries at the Vienna talks" providing, among other steps recommended, for the reduction of United States military personnel by 13,000 and of Soviet military personnel by 20,000, in addition to the Soviet military contingent which has been unilaterally withdrawn from the territory of the German Democratic Republic; and the withdrawal of some Soviet military units from Afghanistan.
131.	A comparison of the list of the initiatives we have advanced during the past year alone with NATO's record immediately reveals the contrast between the two main lines in world politics. The facts are self-evident in showing which policy line is consonant with the aspirations of the peoples and which is in conflict with them.
132.	It certainly seems to be far from easy to create a distorted picture of our foreign policy in the minds of the peoples. Misinformation and, primarily of course, slander directed against it backfire on those who resort to them.
133.	Given the present state of international relations— when the policy of detente is being put to a severe test, when the danger of war is growing—it is essential to multiply efforts in order to arrest this course of developments. Even if the initial steps were not to be the most radical ones possible, they would still be steps which could infuse an invigorating spirit into the international political climate.
134.	Proceeding from this, the Soviet Union proposes the inclusion in the agenda of this session of the General Assembly of an important and urgent item entitled "Urgent measures for reducing the danger of war", and we are submitting for the Assembly's consideration a relevant draft resolution What is proposed here is the adoption in the immediate future of the following measures.
135.	First, an important step would be for the States members of military alliances to renounce the expansion of existing military political groupings through the admission of new members, and for countries which are not members of such groupings to renounce joining them. All States, without exception, should avoid any action conducive to the establishment of new military alliances or to assigning military functions to regional organizations which have no such functions at present. At the same time, the statements repeatedly made by the USSR and the other socialist countries concerning their readiness to disband the Warsaw Treaty organization if, simultaneously, the NATO bloc were dissolved and, as a first step, to eliminate the military organizations of the two groupings, starting with a mutual reduction of their military activities, remain fully valid.
136.	Secondly, it is essential that all States, and, first of all, the permanent members of the Security Council and countries which have military agreements with them, undertake not to increase as from a certain date—say 1 January of the coming year—their armed forces and conventional armaments, as a first step towards their subsequent reduction.
137.	Thirdly, proceeding from the premise that an early conclusion of an appropriate convention, with the participation of all nuclear and nonnuclear States, would best serve to strengthen security guarantees for nonnuclear States, the USSR is also prepared to consider other possible solutions to this problem, provided the other nuclear Powers adopt a similar approach. We call upon all nuclear countries to make identical and solemn declarations concerning the non-use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear States which have no nuclear weapons on their territories. Such declarations, if they serve the aforementioned objective, could be reinforced by an authoritative decision of the Security Council. At the same time, the Soviet Union reaffirms that it will never use nuclear weapons against those countries which renounce the production and acquisition of such weapons and do not have them on their territories.
138.	Fourthly, we are convinced that, if our partners in the negotiations, the United States and the United Kingdom, show corresponding readiness, it is quite realistic to expect a successful conclusion within a short time limit of the elaboration of an international treaty on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests. We consider this to be possible. There are no insuperable obstacles.
139.	To this end, the USSR proposes that all nuclear Powers declare themselves ready to renounce within a period of one year, beginning on a date to be agreed by them, all nuclear explosions. The point is to have a one year moratorium while negotiations would continue with a view to achieving a more radical solution.
140.	A prompt implementation of all these measures would blunt the edge of some of the issues in international relations. It could be instrumental in easing the burden of military expenditures of States, strengthening the regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and creating favourable conditions for progress in the field of the arms race limitation. We hope that the General Assembly will give these proposals careful and due consideration, and that it will support them.
141.	In today's international conditions, the Soviet Union considers it an imperative duty of the United Nations Member States to intensify their efforts in all major directions of the struggle for peace. As hitherto, the Soviet Union will maintain and deepen the dialogue and cooperate with all States that display political will towards this end. By the way, with regard to "dialogue", this is a term often used nowadays. One way of reasoning goes like this: if there is something I do not like in the policy of a State, I will not speak with it. But to our mind such capriciousness, such vagaries, have been widely condemned, and rightly so. There should be no place for them in politics.
142.	At the current session, we consider it necessary to recall the United Nations decisions which have yet to be implemented, proposals put forward by the USSR and other countries, as well as to set forth our views on enhancing the efficiency of efforts in specific sectors of this historic struggle. To this end, the USSR is submitting at this session a memorandum entitled "peace, disarmament and international security guarantees" 
143.	There is hardly any need to prove that the greatest threat to peace on our planet is posed by the unabated nuclear arms race. There is, however, a need to say again and again that it is inadmissible to put up with a situation where people live under the burden of a constant fear of a nuclear disaster.
144.	While recognizing the complexities of the problem of nuclear disarmament, one should not toe the line of those who shirk even its discussion. It is for people to resolve this burning problem. People have created the nuclear weapon, and it is they who can and must outlaw and destroy it. There is no denying that man's mind is stronger than his fists. None the less, the fact remains that the negotiations proposed by the Soviet Union for ending the production of all types of nuclear weapons and gradually reducing their stockpiles until they have been completely destroyed have never started, owing to the negative position of certain Governments. We stand for the talks getting under way and for the Governments concerned to adopt a serious attitude towards them, so that the relevant decision of the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament may be fulfilled.
145.	The conclusion by States of an agreement on the renunciation of the use of force in international relations would be of great importance for the cause of peace and detente. In statements made from this rostrum the Soviet Union has repeatedly stressed the importance of such an agreement and of resolution 2936 (XXVII) adopted by the General Assembly in 1972 entitled "Non-use of force in international relations and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons". In the current situation, the duty of the United Nations to pronounce itself in favour of the prompt completion of efforts in this field is becoming ever more imperative.
146.	To lessen the threat of nuclear war, it is of decisive importance to check the further growth of the strategic potentials of States and subsequently to reduce strategic nuclear weapon systems quantitatively and to limit them qualitatively. And could anyone deny how significant would be the entry into force of the Soviet American Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms, SALT II?
147.	The USSR is ready to ratify the SALT II Treaty and afterwards strictly to comply with all its provisions. It is also the intention of the Soviet Union to participate in the negotiations on the further limitation and reduction of strategic arms, with strict observance of the principle of equality and equal security. But it would not be out of place to say in this connection that, although the Treaty has not yet entered into force, the American side is already laying a mine under it in the shape of a plan whose implementation would open up the possibility of excluding from appropriate verification a large number of strategic nuclear missile systems. I think that this is well known to all representatives in this hall.
148.	Now that the nuclear missile arsenals of States are being constantly inflated, the question of elaborating and adopting more reliable measures to prevent the possibility of the accidental or authorized use of nuclear weapons is becoming ever more acute, and repeated false nuclear alarms in the United States armed forces give ground for serious thought in this regard. Indeed, the fact that the alarm was false becomes known later—afterwards. And this surely leads to certain conclusions. Such things should not take place if the leadership of a State deals with all questions pertaining to nuclear weapons with a sense of responsibility.
149.	It has always been the stand of the Soviet Union that the strengthening of the regime of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons should be a subject of unfailing concern. The failure to see that transfers of nuclear equipment, materials and technology intended for peaceful purposes could serve as a channel for spreading nuclear arms is fraught with the most negative consequences. An important step would be taken if an international agreement were reached on the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on the territories of countries where there are no such weapons at the present time, regardless of whether or not these countries are allies of a given nuclear State. However, owing to the opposition of certain Powers, progress in negotiations on this question is slow, to say the least.
150.	The lethal power of such means of mass destruction as chemical weapons does not at all pale in comparison to the monstrous destructive force of nuclear armaments. The negotiations on their prohibition have been dragging on for many years, with the distance to the finishing line—the signing of a relevant international convention—remaining almost as long as ever. It will be impossible to cover the remaining distance without energetic efforts on the part of all participants in the negotiations. We, for our part, have been persistently working towards that end.
151.	The Soviet Union, as before, is fully in favour of observance of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. It has always been, and remains, faithful to the spirit and letter of the Convention, which constitutes a measure of real disarmament.
152.	Sometimes representatives of military quarters float allegations that the Soviet Union does not always respect the obligations it assumes under international agreements. But such allegations are a ploy that is as old as the universe. The reasoning of their authors is obviously as follows: if peoples are to be deceived, let the deception be huge to make an impression. But in the contest between truth and deception, truth has always been victorious sooner or later. The Soviet Union has not violated one single international agreement and it does not intend to do so.
153.	Those who resort to such allegations attempt to weave them into a thick shroud to cover their own unseemly deeds. Look at what is taking place in the country whose representatives indulge in such statements: plans are openly being discussed there for building new plants to produce chemical weapons. I said plans are being discussed there, but it would be more accurate to say that they are being discussed here, and this is being done at a time when representatives of that very country are sitting at the negotiating table where the question of banning chemical weapons is being discussed,
154.	And how often has the Soviet Union made representations regarding noncompliance with agreements by those who aim such allegations at the Soviet Union? Those for whom these words of ours are meant know that very well. That is how things are with attempts to cast a shadow on the attitude of the Soviet Union towards its international obligations,
155.	The world is not safeguarded from the possible emergence in the not too distant future of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction. This is particularly dangerous now, since forces have appeared that are counting on achieving military superiority. The USSR favours the adoption of additional measures to ensure the conclusion of an international agreement banning the development of new types and systems of weapons of mass destruction, as well as the conclusion, as necessary, of special agreements on individual types of such weapons.
156.	Vigilance and perseverance are required in the struggle against the neutron weapon—that barbarous means of annihilation. The position of our country, which declared in the past that it would not begin production of neutron weapons unless the United States did so, remains valid and it also applies to the possible emergence of such weapons in any other State.
157.	Objectively, there is a basis for the early completion of work on a treaty banning one type of weapon of mass destruction—radiological weapons.
158.	Owing to the opposition if certain Powers, the question of what are called conventional armaments has actually been left outside the sphere of concrete negotiations. The solution of that question should be speedily moved to a practical plane. Representatives of certain countries wish to talk endlessly and willingly on that subject, while doing nothing, however, to facilitate agreement.
159.	The danger of war could also be reduced in no small measure by the limitation and cessation of the arms race in particular geographical areas as well. That applies first of all to Europe. Developments in Europe have always had a most significant impact on the state of world affairs. The Soviet Union, like other countries of the socialist community, is seeking to ensure a steady continuation of the process initiated by the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and compliance with all the provisions and principles of the Final Act which it adopted.
160.	As we are staunch advocates of the Leninist principle of peaceful coexistence, we have always striven to ensure that no avenue in our relations with States belonging to a different social system, including the United States, should remain unexplored. We expect those States to do likewise. Indeed, an overwhelming majority of them do build their relations with us in that fashion.
161.	The course for maintaining and strengthening security in Europe and for reducing the level of military confrontation on the continent was convincingly demonstrated last May at the meeting of the Political Consultative Committee of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty. It was also manifested during the recent talks held by Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev with French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing and with the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Helmut Schmidt.
162.	In the series of proposals made by the countries of the socialist community with regard to Europe, a prominent place belongs to the initiative for the conclusion by all States participants in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe of a treaty on the non-use of either nuclear or conventional arms—I repeat, nuclear or conventional arms. Does anybody who stands for peace object to this proposal?
163.	The socialist countries have taken steps, some of them quite recently, which provide a solid basis for reaching agreement at the Vienna Talks on the Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe. Success in that work is being obstructed by those who do not wish to give up attempts to gain unilateral advantage to the detriment of the security interests of the States parties to the Warsaw Treaty.
164.	The holding of a conference on military detente and disarmament in Europe is a matter of paramount importance. We express the hope that all States concerned will contribute to the realization of this idea. This is a good idea.
165.	A significant role in achieving general agreement on the convocation and the subject matter of the conference is to be played by the Madrid meeting of representatives of States participants in the European Conference. We wish the meeting to be business-like and to be crowned with positive results on all sections of the Helsinki Final Act. We urge other countries to display the same constructive approach to the Madrid meeting.
166.	The problem of lessening tensions in the Indian Ocean is increasingly important. The Soviet Union has invariably supported the initiative of the littoral States to turn the Indian Ocean into a zone of peace. For the purpose of implementing that initiative, we shall continue to cooperate with all States concerned, inter alia, at the Conference on the Indian Ocean scheduled for 1981. The same objective would be served by the resumption of the Soviet American talks, suspended by the United States, on the limitation and subsequent reduction of military activities in that ocean. We are ready at any time to sit at the same table with the United States and to continue negotiations on that matter. It is now up to the United States.
167.	The States parties to the Warsaw Treaty favour discussion within the framework of the United Nations of the question of limiting and reducing the level of military presence and military activities, be it in the Atlantic, the Indian or the Pacific Ocean, in the Mediterranean or in the Persian Gulf. Agreements in that field would serve the interests of peace and stabilization of the international situation. The Soviet Union is prepared at any time to come to the negotiating table to discuss this issue with the States concerned.
168.	More than once the United Nations has tried its hand at achieving agreed decisions on the reduction of the military budgets of States. However, each time, it encountered resolute opposition and all means of misinformation are employed here to frustrate any progress towards agreement in this extremely important field. As a result, the military appropriations of States have been growing from year to year. And what a variety of methods have been devised by certain Governments to extract from the taxpayer ever greater sums to be fed into the grinder of military production. And this is taking place at a time when hundreds of millions of people in the world are suffering from starvation, have no access to proper medical services and education or have no roof over their heads. Resources which could be used for the benefit of people are being consumed by the arms race. Regrettably, the United Nations has not so far pronounced its weighty opinion on that score. It has great possibilities for speaking out.
169.	Now as before, the USSR is prepared to proceed to negotiations on specific reductions, in absolute figures or in terms of percentage points, of military budgets of States permanent members of the Security Council as well as of other States with large economic and military potential. We are also prepared to reach agreement on the amounts which each State reducing its military budget would allocate for increased economic aid to developing countries.
170.	The Soviet Union believes that thorough preparations should be carried out for the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, which is to take place in 1982. That session should be followed by a world conference on disarmament to ensure that a profound consideration of disarmament issues may result not merely in recommendations, but in decisions to be implemented by States fully without any exception.
171.	There must be implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples adopted 20 years ago on the initiative of the USSR.
172.	We welcome the emergence this year of new independent States. In southern Africa there is the Republic of Zimbabwe, which was born in the flames of the long struggle of its valiant people. We are convinced that the day will come when the people of Namibia, too, will win their freedom and independence. Everything must be done to bring nearer the moment when here in this hall of the General Assembly final victory will be solemnly celebrated over the monster which has taken the lives of or crippled many millions of human beings, which for centuries has mercilessly exploited many a people and whose name is colonialism.
173.	The Soviet Union has always shown respect for the legitimate aspirations of States which have freed themselves from the yoke of colonialism. We have good relations with most of them. We note with satisfaction the increasing role of these States in international politics and appreciate the peaceful anti-imperialist orientation of the movement of the nonaligned countries.
174.	Our country has consistently supported the developing States in their desire to attain economic independence, their inalienable right to dispose of their natural resources and their legitimate demand for the restructuring of international economic relations on the basis of equality, without any discrimination.
175.	Problems affecting all mankind are becoming ever more conspicuous in the broad spectrum of the concerns of our time. I shall make special mention of one of them: preservation of nature. The Soviet Union wishes to see man show greater care and concern for nature, and to see natural resources used in the interests of all nations on a scientific basis.
176.	However, everybody knows what immense material and intellectual resources are being deflected from the solution of this problem by the arms race, how ruinous and perhaps irreversible is the damage inflicted on the entire human environment by military activities of States such as tests of various types of weapons and, above all, of nuclear weapons, the stockpiling of poisonous chemical agents and so on, to say nothing of the disastrous consequences which a nuclear war would have not only for people but also for nature in general.
177.	It is the duty of the United Nations to draw the attention of the States of the world to their historic responsibility for preserving the nature of the earth, which is indispensable for the life of present and future generations, and to make its contribution to the development of international cooperation in this field. We have submitted an appropriate draft resolution for consideration by the General Assembly at the current session.
178.	Our views and specific proposals on important measures which should be adopted in the evolving situation stem from the peaceful nature of the foreign policy of the Soviet Union. We are convinced that the necessary possibilities for staving off the threat of war and putting international peace on a more solid foundation exist. There are forces able to do that. For it is the will of the peoples and the policies of States, not late, that determine the trend of world developments.
179.	No responsible politician in the world can remain indifferent to the course pursued by those countries in whose policies the cult of war is becoming the dominant factor. Indeed, even here and now in the host country of the Headquarters of the United Nations there is massive propaganda in favour of nuclear war—before our very eyes, it can be said, But it is not only a question of propaganda; plans for such a war are being worked out and discussed, and this is all being done at government level. In the atmosphere of militarist frenzy which has of late become so widespread in the United States, there is ever less room left for sound and sober assessments of the world situation and well considered conclusions on the conduct of policy.
180.	The United Nations would be right to issue a firm warning to those who seek a dangerous exacerbation of tension and war hysteria. It would be a good thing to say to those responsible: "Gentlemen, do not push the rock down the hill, for there is a risk that you will not be able to stop it later on".
181.	Saving mankind from the scourge of war is the goal towards which the States should direct their efforts, instead of preparing for war. If the General Assembly took that stand, it would add a bright page to the book of modern history.
182.	Despite all the differences in social systems, levels of economic development, national characteristics and historical destinies of the States represented in the United Nations, all peoples want to live with confidence in their future. No country, no Government, if it expresses the aspirations and will of its people, can remain aloof from the struggle for disarmament, for the relaxation of tensions and for peace.
183.	This is the basis on which the Soviet Union acts. "We shall continue to spare no effort", stressed Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, "to preserve detente, everything positive that was achieved in the 1970s, to ensure a turn towards disarmament, to uphold the right of peoples to free and independent development, to preserve and consolidate peace."
184.	Our country and its representatives are prepared to participate in a most constructive manner in the work of this session and to contribute actively to its success.
﻿Mr. President, I congratulate you on your election to the presidency of the General Assembly. It is a recognition of your extraordinary diplomatic skills, but, more important, your election is a tribute to your country and to its contribution to international cooperation and understanding.
52.	On behalf of the United States delegation to this Assembly, I come here today to express anew the United States commitment to the United Nations. I come also to express our hopes for its future at a moment when the world is deeply troubled by tension and uncertainty. Peace is threatened by smouldering regional conflicts and by assaults of the strong upon the weak. Nations large and small are buffeted by steeply rising oil prices and serious economic strains. Within many countries poverty and oppression form an explosive combination.
53.	A few weeks ago I spoke to this Assembly about the international economy.  I stressed the obligation of nations to cooperate in facing world economic problems: payments imbalances, energy inflation, slowed growth in many developing countries, the spectres of environmental decay and even famine.
54.	Our inability to reach a consensus on procedures for global negotiations is a pause in the process, not a failure in our objectives. I do not mean to say that the differences that have kept us from finding a formula for global negotiations can be glossed over. They are real. They are substantive. But we are prepared to use the span of this General Assembly to continue discussions that can lead to procedures, to an agenda and to a negotiating structure that will foster broad agreement among all the nations here represented.
55.	Today I want to look beyond economic problems to the one condition that is a prerequisite for all material progress: peace. If we truly care about building a world in which peace and justice prevail, the world's nations, and this Organization, cannot ignore certain political and legal obligations also—obligations every bit as compelling as the economic obligations I spoke of earlier.
56.	These responsibilities are not new. They are proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations. But dangerous new circumstances require that we stress them anew, lest we betray the very purpose the United Nations is designed to serve.
57.	Our first obligation is to refrain from aggression and to deal with it vigorously. Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations provides for "the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace". Article 2 prohibits "the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State".
58.	Accordingly, the United Nations must confront the continuing assault upon Afghanistan. I raise this issue not to set off a rhetorical exchange, not in the interest of polemics, but in the interest of peace.
59.	Today, more than 1 million refugees attest to the human toll of the violence in Afghanistan. And more is at stake than the independence of one country. If this assault continues, the independence and integrity of every small defenceless nation will be called into question.
60.	Last January, at an emergency special session, this Assembly condemned by a large majority the assault upon Afghanistan. We strongly believe that at the thirty-fifth session also the General Assembly must work under the Charter to reinforce the principles of the United Nations. We must work for a total withdrawal of Soviet troops and a political settlement. We must support the principles of non-intervention, self-determination and non-alignment for Afghanistan.
61.	In Kampuchea as well, armed aggression continues. We welcome reports of some progress made under th4 leadership of the United Nations Secretary General and international organizations in relieving the conditions of deprivation and disease so prevalent a year ago. The threat of renewed starvation requires significant further contribution from the international community.
62.	Despite some improvement in Kampuchea's desperate human situation, no progress whatsoever has been made towards securing the withdrawal of occupying Vietnamese forces and the restoration of self-determination to the Kampuchea people, as called for in last year's resolution on Kampuchea, sponsored by the nonaligned nations. We strongly support the basis for a settlement, including the concept of an international conference, contained in that resolution, which was passed by a large majority.
63.	Above all, let us keep in mind two basic purposes for which this body exists: to oppose armed aggression and to assuage its consequences. No achievement could be more important to the future influence and effectiveness of the United Nations. No failure could be more damaging than a failure to deal firmly with these issues.
64.	Our second obligation, proclaimed by our Charter, is to settle international disputes by peaceful means. Achieving this goal remains urgently important in two key regions: the Middle East and southern Africa.
65.	In the Middle East, the United States is committed to a comprehensive peace—an enduring peace based on the principles of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We are determined to pursue to a successful conclusion the peace process begun at Camp David two years ago this month.  Already that process has achieved something once thought impossible: peace between Egypt and Israel. Now the negotiations are focused upon, a second goal: taking a significant first step towards resolving the Palestinian problem. The current autonomy talks have as their goal arriving at interim arrangements to establish full autonomy for the people of the West Bank and Gaza. After that, the process will proceed to negotiations which will determine the final status of those areas.
66.	As we seek to resolve this conflict, we are committed to finding a solution to the Palestinian problem in all its aspects and, at the same time, to permanent security for the State of Israel. We have no illusions about the difficulties of this quest. We are dealing with a conflict of long duration and intense feelings. There can be no short cuts.
67.	So today I call on all members of this Assembly to lend their support to these negotiations. Camp David has proved so far, and remains for the future, the most hopeful and productive avenue to peace in the Middle East. There is no alternative to negotiations except further conflict. Let us remember that differences are rivers to be crossed, not reasons to turn back.
68.	That persistence can bear fruit—that negotiations can yield peace—has been reaffirmed in recent months in southern Africa. Through arduous negotiations, the new nation of Zimbabwe has been born in peace. Today we have reason to celebrate not only this accomplishment, but also the way in which nations worked together to achieve it. And for the future, the Zimbabwe settlement offers hope—and a model—for peaceful settlements in southern Africa and elsewhere.
69.	The United States will continue its strong efforts to advance the United Nations plan for Namibia. There are no major substantive issues left to be resolved. I am convinced that the United Nations plan would be implemented fairly. All that remains is for South Africa to act in its own interest, in the interest of peace in the region, and in the interest of the Namibian people: to accept implementation of the United Nations settlement. If that does not happen soon, this chance for peace could be lost, and we would face a bitter future of protracted conflict and tragic human suffering.
70.	The settlement in Zimbabwe can also provide a precedent for peaceful change in South Africa. We will continue to urge the Government of South Africa to abandon the repugnant policy of apartheid. We consider it urgent that talks among representative leaders begin on the issue of peaceful, orderly change in South Africa—while there is still time.
71.	We must continue our search for peace and restoration of respect for international law in other parts of the world as well. In Lebanon, in Cyprus and elsewhere, we will lend our full support to the peace making and peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations.
72.	And although the holding of American hostages in Iran is not an item on the agenda of this Assembly, it remains a matter of extreme urgency that this tragic impasse be resolved—resolved in a way that strengthens peace and restores respect for international law. The continuing situation in Iran contributes to uncertainty about security and stability in Southwest Asia. The security of Iran itself and the stability of the area depend on a united, strong and independent Iran living at peace with its neighbours.
73.	With the end of the former regime and the death of the late Shah, a chapter in Iran's history has closed. As a new chapter opens, we emphasize that we recognize the reality of the Iranian revolution, and we respect the right of the Iranian people to choose their own form of government without intervention of any kind. With the emergence of a new constitution and governmental structure and the gradual consolidation of authority, the Islamic Republic of Iran can assume its obligations and independent role in this community of nations.
74.	An indispensable step will be the safe return to their families of the American hostages in Iran. Throughout the 324 days of their captivity, the Member States and institutions of the United Nations have expressed their concern for the hostages in numberless ways and channels. With their safe release, repeatedly called for by the Security Council and the International Court of Justice, Iran could end its isolation from those nations that live in accordance with international law, and sanctions would be terminated.
75.	Today I urge the nation of Iran, its Parliament, and its people also, to consider the human face of the hostage problem. These innocent people and their families have experienced acute suffering. I ask this community of nations to join us in urging that their ordeal be brought to a safe, honourable and prompt end. We also know that in Iran, as in the United States, there are deep feelings as a result of grievances and suffering perceived in the past. We are prepared to do our part in resolving fairly the issues between us. The Iranian Parliament has announced that it will name a commission to deal with the hostage question. We hope that this positive step will bring the Government of Iran closer to a decision on release of the hostages.
76.	The United States shares many common values with the people of Iran. When the safe return of all the hostages to their families is assured, we are prepared to deal on a basis of mutual respect and equality with all the outstanding issues and misunderstandings between Iran and the United States and to reach understandings on the principles which will govern our relationship.
77.	As we look to the future, 1 urge the United Nations, as soon as possible, to take firm and effective measures to counter the global menace of attacks upon diplomats and others. The danger it poses to civilized international life is growing; no institution of peace can afford to ignore it. For our part, the United States seeks peace with all nations. Whether it be with Iran or with the Soviet Union, we are eager to reduce tensions and to restore productive relations as soon as their actions allow.
78.	In all cases our policies will reflect our commitment to non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations. As the President of the United States, Mr. Carter, has affirmed, we shall not interfere in Poland's affairs and we expect that others will also respect the right of the Polish nation to resolve its own problems in its own way.
79.	Another obligation of nations is the control and limitation of arms. A period of heightened tension in the world makes this obligation more difficult to fulfil, but also more urgently important.
80.	For that reason, let me underscore anew today the commitment of my Government to arms control, to practical measures that contribute to world peace and enhance international stability. President Carter voiced this basic commitment when lie was sworn in as President in January 1977. It remains equally valid today.
81.	Let me give several concrete illustrations of that commitment. Some of the arms control efforts I shall mention involve active participation by the United Nations; others involve negotiations outside the United Nations framework. But all are of intense concern to the international community, for an unrestrained arms race would darken the horizon for all humanity.
82.	First, it is President Carter's intention to move forward as speedily as possible towards ratification of the SALT II Treaty.  Accordingly, the President intends to consult with the leadership of the United States Senate soon after the election with a view to resuming the ratification process as soon as is feasible. We consider it of cardinal importance to ratify SALT II and to move forward with the SALT process. The Soviet Union, however, must recognize that for many Americans recent Soviet actions have called into question the Soviet Union's commitment to international peace and cooperation. Accordingly, we call upon the Soviet Union to act in ways that will enhance, not damage, the prospects for SALT II and for other arms control efforts.
83.	Secondly, we are committed to the pursuit of meaningful and equal limitations on theatre nuclear forces in the framework of the SALT III negotiations. We are ready to begin talks with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union this week to discuss this subject and to seek agreement on the arrangements for beginning these talks promptly.
84.	Thirdly, we are committed to seeking an effective and verifiable comprehensive test ban treaty. Substantial progress has been made towards this goal and we are determined to continue pursuing these efforts vigorously.
85.	Fourthly, the United States is committed m the Vienna talks to achieving mutual and balanced force reductions and limitations to diminish the risks inherent in the massive presence of military forces in central Europe.
86.	Fifthly, we are prepared to develop further the security aspects of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. If the international situation permits and if there is balanced progress in all areas, including the human rights area, at the second review session of the Conference, to be held at Madrid in November, we are prepared to consider a post Madrid European conference of the signatory States to the Final Act of the Conference on developing militarily significant confidence-building measures.
87.	Sixthly, we support the effort of the newly expanded Committee on Disarmament to develop the provisions of an international convention on radiological weapons We also support its work towards a comprehensive ban on chemical weapons and we continue to pursue our bilateral negotiations with the Soviet Union on an effective prohibition against chemical weapons.
88.	Finally, the further spread of nuclear weapons would constitute a serious threat to international peace and security. We firmly support efforts, therefore, to reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation. The Treaty on the Non Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is a cornerstone of those efforts; we strongly urge non-parties to embrace the Treaty, for it enhances the security of all nations, nuclear weapon and nonnuclear weapon States alike. At the second Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons there was unanimous agreement on the fundamental soundness of the Treaty and the desirability of universal adherence to it. For those nonnuclear weapon States that have not joined the Treaty, we attach particular importance to the goal of achieving comprehensive, full scope international safeguards coverage. We believe that acceptance of such coverage should become a condition of new nuclear supply commitments to such States. We shall continue to work for a world in which all nations can share in the peaceful use of nuclear energy without the danger of spreading nuclear weapons.
89.	Before I leave this subject, let me emphasize our deep concern over another arms control matter. If arms control is to be successful, agreements must be fully honoured. Questions such as those raised by persistent reports that chemical weapons have been used in Afghanistan, Laos and Kampuchea cannot be ignored by the international community. To do so would undermine both arms control and international law. The United States, therefore, welcomes the emphasis placed by the Committee on Disarmament at its most recent session on the need for international efforts to determine the facts behind those reports. We believe that an impartial investigation into those reports could most appropriately be launched under the auspices of the United Nations.
90.	Important as they are, the obligations I have mentioned by no means exhaust the responsibilities which rest upon us as nations, and as a community of nations, if we are to secure peace. By peace, I do not mean the fragile, artificial stability that comes with repression of a people by its Government; I mean the true stability of societies that are at peace with themselves because the rights of their citizens are protected and nurtured.
91.	So let me close by underscoring another obligation of nations: our obligation to uphold human rights and to concern ourselves compassionately with fundamental human needs.
92.	In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights the community of nations has nobly defined the concepts of human rights and human dignity, just as in the Charter of the United Nations we have outlined the precepts of peaceful cooperation.
93.	The failure of nations to live up to those human rights obligations is a continuing tragedy, made painfully manifest in the waves of refugees now sweeping across the world.
94.	Those suffering people present a dramatic challenge to the international community represented by This Assembly. Over the past five years the United States has welcomed more than 600,000 refugees—from Africa, from Asia, from Europe, from the Middle Last and from the western hemisphere. In the past five months alone we have received more than 120,000 people driven from Cuba to our shores—an influx which has presented extraordinary challenges to our resources.
95.	In recognition of the human need implicit in this worldwide wave of refugees, President Carter has made known the intention of the United States to accept an additional 217,000 refugees over the next year.
96.	Our country, of course, is only one of the many which have welcomed and helped refugees. More than 1 million Afghan refugees have fled to Pakistan; 400,000 Indo Chinese are in Thailand. More than 3 million are homeless in sub-Saharan Africa. Clearly this is a global problem; it requires a global response.
97.	The refugee resettlement efforts agreed upon at Geneva last year [see A/35/12, para. 6] demand our energy and our generosity. We must strengthen the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
98.	The humanitarian programmes of the United Nations and of the other agencies require a renewed commitment from all of us to their support and to their strengthening. But ultimately this human tragedy can be dealt with only by removing its root causes: by overcoming poverty, by ending the abuse of human rights within nations and by establishing peace among nations so that no person need be forced to flee from home and country.
99.	This is why my nation supports the growth of democracy and personal freedom in the Americas, in Africa and in every region of the world. Achieving these ultimate purposes remains a supreme challenge for the United Nations. Making progress towards them must be the work of this thirty fifth session of the General Assembly.
100. Let us not ignore the facts. Ours is a moment of worldwide economic difficulty and a time of tension between great Powers. At such moments, peaceful cooperation becomes even more difficult than usual. At such moments, our obligations as members of this Assembly of nations take on new importance. At such times, when a cloud of troubling events darkens our aspirations to ultimate peace, we can light our path by adhering faithfully to our Charter, to the international law that binds us, to the standards of international conduct that protect us.
101.	Let us hope that the light we generate by doing so will dispel the clouds of tension and discord that darken the world today.
102.	The United States will do its part. We will live up to our obligations to oppose aggression, to build peace, to limit arms, to support human rights and to foster economic justice, for us and for other nations, these endeavours can immeasurably improve life on earth and build the just and lasting peace for which all our peoples yearn.
