Allow me, first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of this session of the General Assembly. I should also like to take this opportunity to express warm congratulations to the people of Belize, who have attained independence after a long period of efforts, and to extend a cordial welcome to the Republic of Vanuatu, which has been admitted to membership in the United Nations.
127.	In the past year, the people of various countries have waged effective struggles against imperialism, hegemonism, colonialism and racism and have increased their mutual support and assistance, thus contributing significantly to the maintenance of world peace. However, the world is still fraught with tension and turbulence. While old issues remain unsettled, new problems keep cropping up. Outrageous violations of the norms of international relations have not been stopped and the third world countries have been the major victims. The world is still faced with the danger of war.
128.	We cannot ignore the fact that the Soviet Union is trying hard to consolidate and increase its military strength and is stepping up its global deployment for war. On the one hand, it continues to occupy foreign territories and massacre the local inhabitants by the use of force and to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries by the threat of force. On the other hand, it has been paving the way for further expansions by carrying out political and economic infiltrations and stirring up troubles wherever possible. AN this shows that the Soviet Union has not given up its bid for world hegemony and that the corollary strategy of a southward drive remains unchanged.
129.	However, because of repeated setbacks and its own vulnerabilities, the Soviet Union, while adhering to a policy of aggression and expansion, has increasingly resorted to political tricks. It has launched a new peace offensive by putting forward so-called proposals regarding disarmament, political solutions and so on in order to confuse public opinion, to^ disguise its own hegemonism and to deceive or lull the people of the world. In these circumstances, it would be contrary to the objective realities of the international scene to suggest that the Soviet Union is harmless and on the defensive or that its deep predicament is forcing it to consider a retreat. Aggression and expansion by Soviet hegemonism continue to be the major threat to world peace. Hence, the struggle against hegemonism remains the primary task for the maintenance of world peace.
130.	The events in Afghanistan and Kampuchea major instances  which threaten the peace and security of the world and grossly violate the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations.
131.	The Soviet armed invasion of Afghanistan and the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea with Soviet support are both aimed at totally subjugating and occupying a neighboring country by force. If such lawlessness is not firmly stored, but instead accepted as a fait accompli, it will only  the appetite of the aggressors and convince them the they can go on practicing the law of the jungle unimpeded In that case, what would be left of justice and the code of conduct for the international community? How, then, can there be any security for the States Members of the United Nations, particularly the weaker third world countries?
132.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and its support for the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea are not only aimed at subjugating the two countries, but also at using them as springboards for further expansion, so as to close the ring around the oil-rich region of the Middle East, push towards the Strait of Malacca and increase the threat to the surrounding countries and to the peace and security of the rest of the world. Many mo. countries will corns to grief if the aggression against Afghanistan and Kampuchea is not checked and if the Soviet Union is allowed to press forward with its strategy of a southward drive.
133.	Meanwhile, as the Soviet Union is going ahead steadily with its global strategic deployment, the risk of war will increase. Only by firmly putting an end to the aggression against Afghanistan and Kampuchea will it be possible to salvage the independence of these two nations, and to blunt or check the momentum of the Soviet Union's southward drive, curb its expansion in other parts of the world and upset its global strategic plan. The heroic struggles in the past three years of the Kampuchean people under the leadership of the Government of democratic Kampuchea and the widespread resistance movement of the Afghan people have made brilliant contributions not only to the defense of their own independence and sovereignty but also to the maintenance of world peace and the security of all countries.
134.	It is obvious that Afghanistan and Kampuchea are die priority issues in the overall world situation and that a fair and reasonable settlement can only be achieved by waging unremitting struggles. We trust that all justice upholding and peace-loving countries and peoples will continue to be deeply concerned with these issues and will strengthen their fighting will in view of the protracted nature of the struggle.
135.	It is understandable that quite a few countries have called for a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues. But the question is: on what principles should the political settlement be based? The resolutions on Afghanistan and Kampuchea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, the declarations adopted by the Third Islamic Conference, held last January, by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non Aligned Countries, held last February, and by the International Conference on Kampuchea, last July, have all stressed that all foreign troops should be withdrawn from both countries and that any settlement of these issues must be based on the principles of respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all States and the right of all peoples to determine their own destiny free from any foreign interference.
136.	China is in favor of such a political settlement and is ready to work with other Member States towards this end. However, the withdrawal of all foreign troops is the primary condition for any political settlement. The Soviet Union and Viet Nam backed by the Soviet Union adamantly refuse to leave Afghanistan and Kampuchea, respectively. This is the basic reason why the Afghan and Kampuchean issues have remained unresolved till now. Under these circumstances, the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples are bound to carry on their sacred war in defense of their own countries. Lately, the patriotic forces of both countries have been closing their ranks in order to fight more effectively against the aggressors. For its part, the international community is duty bound to continue to support and assist in various ways the just struggles of the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples.
137.	Only when the aggressors have suffered heavier and heavier blows on the battlefield and have been subjected to mounting pressure from the international community will they be forced to consider pulling out their troops. Therefore, to increase the pressure on die aggressors from all sides is precisely the way towards creating conditions for a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues. Conversely, any attempt to weaken or break up the armed struggle against aggression or to strike a deal at the expense of the victimized peoples in exchange for concessions from the aggressors would only embolden the hegemonists and hurt the chance of a genuine settlement.
138.	The recent proposals offered by the Soviet Union and Viet Nam for settling the Afghan and Kampuchean questions are all based on the acceptance of the fait accompli created by their armed aggression. A compromise on such a basis' would be tantamount to accepting a new Munich agreement by allowing the aggressors to gain easily at the negotiating table what they have failed to get on the battlefield. That is obviously impermissible. The
Chinese Government maintains that all foreign troops must be withdrawn from Afghanistan and Kampuchea immediately and unconditionally, that these two countries must be restored to their independent and nonaligned status, and that the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples must be free to choose their own political systems and governments.
139.	TJie Chinese Government reiterates its position that following the settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions in accordance with the aforementioned principles, the countries concerned should join in an international guarantee that there shall be no interference whatsoever in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and Kampuchea and that their territory shall not be occupied or used for encroachment on the independence and sovereignty of other countries in either region. We hope that the General Assembly will adhere to the principles set forth in the resolutions adopted at its previous sessions and make renewed efforts towards a settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues.
140.	In the past year the situation in the Middle East, rather than improving, has become more tense. Israel is still clinging obstinately to an expansionist position. It has not only continued to obstruct a reasonable settlement of the Middle East question, but has become more reckless by committing fresh atrocities against the Arab countries and peoples in violation of the Charter and the norms of international relations. It flagrantly raided Iraq's nuclear reactor, repeatedly invaded Lebanon and frequently bombed Palestinian refugee camps in open defiance of the relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations. Israel's lawlessness is intolerable and must be stopped. The Chinese Government and people sternly condemn these Israeli acts of aggression and firmly support the just struggles of the Arab people. We maintain that Israel must withdraw from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem; that the Palestinian people must regain their national rights, including the right to return to their homeland and the right to self-determination and establishment of a state; that the PLO, as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, is entitled to participate on an equal footing in a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question; and that all countries in the Middle East have the right to independence and existence. We are pleased to note that many Arab countries, the European Community and others, have been making positive efforts to bring about a settlement of the Middle East question. Our attitude is that we welcome all initiatives that are conducive to a comprehensive and just settlement of the Middle East question and to peace and stability in the region.
141.	In southern Africa, the white racist regime is becoming more and more unbridled in trampling upon the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations. Not only does it continue to occupy Namibia illegally in defiance of United Nations resolutions and to strengthen the system of apartheid in South Africa, but it has launched repeated armed attacks against the front line States. Not long ago it even carried out a large-scale invasion of Angola. These outrages constitute a flagrant provocation to the African people and to the people of the entire world. In our view, Namibia should attain genuine national independence immediately on the basis of territorial integrity and national unity and in conformity with the aspirations of the Namibian people and the relevant United" Nations resolutions; the system of apartheid in South Africa must be completely abolished; and the international community should apply, without reservation, comprehensive sanctions against South Africa. We firmly support the solemn resolution adopted at the emergency special session on the question of Namibia [iES8/2]. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) must be fully implemented without further delay.
142.	The Middle East and southern Africa are two important regions rich in strategic resources. The Soviet Union has always regarded them as important targets for its aggression and expansion. Masquerading as a supporter of national liberation movements, it has long since infiltrated these regions in an attempt to expand its influence there. The crimes committed by Israel and South Africa have not only brought untold sufferings to the countries and peoples of those regions, but have also provided the hegemonists with more opportunities and pretexts for infiltration, thereby posing a greater threat to peace in the Middle East, southern Africa and the rest of the world.
143.	It must be pointed out that the arrogance and defiance of Israel and South Africa are attributable, in large measure, to United Stales support and protection. The United States has repeatedly expressed its willingness to improve its relations with the third-world countries and to join them in safeguarding world peace. But what is the sense of expressing such sentiments when Israel and South Africa are being condoned and given support instead of being denounced for their flagrant breaches of die norms of international relations? This only antagonizes the hundreds of millions of Arab and African peoples and a large number of third-world countries.
144.	The situation in the Caribbean region merits our attention. The peoples in some of the countries there have long been subjected to imperialist and colonialist exploitation and oppression and unbearable domestic, political and economic conditions. It is their inalienable right to uphold their national independence and State sovereignty, develop their national economy and carry out democratic reforms. This should be recognized in the first place. On the other hand, it must be noted that another superPower and its proxies have been meddling in the internal affairs of those countries and trying hard to infiltrate the region under the guise of supporting the progressive movements. In our opinion, the people of the region should be left alone to solve their own problems. We are opposed to all outside interferences no matter where they come from.
145.	The situation in NorthEast Asia is also not tranquil. The United States has thus far failed to withdraw its troops from South Korea. The peaceful reunification of Korea continues to meet with obstructions from the authorities in South Korea. In October 1980, President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea put forward a new formula for the establishment of a Democratic Confederal Republic of Koryo, which would incorporate both North and South Korea. This reflects die fervent hope of the broad masses of the Korean people for the reunification of their fatherland and provides a practical way for its realization. We maintain that resolution 3390 ft (XXX) on the question of Korea, sponsored by 43 countries and adopted by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session, should be implemented expeditiously so as to create. favorable conditions for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea.
145. Over the past year, the world has not only witnessed a series of major political events, but has also been faced with serious economic problems. The economic conditions of many developing countries have further deteriorated and the economic contradictions between the North and South have become more acute. Faced with worsening terms of trade, the developing countries are plagued with greater deficits in their international balance of payments and heavier burdens of foreign debts. They basically remain powerless in international economic relations. Certain developed countries are clinging to the old international economic order and trying to shift the consequences of the economic crises onto others, thus creating greater obstacles for the developing countries to build independent economies and making it more difficult for them to achieve the objectives of their, development strategies.
147.	The efforts of the developing countries to achieve economic independence after winning political independence represent an irresistible trend of our time. The major developed countries, however, refuse to go along with this trend by changing their unequal and unfair relationship with the developing countries. This is the root cause for the ever sharpening economic contradictions between the North and South.
148.	The economies of nations are closely interrelated. The developed countries are increasingly dependent on the developing countries for their economic growth. From the longterm point of view, the prolonged impoverishment of the latter will not be in the economic interests of the former. A number of developed countries have come to realize that their own economic "stagflation" may be alleviated as a result of the economic growth of the developing countries. We are of the view that the principle of equality and mutual benefit, which is the norm of international relations, should also apply to the economic field.
149.	Moreover, one must not lose sight of the fact that the economic difficulties of the developing countries and the resultant domestic political turmoil, as well as the worsening NorthSouth contradictions, will provide the hegemonists with opportunities to stir up troubles. To support the developing countries in building their independent economies and to promote appropriate reforms in the international economic order so as to establish step by step a new international economic order is therefore not a purely economic matter but a vital political question that affects the maintenance of world peace and stability.
150.	It is pure hope that the major developed countries, proceeding from the overall situation of the world, will give serious consideration to the legitimate desires and demands of the developing countries, promptly come to an agreement at the current session or at the forthcoming Cancun summit to launch the global negotiations, and take practical and feasible measures to meet the urgent needs of the developing countries and improve North South relations.
151.	The political and economic situation of the world today is grim indeed. The maintenance of peace is the common aspiration of the people of the world. However, We have to struggle for peace; we cannot beg for it. To
defend world peace it is imperative to oppose hegemonism. To this end, the peoples of all countries should unite and coordinate their actions, taking into account their respective situations. In order to achieve greater unity against hegemonism it is necessary for all parties to respect each other's sovereign rights and interests and to treat each other as equals. On the eve of the Second , World War certain countries failed to discern in time the source of the threat and failed to unite effectively to oppose it. The people of the world ended up paying a heavy price and the world learned a bitter lesson.
152: China has consistently pursued a foreign policy of peace. Having suffered enormously from foreign aggressions and wars in the past, the Chinese people know only too well how precious peace is. Today, as the Chinese people are engaged in building China into a modernized socialist country, they need all the more a lasting peaceful international environment. However; in pursuing the policy of safeguarding world peace and opposing hegemonism, China is motivated not simply by its own interests, but also takes into account the interests of the people of the whole world.
153.	China is a developing socialist country; it belongs and will always belong to the third world. China is ready to work together with other third-world countries as well as all countries that uphold justice and love peace and to contribute all it can to the defense of the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations and to the cause of opposing hegemonism and maintaining world peace.
53.The English version of his statement was supplied by the delegation. *Mr. President, I should like, first of all, to take this opportunity to convey to you the congratulations of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to this high office. We see in you a man of distinction who, in his long and active involvement in the work of the United Nations, has shown exceptional qualities. We see in you the representative of one of the leading members of the non aligned movement, a country with which we have had good, longstanding relations.
54.	I should also like to express my country's gratitude to the President of the thirty-fifth session of the General As sembly, Mr. Riidiger von Wechmar. He discharged the du ties of his office with a sense of awareness of the new reality of global interdependence. In so doing he was able to count on the full approval and support of the Federal Republic of Germany.
55.	At the same, time, I wish to thank the Secretary General for his dedicated work over the past 12 months on behalf of the Organization, and thus also on behalf of peace.
56.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany, I extend a warm welcome to Vanuatu as a new Member of the United Nations.
57.	For a decade now, the world economy has been in a critical phase of readjustment: inflation, recession and unemployment in the industrialized countries, but, above all, stagnating indeed, declining per capita incomes in many developing countries. The want and distress of the poor in the third world are increasing. At the same time, the world population continues to grow rapidly: over the next 20 years it will increase from 4.5 billion to approximately 6.5 billion people. This means that food, clothing and housing, schools and jobs have to be provided for 2 billion people. That is equivalent to the population of 2,000 completely new cities, each with 1 million inhabitants. This shows that mankind as a whole is faced with great and global challenges.
58.	Yet and this is the disturbing part of it is not these problems that are the focal point of world politics and of world interests: the headlines of the international press tell us, rather, about an arms race and tensions between nations, about war, civil war and intervention. At a time when global interdependence and global cooperation have become a question of survival, the human race is in danger of once again pitting its strength against itself.
59.	Now, at a time when we ought to be concentrating our material as weK as our intellectual resources on the task of bringing the world economy out of its structural crisis, on development in the third world and on preserving the conditions of life on our planet, $500 billion is being wasted on arms. But our children and grandchildren will judge us solely by whether we have succeeded in setting me world on the road to peace, development and survival, or whether we have declined into confrontation, an arms race and, ultimately, catastrophe.
60.	We can preserve world peace and master the great challenges to mankind only if all countries act in accordance with principles that are commensurate with the provisions and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. This calls for renunciation of force, that is to say, renunciation of the use and threat of use of force, since conflicts must be settled by peaceful means; for no aspiration to domination over others, no interference in the internal affairs of other coun tries and respect for the right of self determination of all nations; for responsible action with an awareness of global interdependence, using moderation and restraint in pursuing one's own interests; for readiness for dialogue, negotiation and cooperation; for no aspiration to superiority, but rather a desire for balance at the lowest possible level of arma ments, adhering to an active policy of preserving peace through cooperation on issues of international security and, in particular, of arms control and disarmament; and, finally, for elimination of the NorthSouth confrontation as part of a policy of worldwide partnership and the safeguarding of peace.
61.	In the search for a solution to these global problems, very great importance attaches to the development of East West relations. At the beginning of the 1970s we all hoped that the efforts increasingly to reduce the differences between East and West and to expand cooperation would prove successful, and considerable progress in the development of East-West relations was indeed achieved in the first half of that decade. But of late the East-West confrontation has intensified yet again. It threatens to push the North South dialog to the periphery of world affairs once more. Indeed, the East-West confrontation threatens to spread to the South.
62.	That must not be allowed to happen. East and West must do everything possible to pull themselves back onto a course leading to stability in their relations and to cooperation. On no account must East and West allow the third world to become a theater for the continuation of their conflict. The countries of the South have problems enough and should not also be made the scene of the contest be tween East and West.
63.	Negotiations on arms control and disarmament with the aim of establishing a balance at the lowest possible level are more urgent than ever. There must not be another arms race.
64.	In the 1970s the Soviet Union made extraordinary efforts in all fields of armaments. They were not matched by comparable efforts on the part of the West; quite the contrary.
65.	The West has noted with great concern how the Soviet Union has not only increased its superiority as regards conventional forces but has at the same time stepped up its medium-range nuclear weapons and given them new quality, in particular with the SS20 missile and the "Backfire" bomber. Our concern about these developments can only be dispelled if the current and proposed East-West negotiations are successful. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will contribute all it possibly can to the achievement of that aim.
66.	We hope that the meeting between Secretary of State Haig and Foreign Minister Gromyko will mark the beginning of a new, constructive phase in the dialog between the United States and the Soviet Union, which is of such importance for the whole world. The importance and weight of the United States and the Soviet Union give both countries a special responsibility for world peace. Dialog, negotiation and cooperation between East and West must 'be intensified and further developed. This also includes the continuation of the SALT process.
67.	We also hope that the meeting between the United States Secretary of State and the Soviet Foreign Minister will above all give a signal for the start of negotiations on medium-range nuclear weapons. We have advocated such negotiations for quite some time. We have been involved in the preparations for them with our allies, and we will continue to follow them in the future. We want medium-range nuclear missiles on both sides to be limited to equal ceilings at the lowest possible level, and the more the Soviet Union reduces its arms buildup, the lower that level can be. If that arms buildup is eliminated altogether, there will no longer be any need for the West to deploy medium-range weapons as envisaged.
68.	The Government and people of the Federal Republic of Germany long for nothing more dearly than a result of that kind, which to us would be the ideal result. But it is not only a question of nuclear weapons. In the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe, we are resolutely pursuing the aim of achieving a balance of forces in central Europe by means of mutual reductions, in order to improve military stability and to rid the peoples of central Europe of the fear of possible surprise attack.
69.	As a result of the Madrid review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, we want a conference or disarmament in Europe as a forum for agreement on concrete confidence building measures for the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals.
70.	It is not only East and West that have to tackle the task of arms control and disarmament. That task is universal and applies to all regions and to all countries.
71.	The United Nations already proclaimed the 1970s the United Nations Disarmament Decade, but we are all pain fully conscious of the scant success of our efforts to stop the worldwide arms spiral.
72.	My country has put forward as its contribution to the General Assembly's second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held in 1982, a draft comprehensive pro gramme or disarmament.4 Its purpose is to facilitate world wide disarmament negotiations, to describe the conceptual framework for such negotiations, to define the criteria and principles, and thus to carry out important preparatory work for concrete negotiations and results.
73.	1 wish to mention four principles in particular: balance, openness, verifiability and confidence building.
74.	Disarmament negotiations can only prove successful if they enhance the security of all concerned. Whoever seeks one sided "advantages in disarmament negotiations or tries to hold on to those already gained will create a deadlock. The aim must be balance at the lowest possible level. Superiority of one side causes instability and this in turn poses a threat to peace. Balance and parity constitute the recognized central principle of the SALT negotiations.
75.	But that principle must not be restricted to the SALT process. In their joint declaration of 6 May 1978, General Secretary Brezhnev and Federal Chancellor Schmidt said that "both sides deem it important that no one should seek military superiority and that they proceed on the assumption that approximate equality and parity suffice to safeguard defense".
76.	It is now necessary to ensure that in the disarmament negotiations between East and West this principle is translated into practical, concrete policies.
77.	Disarmament presupposes transparency of the force relationship. Each side must openly give information about its own force strengths and armaments. Anyone trying to evade this is sowing the seeds of mistrust and casting doubt upon his intentions. The United Nations has elaborated a standardized reporting system with a view to making military budgets comparable. My country, like some other Western and nonaligned countries, has submitted a report on its defense budget in line with that system. All other countries should follow that example.
78.	I repeat my proposal that the United Nations should set up two registers: first, one which records how much each industrial country spends per capita on armaments and how much it spends on development assistance; and secondly, another register which lists worldwide exports and imports of weapons. This would be an important first step. The international community cannot look on indifferently as military spending in East and West and in the third world continues to increase while development aid budgets stagnate.
79.	The obligations assumed in disarmament negotiations must be verifiable. The verification procedure must in each individual case be tailored to the treaty to which it is to apply. We can do some important preliminary work in that respect in the United Nations if we develop procedures and instruments of verification which have been internationally agreed upon and, where possible, also tried out in practice.
80.	Anyone who opposes on site inspections or refuses to accept verification in other forms will be open to the suspicion of wanting to hide something and deceive others; he will be destroying confidence rather than building it.
81.	The Geneva Committee on Disarmament is discussing a comprehensive prohibition of the manufacture and stock piling of chemical weapons. Here, too, the most difficult problem still to be solved is that of verification. We hope for an early agreement on the verifiable prohibition of chemical weapons.
82.	Real disarmament can be achieved only through mutual confidence among States. Concrete confidence building measures are therefore indispensable for successful dis armament. The Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, signed at Helsinki on 1 August 1975, makes provision for initial confidence building measures. The proposed conference on disarmament in Europe could be a new qualitative step in the process of confidence building. confidence building measures can al$oNbe conducive to stability and arms limitation in the third world. It was with that in mind that, during the thirty-fourth session, we launched an initiative with a view to giving a global dimension to efforts to achieve confidence building meas ures.
83.	We hope that the SecretaryGeneral's study now before us [At36/474 and Corr. 1] will generate effective impulses for concrete measures to speed up the confidence building process all over the world. We need a code of confidence building.
84.	Those four principles for disarmament negotiations balance, openness, verifiability and confidence building are four prerequisites for success. They can serve as four cornerstones for the construction of a comprehensive security partnership around the world.
85.	The foremost objective of my country's foreign policy is actively to safeguard peace. We want peace and freedom. But to us, peace means more than the mere avoidance of war. We want a world of cooperation based on partnership among nations.
86.	Together with other European democracies we have formed the European Community in order to shape our common future together. By developing the European Community into a European union, we shall be able to work even more effectively as a force for peace and progress in Europe and in the world.
87.	We have united with our European allies and the United States of America and Canada in the North Atlantic Alliance. That alliance rests on the common values of free dom, human dignity and self determination. Its sole pur pose is to preserve common security and safeguard peace. It derives its strength from the friendship and trust between Europeans and Americans.
88.	On the basis of the European Community and the North Atlantic Alliance we, the Federal Republic of Germany, have, by means of our Ostpolitik, made an important contribution to the stabilization of peace in Europe. We shall continue that realistic policy of dialog, of reducing tensions and of strengthening cooperation.
89.	The line that divides East and West also divides the German nation. Consequently, no one is more severely affected by any deterioration of the East-West relation ship than the Germans; no one has a more direct interest in improving East-West relations. There must be no re lapse into the cold war.
90.	The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany of concluding treaties with its neighbors in the East the Moscow Treaty, the Warsaw Treaty, the treaty with Czechoslovakia and the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic are testimony to our longterm policy of cooperation and detente. We abide by those treaties. It is our wish that General Secretary Brezhnev's visit to Bonn in November will strengthen our bilateral relations and will favourably influence East-West relations as a whole.
91.	The developments in Poland are of particular importance for the situation in Europe and in the world. It is up to Poland alone to determine its path. We expect all other signatories of the Final Act of Helsinki, like ourselves, to refrain from any interference in the internal affairs of the Polish People's Republic.
92.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its conviction that the two German States bear special responsibility for peace in Europe. Never again must war originate on German soil, as stated by Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and Chairman of the German Democratic Republic State Council, Erich Honecker.
93.	Especially in the present difficult phase of East-West relations, the following must be axiomatic to both German' States: we must carefully preserve what we have achieved between us and what we have contributed to peace in Eu rope over the past decade; in our mutual relationship and in relations with all our neighbors we must exercise restraint and consideration; the GermanGerman relationship must never be an additional cause of strain on the East West relationship; we must continue the dialogue at all levels without any preconditions; it must be our common goal to achieve the largest measure of progress in implementing all parts of the Final Act of Helsinki,
94.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany intends to promote cooperation between the two German States, and we want to provide more opportunities for contacts between Germans on both sides. Those and other improvements which make life easier for the Germans in their mutual relationship are not only a dictate of humanity but are an indispensable contribution to peace and cooperation in Europe.
95.	Our aim is and will remain to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self determination. The wall which divides the Germans will not prove durable. The will of the people is not to preserve, still less to deepen, the division between them, but to remove it.
96.	The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin has helped to calm the situation in and around Berlin. That must remain so. Each side must realize that the Agreement can produce a stabilizing effect on Berlin and favourably influence East-West relations only if all sides strictly observe and fully implement it.
97.	Another impressive testimony to United States solidarity with Berlin was the visit by the American Secretary of State Mr. Haig on 13 September 1981.
98.	As in our bilateral policy, we are also striving within the multilateral framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to improve East' West relations in Europe. The Final Act of Helsinki is a document which manifests the will for cooperation in Europe, and it should be consistently implemented by all signatories to make Europe a region of lasting peace based on respect for human rights.
99.	We are acutely aware how much still remains to be done in that respect. Together with om Western partners, we are making every effort to ensure that the follow-up to the Conference, in Madrid, will produce a final document which, in all fields covered by the Final Act, will bring progress for cooperation among the countries of Europe and make for better relations among their citizens.
100.	The process of the Conference on Security and Co operation in Europe must be continued. It is the great hope of many people, not only in Europe. The Madrid Conference must issue a concrete mandate for a conference on disarmament in Europe if it is to meet the need for security in Europe.
101.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany also wishes to contribute to peace and the peaceful settlement of conflicts outside Europe. The agenda for this session of the General Assembly includes items on four major international conflicts: the Middle East, southern Africa, Afghanistan and Kampuchea.
102.	At the previous meeting, the President of the European Community also spoke on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. Following.his statement, let me say that we have a vital interest of our own in lasting, comprehensive and equitable peace in the Middle East. Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries is just as indispensable for such peace as is recognition of the right of self determination of the Palestinian people. The efforts to achieve a comprehensive, lasting and equitable peace settlement must be intensified. The starting point for this must be the renunciation of force by all sides.
103.	It is with a sense of concern for world peace and deep sympathy for the suffering of the people that we watch events in Lebanon. All efforts undertaken by the Lebanese Government to bring about national conciliation and to restore Lebanon's sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity have our full support.
104.	In the context of the initiative of the five Western States, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is emphatic that Namibia should at long last gain independence through free elections on the basis of Security Council .resolution 435 (1978). This must happen in 1982. The independence of Namibia must not be delayed any longer. We acknowledge the constructive contribu tions of the OAU towards a settlement of the Namibia question. The remnants of colonialism and racism in southern Africa must be eliminated.
105.	We condemn South Africa's intervention in An gola; the Republic of South Africa has taken a grave responsibility upon itself.
106.	My country stands side by side with the non aligned and Islamic countries in an effort to terminate the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and to achieve a political solution which will restore to that sorely tried people self determination and independence and reestablish Afghanistan's status as a genuinely nonaligned State. The European Council has proposed a conference on Afghanistan with the aim of achieving that goal in two phases. The continuing occupation of Afghanistan is a heavy strain on international relations.
107.	The Federal Republic of Germany actively sup ports the efforts of the international community, and especially the ASEAN countries, to restore the political in dependence and territorial integrity of Kampuchea.
108.	We are following with concern developments in Central America where, in El Salvador, and also else where, the use of force and bloodshed are on the in crease. The people of that region must be enabled to determine their own destiny free from direct or indirect intervention from outside. 
109.	All democratic forces in those countries should act in awareness of their common responsibility and dissociate themselves from the forces of violence. Like the whole of the third world, like the whole of Latin America, Central America, too, must be kept out of the East West conflict. Political and social reforms must create a more equitable and stable order, and with it the conditions which will allow Central America to become a region of peace. The European Community can be a good partner to such a Central America.
110.	At its thirty-fifth session, the General Assembly included in its agenda a new item entitled "International cooperation to avert new flows of refugees". In resolution 35/124, it expressed the conviction that the refugee issue is no longer a humanitarian one only, but also affects world peace. As the resolution stated, the flows of hundreds of thousands, indeed millions, of refugees '"jeopardize the stability of entire regions and thus "endanger international peace and security".
111.	We, the Federal Republic of Germany, favour general guidelines for the conduct of States, as well as practical measures which will make it possible to prevent any fresh flows of refugees, and ws propose that this be discussed by an ad hoc committee.
112.	The General Assembly is commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the Conference of Heads of State of Government of NonAligned Countries held at Belgrade in 1961. The nonaligned countries constitute a powerful movement in the world of today, but their goal has not yet been fully attained.
113.	Colonialism is almost everywhere a thing of the past, but the independence that has been gained by for mer colonies is threatened by attempts to dominate them in other ways. In 1979, in fact, the world witnessed an ideologically motivated attempt to make the nonaligned movement itself, as it was called, the "natural ally" of one of the two systems of the North. That attempt failed. It had to fail, because the wheel of history cannot be turned back. There is no longer any future in hegemonic aspirations, nor in interventions in the internal affairs of other countries, but they can still be a threat to peaceful relations between nations.
114.	With its model of a pluralistic world of nations who have chosen their own destiny, the nonaligned movement is a force_working for the cause of progress. It is at the same time a force working for the cause of peace and stability because today both these aims can be achieved only within an international order in which nations cooperate with one another in partnership and on the basis of free self determination and equality. The Federal Republic of Germany stands side by side with the nonaligned countries in the pursuit of this goal.
115.	The desire for independence also manifests itself in the regional groupings which are being formed and are growing in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
116^ After the European Community, there is now an other association, ASEAN, which has already developed extensively. A powerful influence for peace and liability in Asia emanates from that organization.
117.	Regional cooperation is also progressing elsewhere in the third world. Cooperation among the Gulf States, the groupings that have been formed in Latin America, and those already established or to be established in Africa, which were all molded into a grand design by the Conference of Lusaka, are proof of this. These groupings also provide small and medium-sized countries with an opportunity to shape their independence and their future
together.
118.	Together with the other members of the European Community, we promote this development towards plurality and partnership based on equality. Stable economic and social development in the third world is indispensable for lasting international peace;
119.	The common goal of the industrial and developing countries in the 1970s was to accelerate growth in the developing countries in the context of constant global economic growth, but it did not turn out that way. Today, at the beginning of the Third United Nations Development Decade, the growth of per capita incomes has stopped in many oil-importing countries of the third world. Indeed, real per capita incomes in most of the poorest countries are even declining. We view with concern this crisis of development.
120.	We also view with concern the fact that the North South dialog has lost momentum. In spite of the progress achieved in many individual areas, it is marking time on the major issues. That is why we look towards the forthcoming International Meeting on Cooperation and Development, to be held at Cancun. An important idea of the Brandt Commission becomes a reality. The great opportunity afforded by this unprecedented Cancun meeting must be seized. We want it to generate a new resolve to settle the urgent problems of the world econ omy and development by means of solidarity and global cooperation. Lastly, we want it to pave the way for the beginning at long last of global negotiations. We want to work for a global energy strategy which will create security among both producers and consumers. We want to work for a global food strategy in order to guarantee food security and thus eliminate hunger.
121.	The outcome of the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, to be held in 1982, will be crucial. Its importance for the future of the North-South dialog Can hardly be overestimated because, as the SecretaryGeneral has emphasized, it is a question of whether we in the United Nations are capable of negotiating solutions for global problems which strike a fair balance between the elementary and basic interests of all nations and at the same time serve the world as a whole,
122.	A return to world economic growth and development calls, first and foremost, for energetic efforts on the part of all countries. The industrial countries must break the back of inflation and thus restore the basis for constant growth and the elimination of unemployment. The nations of the third world, on the other hand, must adopt development strategies that involve the masses of the poor in the growth process. Labor intensive agricultural production and industries, coupled with an effective population policy, must form the nucleus of development plans. But if they are to be successful, the efforts of the developing countries themselves need adequate support from outside. All countries in a position to do so should contribute their share. The Communist industrial countries must no longer shirk their duty to help the nations of the third world in a spirit of solidarity.
123.	The Federal Republic of Germany gives high priority cooperation in the field of development. This means, first, that in spite of our own economic difficulties we shall not relax our efforts to provide financial and technical assistance. Even our budget for 1982, which is one of self-restraint for our citizens, allows our development aid to grow at a greater rate than that of the budget as a whole. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the programme of action adopted at the United Nations Conference en the Least Developed Countries, held recently in Paris, because these countries are the ones that depend most on official development aid.  
124.	Secondly, we are still strongly in favor of markets in industrial countries being kept open and widened to take in the exports of developing countries. There must be no lapse into protectionism. We do not try to solve our problem of unemployment by erecting trade barriers, but by promoting structural change with the necessary supporting social measures. Only with free world trade can North and South advance.
125.	Thirdly, to many developing countries, exports of raw materials are still the main source of foreign exchange. These countries in particular are suffering as a result of the decline in the growth of the world economy, a situation which has lasted for several years now and which has checked demand for raw materials and caused prices to drop. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany attaches great importance to the problems confronting commodity-exporting developing countries. We have just decided to make a substantial voluntary contribution to the Second Account of the Common Fund for Commodities.
126.	Fourthly, the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy has, for the first time, made energy issues a subject of negotiations within a global framework. We must continue along this path. The steep, abrupt increase in the price of energy has placed a heavy burden on the industrial countries. To the oil-importing developing countries, it has become a question of their very existence. We need partnership and cooperation between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries [OPEC], industrial countries and oil-importing developing countries. This is the only way the world can come through the transition to the post-oil era intact. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany also advocates the establishment of a World Bank affiliate for energy which could help considerably to resolve the energy problems of the third world.
127.	We must not allow national egoism to gain the upper hand in the process of NorthSouth cooperation. We are called upon to play our part the industrial countries of the West and of the East and the developing countries. The NorthSouth problem is not merely the global social issue; it is a task of world peace which we shall have to accomplish if we want to ensure the survival of mankind.
128.	To the Federal Republic of Germany, respect for and protection of the dignity aild the rights of man are fundamental to all policies. Efforts to secure the exercise of human rights throughout the world are therefore one of the central elements of our participation in the work of the United Nations. We deem it the responsibility of the Organization to raise its voice whenever fundamental human rights are violated, irrespective of where and by whom.
129.	The United Nations has created procedures and institutions to foster respect for human rights all over the globe. These procedures are still relatively weak, but they are having a growing effect. It is important to continue this work with determination and to develop further the possibilities open to the United Nations for protecting human rights. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany continues to support the idea of an international court of human rights.
130.	We have rioted with satisfaction that our initiative regarding a convention on the ultimate abolition of the death penalty has met with a favorable response from many countries. The draft convention takes the form of a second optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. This form should make for constructive discussion leading to progress in this field.
131.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is aware that other legal traditions, religious convictions and historical experiences have led many countries to take a different view of the death penalty. But no one can overlook the frequent abuses of the death penalty in the world of today and the growing incidence of executions without regard for the due process of law. Equally depressing is the fact that people are still subjected to torture. This makes the struggle to abolish the death penalty and torture more urgent than ever.
132.	Mankind has reached the highest point to date in its level of knowledge and in its capabilities. It can use that knowledge and those capabilities to resolve the problems vital to its survival, but it can also use them to destroy the earth's civilization and, perhaps, even the human species.
133.	Only if we act in awareness of our responsibility for the safeguarding of peace and respect for the dignity of man, and only if we act with the desire for global solidarity, will we find the way to a good future. This is the foremost task of the Organization. The Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its trust in the United Nations.

My first words are addressed to the delegation of Vanuatu on the occasion of the admission of that country to membership in the Organization. France is tied with the people of Vanuatu in many ways and we therefore welcome this one hundred and fifty-fifth Member of the United Nations into our midst.
2.	The Assembly's decision to entrust to you, Sir, the presidency of the thirty-sixth session is one that we find fully justified, and I should like to express to you my delegation's warmest congratulations. You are well aware of the ties that bind our two countries. Your personality and experience in international affairs guarantee that our work will be conducted with all necessary vigor and authority.
3.	My next remarks are addressed to you, Mr. Secretary General. All of us here are familiar with your political acumen and your commitment to international order. We have had many occasions to meet and to become acquainted over the years. To my Government's tribute to your qualities I should like to add my own personal expression of friendship and high esteem.
4.	We also know that we can count on the competence and active participation of the Secretariat. We can be sure of its invaluable support, however onerous the tasks imposed by the successful operation of a session such as this. I wish to express my congratulations and thanks to them for this.
5.	A radical political change recently occurred in the political life of my country, France. On 10 May, a new President of the Republic was elected. On 21 June, by sweeping a majority of the left into power in a most spectacular way, the people of France reaffirmed their will to turn over a new leaf and to enter a new era. The world of today arid of tomorrow is not and cannot be build in the image of the world of yesterday.
6.	For many years now, a majority of the States of the world have been heralding in this very forum the new international economic order. This order will not be solely economic nor will it be exclusively international. My country is aware of this change and the Socialist Government of France has embarked upon a definition of this new order, an order which will be more just and more equitable for the least privileged, the weak, those who languish on the periphery of society, those who for too long have been ignored. These people form the most important element of our majority in France; they also form the majority here in this hall. To all of them we wish to propose a future, an ideal consisting of progress and hope.
7.	The message of which my Government feels itself to be the bearer therefore transcends our own frontiers. Of course there is no question of proposing to others solutions that must be defined and adopted only by each people according to its own constitutional authority. The right of each people to define its own destiny is sacred. But there are principles and aspirations that our national community intends to assert and ^defend, and which we . believe have universal value, since they will form the international order.
8.	After those preliminary remarks, it goes almost without saying that our conduct in its entirety is devoted to man himself. Man is the fundamental value. Man is the starting point and the ultimate objective of all policies. France denounces all forms of totalitarianism and authoritarianism. We denounce and will fight discrimination in all its forms, whether religious, sexist or racist. France declares war on contempt.
9.	Our common fight in this Organization therefore must be waged resolutely to ensure respect and freedom for men. It is inconceivable that a State should base its strength and prosperity on the oppression of its citizens, or, worse still, on the humiliation and rejection of a part of its population who are denied the status of citizenship.
10.	Some will object that the Charter of the United Nations, like the rules of international law, prohibits interference in affairs falling within the national jurisdiction of a State. But in this context I should like to make two comments.
11.	The first which hardly needs to be made in this Assembly is that the very practices of our Organization testify to a significant evolution in this regard. Little by little, massive and flagrant violations of fundamental human rights appear to be falling within the competence of the international community, as one can judge from conventions and other international agreements adopted in recent years at world and regional levels.
12.	Who today still doubts that apartheid and other manifestations of racism can and should be denounced be fore the principal United Nations bodies? Who has not welcomed the progress inadequate as it may be brought about thanks to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, held at Helsinki? With regard to violations less broad in scope, they are, as representatives are aware, the object, particularly within the Commission on Human Rights whose tenacity we admire of procedures which are often discreet but which gradually are permitting certain practices to be corrected.
13.	I would add that in the field of human rights the actions of international institutions truly complement those of nongovernmental organizations. I should like to pay a tribute 19*, them today, as well as to the associations, labor unions, political parties, youth movements, religious groups and, of course, to the mass media, the audiovisual medium in particular, which have helped so much to arouse public opinion and mobilize it in express sing its indignation when shocking situations have arisen that need to be condemned.
14.	Human rights are inseparable from the rights of peoples and nations. I have already emphasized the right of each people to decide its own destiny, in total independence, and therefore to choose its political regime, its economic system, its social structures and its friendships; freedom to enter into a network of alliances or to prefer neutrality or nonalignment. France has always been and remains conscious and jealous of its independence. Its geographical situation, its cultural affinities and the fact that the world is, unfortunately, a dangerous place have prompted France to adhere freely to the Atlantic Alliance, to which it brings a loyal contribution in the defense of values that are common to all members of the Alliance  the values of freedom and civilization.
15.	However, France reserves the right to make its sovereign judgment of the threats and dangers that could lead to the gravest decisions. It hopes, too, that negotiations between the greatest Powers will make it possible to reduce the growing threats resulting from recent over-armament. Further, it reaffirms its determination to contribute to establishing confidence building measures from the Urals to the Atlantic. The relations that it has maintained for many years with the Soviet Union and the people's democracies of Eastern Europe allow it to express itself clearly, to let its convictions and worries be known directly, without going through intermediaries, and to contribute in this way to establishing between the countries of Western and Eastern Europe relations promoting the fullest development of all peoples.
16.	The right which we claim to determine our own future is something which we believe it is only fair that other States, both small and large, weak and strong, peoples of the South and of the North, should be allowed to possess, too. France will therefore be on the side of those who fight for the recognition of the rights of their people or for the independence of their nation.
17.	We have the greatest sympathy for those who, still remaining outside the mainstream of East-West confrontation, wish to escape from spheres of influence. We salute the nonaligned movement and wilt be happy to lend our support to genuine efforts at nonalignment, whenever that nonalignment is proposed fry an authentic member of that movement. The world is not inexorably condemned to be divided into two enemy camps. The tensions which sometimes exist between neighbors must not be artificially transformed into duels between champions of the East and West. The sole object of a recent Franco-Mexican statement on El Salvador was to serve as a reminder of the need to let each people settle its own affairs by political and democratic processes.
18.	Faithful to its principles, France condemns outside interference and therefore denounces all undertakings .of force against any people and any State. Violence cannot create right. This elemental truth must not be forgotten, whatever the circumstances, the status or reasons of those who occupy territories against the will of the population that has been invaded and subjugated. Without comparing the occupying Powers, their reasons or their methods, condemnation must be applied equally to the Republic of South Africa, when it sends its tanks into Angola and ignores United Nations resolutions on Namibia; to Viet Nam, when it continues its occupation of Kampuchea; and to the Soviet Union, when it intervenes with its troops in Afghanistan.
19.	In the Middle East, it is not through violenceof which our Ambassador to Lebanon, Mr. Louis Delamare, recently became an innocent victim that peace will finally return to this part of the world, which was the cradle of so many civilizations and which has become the crucible of so much suffering!. The people and cultures of this region, who through the centuries have been caught in the web of historical evolution, victims of contempt and hatred, have a right to peace; their States should be able to develop in security; their peoples should be allowed to build their future in justice.
20.	Violation of the resolutions of the Organization is not the way to ensure the necessary security for the countries in the Middle East, for all the countries, including Israel. War is not the way for the peoples of this region, all the peoples, including the Palestinian people, to see all their rights recognized, including the right to a homeland and a State.
21.	There, as elsewhere in the world, negotiation among all the parties concerned is the only acceptable means of dealing with the reasons that have led one or another of them to act by sword and fire. Negotiation is the golden rule of the Organization. If this rule is broken once, just once, how can its observance be required elsewhere and in all cases?
22.	Let those here who are tempted to justify violence in one instance reflect on the fact that one day they may themselves be the victims of some other violence and be destroyed by it. Justice for peoples, security for States, respect for international decisions, negotiation: these are the principles that will guide France in the position it takes on the Middle East and throughout the world.
23.	Here then are quite a number of situations characterized by attacks on the principles of self determination and national sovereignty. All of us together in this room must agree to maintain the necessary pressure. Let us proclaim our willingness to resort to dialog, to discussion, to objective analysis of the concerns and motivations
of all parties. We are convinced that such an approach is
valid in the case of most of the crises that the world community has to face,
24.	Let me remind you forcefully that in the case of many of these crises it would be sufficient if the provisions of resolutions already adopted by the United Nations were respected. Think, for example, of southern Lebanon, occupied, torn asunder and removed from the legitimate Lebanese authority; think of Namibia, whose independence and sacred right to sovereignty are endlessly delayed. The time has come solemnly to affirm from this rostrum and I do so now in the name of France that every possible means must be brought to bear to ensure that Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 435 (1978) are applied in full without delay. My country is ready to make a contribution to this effort on whatever lines are decided on by this Organization.
25.	In certain situations we must go even further, and here again the United Nations has a significant role to play. Once Namibia has finally gained its freedom and independence through the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), it must be helped, and probably guaranteed, in its first few years. Angola, which has suffered so much from war, must be assured of all kinds of support during its reconstruction. Kampuchea, already rescued from famine by international efforts, must be able one day to determine its future freely and democratically, and it too, of course, will need guarantees and assurances of every kind. Afghanistan, if it is not to run the risk of interference which has recently been denounced in some quarters, and if it is to put an end to the interference now made evident by the bloodshed of the battlefield, will need some guarantee of the status it seeks. In many quarters, and in the face of threats of quite different kinds, the same idea has been advanced, namely, to accept, acknowledge and guarantee the wishes of a people to be freed from the tensions that surround it and threaten its independence and its desire for nonalignment. France believes that this similarity of ideas about very different areas and situations provides material for consideration and a common approach at the international level.
26.	I am often surprised to note that in most circles the true dimension of NorthSouth problems is not understood. Some talk of charity for unfortunate starveling of some devastated country, others demand higher prices for their products or a transfer of some special technology. But how often do you hear it acknowledged, as it has rightly been acknowledged by the members of the Brandt Commission,  that the progress of the NorthSouth dialog is a prerequisite for world progress and perhaps even for world peace?
27.	The South has become part of the life of the North. How much longer will it take for people to understand this? This is an essential aspect of the new age that is upon us whether we like it or not. What position will the South occupy and what part will it play? Those are questions that must be asked.
28.	From the political standpoint, I have already mentioned cases where the fundamental principles of the life of our people and our societies are being threatened or violated. Obtaining respect for such principles in southern Africa, the Middle East and Latin America is essential for those who believe in those principles. The French Government considers itself to be one of these countries. 1 will not return to this point, except to remind you how much our young people, the moving spirit of our so cities, are concerned with these problems, with which they are more familiar today, now that the media are tel ling them what is really taking place in the South, which was not the case a few decades ago,
29.	However, solidarity and interdependence transcend the political and moral realm. The world is riven by crisis, causing the number of unemployed to soar and condemning the most unfortunate to despair. Who can claim that this crisis will be set to rights or brought under control solely by the forces and mechanisms of the market place, and solely within the framework of the most advanced economies?
30.	Economic revival, which we all need urgently and this is particularly true of the most underprivileged countries requires the development of the countries of the South. This is not just a matter of a few hundred million dollars, but of tens of billions of dollars, which must be injected wherever they are most desperately needed and where their effect will be almost immediate in improving purchasing power and, as a result, in expanding markets. Elsewhere I have spoken ? a planetary "new deal" in order to recall this obvious truth which President Roosevelt, when confronted with America's great depression, identified in his day.
31.	It is important, therefore, for all of us together to tackle the issue of financing development and indeed the issue of the very survival of those who are most deprived. Where can the available resources be found? How can we organize the use of those resources? Where should we channel them? What kind of link should be established between the funds that all those who can should contribute, the lending capacity and administrative supervision of competent institutions, and the rightful concern of lenders and investors to guarantee the security of their investments? A few answers are ready and have been proposed. They must no longer be delayed or distorted. But they will not be enough, so let us strive to see how we can do more and better.
32.	Naturally, since the resources to be shared are unfortunately inadequate, our thoughts should turn first to those who are suffering most, sometimes to the point of death. My country was very happy to host in Paris the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.

33.	My Government notes with satisfaction that commitments were entered into by the international community and we are pleased that the countries of the European Community decided to commit 0.15 per cent of their total gross national product to help the least developed countries. France, for its part, as the President of the Republic has said and I repeat, will attain the United Nations aid target of 0.7 per cent of its gross national product, excluding the French overseas departments, before the end of Mr. Mitterrand's seven-year term. This in fact commits us to doubling in real terms our aid to the developing countries. France's effort will, starting in 1982, give priority to increasing its voluntary contributions on a multilateral basis and to aid countries with which it has special ties, particularly in Africa. 
34.	As we are all aware, it is not enough just to increase financial aid. So I ought to say something now of special aspects that should take priority: food, energy and trade. However, the time allotted for these remarks will not sufficed Allow me to focus on two aspects of the new international order that I believe to be essential.
35.	Predictability has now become an essential feature of tomorrow's order. Without 'it, how can one plan, organize, formulate and invest in a rational manner? But never before in history have the principal factors of economic life been so unpredictable. You only have to think of the prices of basic commodities imported by countries in the South, the prices for raw materials exported by the developing countries, the exchange rates and interest rates that influence all transactions. We are living in a world with out order, a chaotic world, an insane world. We the European countries without significant natural resources are suffering along with the countries of the South. In the face of speculation and uncertainty, our interests are those of the South; in this debate, we are with the South.
36.	It is important therefore gradually to introduce a system of law in world economic relations. We must seek contracts, treaties and international agreements. One of the innovations of the Lome Conventions between the European Community and 61 developing countries is to make the relations they embody predictable and reliable.
37.	Another feature of those Conventions is their comprehensiveness. Even more so at the world level, all of the economic, financial and technological problems should be discussed and negotiated simultaneously and jointly. The foregoing is justification enoughs France and its European partners are resolved that global negotiations should be started at the United Nations at the earliest possible time. We shall exert all our influence to see that no further delay is imposed. This is to be confirmed in a month at Cancun, at the International Meeting on Cooperation and Development.
38.	The global nature of NorthSouth problems seems evident to almost all of us. But have we given sufficient thought to the interaction between those external problems and our domestic problems? The new order will include major structural changes in each of the industrialized countries. The overall progress made possible by this renewal will be reflected in certain sectors by a decline in activity that will be more than compensated for in other sectors. New directions will be taken, and they will come up against resistance.
39.	These things will not be done if in the industrialized countries discussions are limited to diplomats, bankers, administrators and other experts. It is important to involve public opinion, the workers who are directly concerned and the young people whose future is at stake. The media have a key role to play here, and they can do so. There are times when strong feelings are aroused in towns and in the country side, when the misery and suffering of a downtrodden people give the more fortunate television viewer a moment of discomfort and indignation, or when despair in a crisis becomes unbearable.
40.	I have just mentioned the NorthSouth dialog in its worldwide framework. But we must also consider it in the regional framework.
41.	The region is in fact the natural context in which peoples can express their special identity; the similarity of problems, cultural affinities and sometimes even rivalries, as well as common threats, make it possible to multiply ties within a region or subregion. The more highly structured and grouped a region is, the less outside influences come into play there. This is an important way to avoid the contagion of East-West division in areas that are not directly involved. In the economic domain also, the cooperation that is so desirable among the countries of the South can .be encouraged in a rational manner, as was so clearly demonstrated at the very interesting HighLevel Conference on Economic Cooperation among Developing Countries, held recently at Caracas.
42.	It is premature to try to take stock of the activities of the major regional organizations because their responsibilities and importance continue to grow. As a Frenchman, however, I am sure I will not surprise the Assembly when I say something about the European Community. It is still far from perfect, but its results are already evident in a number of different areas agriculture, the monetary system, the Lome policy, the generalized system of preferences and its authority is growing rapidly in the world. The French Government is planning to launch soon a number of new and exciting programs industrial, social and others within the Community.
43.	In the economic sphere, reference should also be made to the United Nations regional commissions. The role of the Latin American countries as precursors in identifying a regional image and regional pride should be noted. We should mention the various regional groups such as the Association of South East Asian Nations [ASEAN], and quite a number of African regional organizations. I should like to pay a tribute to the most important of them, the Organization of African Unity [OAU], which at its recent Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held at Nairobi, dealt in a masterly fashion with some of today's most difficult problems. Thanks to the OAU we now have some hope of seeing a united and independent Chad, free from foreign interference, resume its place in Africa's concert of nations. And it is of course thanks to the OAU that we are hoping to see a referendum of self determination take place soon among the peoples of Western Sahara.
44.	The development of regional cooperation has been so convincing in some parts of the world that we are tempted to set new goals. For historical and cultural reasons disputes may exist between neighbors, sometimes going back several centuries. There are many of us in this Assembly who are worried that East-West rivalry may be superimposed on those differences. Mutual distrust between two neighbors may indeed lead to an arms race. The risk then becomes great that they will all come to depend on increasingly sophisticated and therefore more costly arms supplies. What will then remain of self determination, independence and nonalignment, to which both parties are entitled?
45.	Can we not rather imagine that the group of countries most concerned by a confrontation of this kind among two or more neighbors might have the wisdom to limit the effects of the dispute, to establish a regional or subregional system for the evaluation of military forces, and even to conclude a genuine regional agreement on self-limitation of armaments, accompanied, of course, by appropriate means of control and verification?
46.	France has been shocked, as have so many others, by the disproportionate efforts that so many third-world countries must devote to arms and defense. We are disturbed by the growing dependence that this evolution inevitably en tails, and we fervently hope that the attempts that have already been made to slow this trend will be encouraged by our Organization and supported by world public opinion.
47.	Whatever the interests in a regional approach to arms limitation, the effort should, of course, culminate in this Organization. Nothing durable or solid can be built without the endorsement of an institution whose role it is to be universal. There is hardly a domain that is outside its jurisdiction, and the wholly democratic structures it possesses serve to guarantee the value of its decisions. On this rostrum from which I am speaking, every speaker and therefore every country is equal.
48.	The fact that emphasis should generally be placed on the unique role of the United Nations in the most dangerous crises is only normal, because one immediately thinks of Cyprus, southern Lebanon, Namibia and also UNHCR, UNICEF and so many other organizations which, in tragic circumstances, have so well demonstrated human solidarity. But we know that the United Nations has other functions and that, in meeting places that figure less often jn the major international press, ideas are compared that gradually lead to a consensus that will generate progress. I have in mind also the arms limitation talks, where gains have been made and where decisive steps are still to be taken among others, the establishment of an international satellite monitor ing agency.
49.	Other ideas, still more ambitious, direct our attention well beyond the immediate future. Next year the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament will give all of us an opportunity to shoulder our responsibilities. My country will play its part, and we will make a loyal and far-reaching contribution to the search for ways of defining conditions for a just and sure limitation of arms.
50.	Nor do 1 forget that in many ways this Organization and the specialized agencies play an operational role, whether in terms of technical or humanitarian aid, or in more general regulations. In this regard, I should like to emphasize my country's special interest in the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The convention that that Conference is busy drafting will soon define how these riches of the world should be rationally organized in the future. It will mark extraordinary constitutional progress and will leave its imprint on the history of the world. The United Nations can and should be proud of it. Consequently, and in spite of a few reservations on details, the French delegation believes it essential that the work of the Conference on the Law of the Sea be concluded as soon as possible. We appeal to one and all to cease the maneuvers which have had the effect of jeopardizing the progress made over so many years of persevering effort.
51.	My last remark should confirm what has already become obvious from my observations namely, France's commitment to the United Nations, from which the world expects so much.
52.	Our status as a permanent member of the Security Council, our human and economic resources, the independence of our policy towards all, whether States or great corporations, and our sympathy although that is too weak an expression our feeling of fraternity with the weakest, most deprived peoples, assure us, we believe, of special relations with most of the world. But they also create for us special obligations. At the global level, as indeed in France itself, the Government of which I am a member knows what is expected of it. We are ready.


The United Kingdom currently occupies the presidency of the European Community. My statement this year is therefore made on behalf of the Community and its member States and in the interests of brevity I shall not make the customary remarks on a national basis.
59.	In this capacity, it is a particular pleasure to convey to you, Mr. President, at the outset of the thirty-sixth session of the Assembly, our very sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency at this session. I know that with your distinguished career and your considerable experience in the Organization you will guide our proceedings with skill and authority.
60.	I should also like to convey my warmest congratulations and admiration to the outgoing President for his efficient and capable conduct of the proceedings of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly and also the eighth emergency special session.
61.	The 10 members of the European Community also wish to express their gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for a further year of strenuous efforts in the cause of peace, and I should like tojoin with my other colleagues who have congratulated the Republic of Vanuatu on its independence and its membership of this body.
62.	Three principles are fundamental to the European Community and underlie its activity in the world today and the role it seeks to play in the United Nations. First, the community was born from a determination to avoid the recurrence of war and from a desire for permanent and fruitful reconciliation. Secondly, it looks to partnership and collaboration between neighbors as a way to stimulate social and economic progress. And thirdly, it is based on a belief in the fundamental importance of human rights.
63.	The first principle, its commitment to international reconciliation, explains why the European Community feels a duty to help where it can with the problems that afflict the world. AH conflicts, local, regional or global, adversely affect the possibilities for peace and progress throughout the world. All of them add up to the sum of human misery.
64.	The conflict which perhaps poses most dangers is the ArabIsrarl dispute. The European Community believes that it has a distinctive role to play in the , search for a negotiated, comprehensive settlement which must be both just and lasting. The Community's view of the principles according to which a settlement can be devised, starting from Security Council resolution 242 (1967), was set out in the Venice and Luxembourg Declarations.of 13 June and, 2 December 1980 respectively. The starting point must be the right to existence and security of all States in the area, including Israel, and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination. Acceptance of these principles by the parties concerned would remove a major obstacle to progress.
>
65.	The members of the Community will pursue their efforts to promote a peace settlement energetically. Nevertheless, we must be clear about what the European Community can and cannot achieve. Ultimately it is for the parties to negotiate a lasting settlement themselves. In our view, a comprehensive settlement can only be negotiated if all the parties concerned, including the Palestinian people and the PLO, which will have to be associated with negotiations, accept the principles which we set out in the Venice Declaration and play their full part. One of Europe's main aims is to facilitate such negotiations, complementing the efforts of others towards the same objective. These thoughts underlay the Venice Declaration and the subsequent diplomatic efforts of the Community, notably the contacts made by Britain's predecessors in the presidency.
66.	If a settlement is to be possible a climate of confidence must first be built up between the parties. Both sides must refrain from words or acts, particularly acts of violence as in recent months, which only complicate the search for a settlement The Community members are bound to repeat that the Israeli policy of settlements is contrary to international law and a major obstacle to progress towards peace. While pursuing its efforts in every other possible way, the European Community will work to encourage a climate of confidence as a contribution to a comprehensive settlement. The Community therefore welcomes all clear statements of interest in a peaceful settlement, including that made last month by Crown Prince Eahd of Saudi Arabia.
67.	I should like to put on record the European Community's sympathy for human suffering in Lebanon and our support for the efforts of the Lebanese Government to promote security and national reconciliation. We believe that the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon can only be assured if all concerned uphold the authority of the legal Government and avoid all actions tending to undermine it. In this context, the Community values the work of the Quadripartite Committee of the Arab League. In south Lebanon, the ceasefire has been a valuable achievement and we hope it will be possible to reinforce it and build upon it. The Community members welcome and support all diplomatic efforts to this end. In .particular, they believe that UNIFIL should be enabled to carry out in full the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council and, we applaud the courageous and responsible work of the Force and express our sympathy for its losses; arid I take this opportunity to reaffirm the Community's support for the valuable peacekeeping work of the United Nations in other areas.
68.	If history and traditional and geographical proximity make the Middle East of particular concern to Europe, we are no less concerned about the other crises which strike at the very basis on which international peace and stability must rest.
69.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which constitutes a grave breach of the Charter, is one such crisis. It is an affront to international opinion that the Soviet military occupation there should continue. It has brought untold suffering for millions of Afghan people and untold problems for the countries to which large numbers of them have fled. It is to seek relief for that suffering and to contribute to international peace and stability that the European Council put forward its plan for a two-stage conference on Afghanistan.7
70.	The Council's proposal for such a conference has received widespread support. It is therefore a great disappointment that the Soviet Union's response has so far been negative.
71.	If the Soviet Union is sincere in its stated desire to withdraw its troops in the context of a political solution, then the proposal of the Council offers a way for negotiations to begin. If, however, the Soviet Union's only real concern is to obtain the acquiescence of the international community in its occupation of Afghanistan, and increased status and recognition for a regime which is rejected by the Afghan people and world opinion, then the outlook for any negotiations is grim indeed.
72.	The members of the European Community support any efforts which will bring foreign intervention in Afghanistan to an end and allow that country to return to its traditional independence and nonaligned status. It is essential that the principles of the resolution of the Assembly should be observed. We support the efforts of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral to find a way to a peaceful settlement in accordance with those resolutions.
73.	Another country which has been invaded and then occupied by a more powerful neighbor is Kampuchea. Thanks to the admirable efforts of the international emergency relief operation Jed by UNICEF and the International Committee of the Red Cross, the physical condition of much of the population of Kampuchea has been transformed in the last two years. The European Community and its member States have played a major part in the financing of the relief.
74.	But now that the immediate cause of suffering has been removed, it is time to turn to the political problems that still afflict that country. As with Afghanistan, the aim of the international community must be a comprehensive political settlement. The basis of that settlement should be an independent and neutral Kampuchea with"' a genuinely representative Government. The position of the European Community was set out fully in the statement which, as President of the Community, I made to the International Conference on Kampuchea held here last July.
75.	The Declaration on Kampuchea adopted by that Conference puts forward a reasonable and practical basis for a settlement of the Kampuchean problem. The Community endorsed that Declaration, which we believe would protect the legitimate rights of all concerned. We call on Viet Nam to agree to withdraw its forces and join the process of peaceful negotiations set in train at that meeting. The Kampucheans must be allowed to exercise their right to self-determination without disruption, intimidation or coercion.
76.	The Community members are also very concerned at the continuing denial of the right to self-determination which lies at the root of the problem of Namibia. We deeply regret that the settlement leading to the independence of Zimbabwe has not been followed by further progress towards a speedy solution of the problems in that region.
77.	The outcome of the pre-implementation meeting on Namibia at Geneva in January was a great disappointment. We saw no justification for South Africa's prevarication. We hope that the renewed efforts of the five Western States will succeed in finding an acceptable basis for pursuing negotiations on the implementation of the United Nations plan in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). This provides the only possibility of a peaceful transition to internationally recognized independence for Namibia in accordance with a precise and rapid timetable.
78.	The European Community has condemned the South African incursion into Angola, the violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity which it has involved, and the loss of life and suffering it has brought. We have demanded the immediate withdrawal of South African forces from Angola.
79.	Within South Africa itself, the Community can find little cause for optimism. Virtually none of the expectations of worthwhile change in recent years have been fulfilled. Reforms promised by the South African Government, mostly still not implemented, do not deal with the fundamental problem of the political as well as the social and economic aspirations of blacks, coloreds and Asian South Africans.
80.	Without an early move towards government by consent and the abandonment of the system of apartheid, which we ail abhor, the trend in South Africa can only be one of accelerating conflict and violence. The European Community appeals with the utmost urgency to those in South Africa who can act decisively to face this reality, and to show the imagination, the boldness, and the leadership that are necessary to reach a political solution. In the meantime, the members of the Community continue to press South Africa to bring about peaceful change in that country.
81.	In this catalog of unsolved problems I am glad to be able to mention one small chink of light. The European Community commends the efforts of the Secretary General on the question of Cyprus. Under his auspices the inter-communal talks have been established on a regular basis and conducted in a constructive manner. We have been pleased to note that there have been encouraging developments recently. We earnestly hope that there will be further progress towards a just and lasting solution to this grave problem.
82.	Simply to discuss specific crises does not give an adequate impression of the Community's approach to the problems facing us all. To be faithful to the principle of reconciliation we must work not just for the resolution of conflicts when they occur, but to lessen the tensions that give rise to them.
83.	Europe is fortunate to have been free from war for 36 years, but it is the area where the tension between East and West is felt most strongly. It contains the greatest concentration of military forces in the world. Community members recognize the need to lessen tension by maintaining a dialog between East and West. Efforts must be intensified to reduce the appallingly high level of armaments on both sides, while maintaining undiminished security for all States.
84.	Many of the hopes that we entertained for concrete measures of arms control and disarmament as we entered the 1970's have been cruelly disappointed. Nevertheless, the members of the European Community believe that there can be no substitute for painstaking negotiation resulting in agreements which tackle specific problems of arms control in a way which increases confidence and assures the security of all States.
85.	We strongly support negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on the mutual limitation of nuclear forces, and in particular the forthcoming negotiations on theater nuclear forces. Success will not be easy. Despite the difficulties, we believe that the objective should be to strike the balance at the lowest possible level. Nonproliferation of nuclear weapons remains a vital element for the security of us all.
86.	The control of nuclear forces, in Europe as in the rest of the world, is only one side of the coin. It is equally important to reduce the size of conventional forces. In Europe the negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions continue to work towards that. The members of the European Community have also given their full support to the French proposal for a conference on disarmament in Europe* to negotiate confidence building measures of real military significance, which will be binding, verifiable, and applicable to the whole of Europe. We are seeking agreement on this important proposal at the Madrid review meeting on the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and we remain convinced that confidence-building measures which meet these criteria will make a real contribution to reducing the tensions and dangers of armed conflict. Such an approach could be useful in other regions of the world.
87.	The European Community's second principle is cooperation. Here, duty and inclination point the same way. The Community is the world's biggest international trader. The handling of economic questions in harmony goes to the heart of the Community's interests.
88.	To draw harmony from a variety of existing instruments is a challenge for the whole world community. The International Development Strategy, to take one example, is addressed to developed and developing countries alike, and recognizes their mutual interdependence. The greatly increased assistance provided by IMF and, especially, the World Bank, to take another, deserves acknowledgment and support, and we welcome both,
89.	The current problems of the world economy accentuate the need for cooperation. They do not automatically make it easier. Adjustment to slower or negative economic growth, higher energy prices and weaker demand is taking time. Inflation, unemployment and interest rates remain high, and exchange markets volatile. The shoe pinches very hard for many countries, especially in the developing world. As was stressed at the European Council at its meeting last June, the Community is of the opinion that cooperation with developing countries and the intensification of international economic relations serve the interest of all concerned, and that they are necessary not only to strengthen the economies of the developing countries, but also to promote the recovery of the world economy.
90.	We in the Community see no room for defeatism. I shall examine some issues which are getting our active attention.
91.	Trade is vital if the developing countries are to achieve sustained economic growth. This concept underpins the close and friendly ties we have with the developing countries, reflected in the Lome Convention 10 the generalized system of preferences and the Community's other arrangements. The Second Lome Convention" has further improved the trade Advantages extended by the Community to the African, Caribbean and Pacific signatories. It has also made available substantially increased amounts of aid.
92.	Meanwhile, the Community stands firm for the maintenance of an open trading system and continued resistance to protectionism. GATT has served the international community well. The Community attaches importance to the full implementation of the Tokyo Round. It endorses the broad agreement within GATT that the contracting parties should envisage a ministerial meeting in the coming year to consider the overall condition of world trade.
93.	Let there be no doubt, equally, about the importance we attach to official development assistance. We welcome the intense diplomatic activity surrounding the problems of development. Despite real budgetary difficulties, we in the Community remain committed to the target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national product and have accepted the target of 0.15 per cent as aid for the least developed countries. The Community and its member States individually already provide development assistance worth over $12 billion a year. This is 39 per cent of all aid given to the developing countries, more than half the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development total and six or seven times that given by the countries of Eastern Europe. We see room for a matching effort here. 
94.	The Community was pleased to see the progress made at the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy at Nairobi last month. This was the beginning of a long but vital road. We were closely involved in the preparation of the Program of Action, and we welcome its adoption. The Conference will be seen as a milestone in the search for global solutions to energy problems that affect developed and developing countries alike.
95.	We in the Community know full well that the problems of the world economy, which affect us all, create a particular hardship for developing countries, and especially the poorest among them. That is why we welcomed the successful conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries held at Paris and will do our best to ensure that it is followed by positive and concrete results which will help the least developed countries to overcome their fundamental problems.
96.	No discussion of the international economy would be complete without a tribute to the efforts of the outgoing President of the General Assembly to bring all sides together in order to launch a new round of global negotiations. Last June the European Council expressed the view that preparations for the new round of global negotiations should be completed as soon as possible and called on the summit conferences in Ottawa and Cancun to give a positive impetus to those preparations. The Community wants to see relations between developed and developing countries take a new and constructive course.
97.	In this connection, we were happy to note that those countries attending the Economic Summit at Ottawa declared themselves ready to participate in a mutually acceptable process of global negotiations in circumstances offering the prospect of meaningful progress. We welcome the recognition at the Ottawa summit of the importance of making increased resources available for the purposes of accelerated food production and food security in the developing world.
98.	The Cancun summit will provide an exceptional opportunity, and we hope that the exchanges there will be imaginative and spontaneous. A twoday summit cannot achieve miracles, but the discussion could mark an important step forward in mutual understanding and provide a political impetus in the NorthSouth dialog. The atmosphere of the preparatory meeting for Cancun was an encouraging augury.
99.	The third principle which governs the European Community's activities on the international stage is the defense of human rights. The Community is a group of States founded on a commitment to democratic principles. Our citizens participate in a political system which guarantees and respects the fundamental freedoms of the individual. Inevitably, therefore, the defense of human rights is a matter of concern to them.
100.	We stand for the promotion and protection of all categories of human rights: civil and political as well as economic, social and cultural. We especially condemn cases of torture, detention without trial or arbitrary execution. We think it deplorable that there should still be situations where people disappear without trace, or where they are persecuted on grounds of race or religion, or for defending human rights.
101.	It is now accepted that these and other violations of human rights are a subject of proper and necessary concern for discussion at the United Nations. As States Members of the United Nations we all have the obligation to promote the protection of human rights in our own countries and in the international community as a whole. We shall continue to speak out against violations of human rights in appropriate United Nations forums and also at the Madrid review meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
102.	Too often in the past the United Nations has been unable or has failed for reasons of political expediency to respond to flagrant violations of human rights. This undermines the credibility of the United Nations. We must not overlook such violations of human rights no matter where they occur. Rather, we should work together to protect the victims and to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to promote respect for human rights.
103.	I hope that I have demonstrated that the European Community is a force for peaceful progress in a turbulent and troubled world. We threaten the security of no one. We have no ideology or system that we wish to impose on those of other cultures and traditions. We respect the right of all nations to self-determination and freedom from foreign interference, and we wish to help them in their pursuit of stable economic growth. It is our conviction that among the vast majority of the members of the Assembly there is an enormous potential for common understanding and cooperation which could only be for the benefit of all mankind.
I convey to you, Sir, the warm felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly. It was a memorable election, not without its drama. We have every confidence that under your dynamic and competent leadership the General Assembly will be able to deal effectively and comprehensively with the many tasks before it.
2.	I would also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation of the resolute and efficient leadership provided to the Assembly during its thirty-fifth session by your predecessor, Mr. Rudiger von Wechmar.
3.	The tolerance and patient diplomacy of the Secretary General are well known. I would like to place on record our sincere appreciation of the statesmanlike manner in which he has carried the awesome responsibility of his post.
4.	On behalf of the people and Government of India, I have great pleasure in welcoming Vanuatu and Belize, which have recently achieved their independence and joined the United Nations.
5.	The contours of the world landscape have indeed changed within the past year to such an extent that the shifts and turns make some of us wonder whether international peace and security can at all be preserved intact if the present slide continues. The tension around us is very palpable. Confrontation has become acceptable for bolstering up otherwise sagging egos. Meanwhile, those who are weak and small in terms of defense capability and economic muscle worry about their very survival as free nations. Additional weapons are being injected on a large scale into fragile regimes and areas where tensions are already high. There is a conscious and declared attempt to make relations with the developing countries function of the EastWest variable and to evaluate these relations in terms of the utility factor in the EastWest game. Considerations of the material wellbeing, peace or stability of a country are being subordinated to those of strategic superiority and containment.
6.	The grim international situation is perhaps both the cause and the consequence of the vast inequities and disequilibrium of the world economy. Tfe present structure is so designed and managed as to preserve and perpetuate its oases of privilege and affluence amidst a desert of dearth and deprivation. There is a strange scenario consisting of the economic problems of the developed world caused by what has been called a "system overload" arising from the divergent pulls of economic surplus, deceleration of demand, inflationary spirals and exiguous unemployment on the one hand, and of the grim problem of diminishing economic opportunities faced by the developing countries on the other. It is this dramatic contrast which is in part responsible for the mood of frustration and desperation in the world today. But what is most surprising is that there is an increasing tendency to tackle economic problems through political means. Obviously this will not work in the new context of a world composed of States having sovereign equality but steeped in gaping economic inequalities. No, it is time to realize that there can no longer be political solutions to economic problems.
7.	The pursuit of such a strategy for development can at best be described as misguided and unfortunate. We do not presume to prescribe panaceas to others, but we cannot possibly accept a denial of our own experience, namely, that an unbridled play of the forces of profit and acquisition can lead to concision and anarchy in economic relations. In structurally weaker economies it leads inevitably to an unbalanced allocation of priorities, distorting the social fabric by widening disparities, heightening tensions and leading ultimately to destabilization. Particularly in the developing countries, the State is the main instrument of change and almost the sole repository of power. It would be very unfortunate indeed if State power were employed to support those who are already powerful in the society, resulting in a disequilibrium which inevitably would generate centrifugal forces that would tend to destroy the society itself-. This is already threatening a number of recently emancipated societies. Such societies therefore need a structure wherein State power uncompromisingly stands by the powerless and maintains a balance between the underdog and those who have a long enough reach and strong enough hands to help themselves, no matter what. Within this overall structure there ought to be full scope for individual initiative, entrepreneurship and & civilized, as opposed to anarchic, interaction of market forces. I have no doubt that this logic holds good in international economic relations as well.
283
A/36/PV. 15
8.	The Charter of the United Nations is based upon the yearning of mankind for peace and prosperity: peace 
which is not merely the absence of a shooting war and prosperity that is not the enrichment of one at the expense of others. We cannot remain indifferent witnesses to the crumbling of detente. The great Powers have long sought security through a balance of mutual vulnerability. Raising the level of deterrence is not going to add any further to their sense of security. Hence a search is on for new strategic partners and allies. I would like to be optimistic, but true optimism invariably has to be based on a realistic and, objective assessment. The determined quest for new political and strategic arrangements on a global scale, with an almost callous disregard for the longterm interests of mankind, does not really leave much room for optimism.
9.	We in India have asked ourselves some basic questions and found some answers to them. The philosophy behind the answers is a simple one and was beautifully articulated by Jawaharlal Nehru in a broadcast he made to the United States of America on 3 April 1948 from New Delhi. It was entitled "The Age of Crisis". He said:
"Today, fear consumes us all fear of the future, fear of war, fear of the peoples of the nations we dislike and those who dislike us . . . But fear is an ignoble emotion and leads to blind strife. Let us try to get rid of this fear . . . and then gradually the crisis of the spirit will be resolved, the dark clouds that surround us may lift and the way to the evolution of the world based or. freedom will be clear."
10.	It is against this background that we see the destiny of India, both within, and in the world, more especially in our own region. Within India the reaffirmation of the policies set out by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi has been accompanied by a renewed dedication to national reconstruction and the consolidation of a secular and pluralistic political system. The stresses and strains of the international economy have impinged upon various aspects of our own economic growth but have not shaken the self- confidence of our people. Our dedication to our chosen objectives, especially to self-reliance, remains undiminished. If the successful inauguration of the APPLE geostationary satellite by our scientists represents one frontier of India's efforts and achievements, the harnessing of animal power through redesigning the bullock cart or the grinding wheel is symbolic of another equally relevant application of technology.
11.	Our self-reliance consists in trying to find solutions to our problems primarily according to our own genius. Our problems are basically simple food, clothing, shelter, health and education. It is their sheer magnitude that is baffling, not their complexity. There are no psychosomatic ailments, no paranoia of any kind afflicting us. We will therefore persevere, in our massive effort to lift ourselves up as a whole mass and not piecemeal, using methods and technology most relevant to our situation, ringing from the most sophisticated to the most simple, neglecting nothing useful because of its plainness, taking nothing irrelevant because of its dazzle. I am sure that many more developing countries now accept this pattern and that some of them have arrived at it by the circuitous and hard route of disillusionment arising from inappropriate models.
12.	India's relations with its neighbors are based on a recognition of the fact that the interests of the countries are so linked that there is no reason for us to be on any terms other than friendly. These relations are based on sovereign equality, a recognition of mutuality of interests and mutuality of perceptions to the extent possible. Where this mutuality does not obtain there is no undue keenness whatsoever to impose unwanted identities on one another. Whatever the depth of relationship at a given time, our sole interest is in promoting an environment of peace and stability that will enable all countries of the region to engage in fruitful development endeavors, avoiding outside influences.
13.	Some constructive steps in the direction of strengthening regional cooperation among the States of South Asia have been considered. We are confident that, given a sense of realism and the requisite political will, such cooperation would be feasible in advancing the development of the countries in this region. I would like to pay a special tribute to the wisdom and foresight of former President ZiaurRahman of Bangladesh for his dedicated efforts in this direction.
14.	All countries in our region face similar economic problems, and we should devote our energies towards development and development alone. India wants to have strong and self-reliant neighbors, since we are convinced that this alone is in our interest. We are, however, gravely concerned by the deteriorating security environment in our region. While India does not find itself- helpless in any way, we view with deep concern the possibility of the strategic calculations of outside Powers engulfing countries in our region.
15.	We are committed to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We are committed to the principles of nonalignment. Our twin commitments in the field of foreign policy are based on the objective necessity to contribute in a positive manner towards the creation of a peaceful and cooperative world. In India today, I am glad to say, there is complete unanimity regarding the content and relevance of the policy of nonalignment and the principles of Pancha Shila. Our commitment to nonalignment has made us unafraid to stand by ourselves, if need be, on our own conviction, whenever a point of principle is involved.
16.	More than two decades ago Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru spoke of the threat of the cold war coming to our doorstep. After a slight letup, this threat seems once again to have come back today. IWenty years since its inception, the nonaligned movement once again faces a situation which calls for the utmost ingenuity and pure purposefulness. However, despite the changes in the environment tending to exert pressure on the movement itself-, the nonaligned countries can still bring a semblance of sanity in international relations. No one has claimed or should ever claim that the nonaligned movement is a monolith. Its resilience and effectiveness, which unfortunately seem to be lost on some, are being recognized by more and more countries. It is not for nothing that every new independent nation promptly joins the nonaligned; the delicate plant of nascent freedom needs a nonaligned climate in order to grow and find its identity. Alignment saps it; alliances spell blight for it. It is a happy augury, both for the movement and for humanity as a whole, that on an increasingly large number of issues, such as decolonization, rejection of apartheid, the Middle East question, more equitable international economic relations, global interdependence and, we hope, many others that will emerge in due course, there has come about an identity of views between the nonaligned and several non non-aligned countries. We fervently hope that both the trend and the tribe will increase to a point where alignment ceases to be either fashionable or profitable.
17.	I shall now briefly refer to some of the world's unresolved problems, whose number unfortunately tends only to increase with each succeeding session of the General Assembly. The most important of the problems is, of course, the very survival of mankind.
18.	Nothing proves the unreality and mockery of international politics today so much as the failure of all attempts at disarmament. Despite this unreality, the world cannot afford to ignore the fateful implications of the arms race, particularly in its nuclear aspects, for the very future of life on this planet. Along with increasing levels of sophistication, new claims are being made regarding the possibility of waging "winnable" wars. On top of everything, we now have the neutron weapons. This development will set the stage for a qualitative jump in the nuclear arms race. While the Governments of the nuclear weapon States ostensibly practice deterrence, the choice which they are presenting their own people with seems to be one of death by their own bombs or by those of the enemy. Most certainly, it is not a choice between death and survival. I have no doubt that in spite of the intense psychosis created by these Governments in a variety of ways the people of the nuclear weapon States themselves feel disaster in their bones all the time. It is time that this feeling finds increasing articulation and leads to active opposition before it is too late. It goes without saying that for the rest of mankind this is a matter of the greatest concern. The world cannot afford to permit any State or States to endanger the survival of a)I mankind. peace-loving States should assume, in a more strident manner, the moral responsibility to urge nuclear disarmament on a high priority basis.
19.	The nonaligned countries have clearly and consistently stressed the primacy of their concern about nuclear issues. We are aware that each time there is a move to modernize a weapons system on one side, a corresponding mirror image action is taken by the other, resulting in the escalation of fear, anxiety and suspicion in the whole world. Each upward spiral in the arms race becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. It is our sincere belief that this vicious cycle of action and response can be broken. We hope that the dialog between the United States and the USSR which has just started will result in genuine and practical measures to give a fresh start in this respect. Meanwhile the world waits with bated breath, teetering on the brink of disaster.
20.	The Indian Ocean is another theater witnessing a great accumulation of sophisticated military hardware. This is in flagrant violation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace adopted in 1971 [resolution 2832(XXVI)], in which the General Assembly expressed opposition to the military presence of the great Powers in the context of their rivalry and calls for its elimination. There is an effort to divide the littoral and hinterland States. Arguments are being improvised to justify greatPower presences in the Indian Ocean area. There is a need for determined efforts to stop these moves, which ruin our security environment. Further, it needs to be reiterated that greatPower presences in the
Indian Ocean are unacceptable not only in the context of their rivalry but under any circumstances whatsoever. Were they to agree among themselves to stay put in this Ocean they would still be equally unwelcome. Together or separately, we want them out.
21.	India has consistently expressed its disapproval of all kinds of outside intervention and interference in any country. We have unequivocally opposed the presence of foreign troops in any country and all countries. For us this includes Afghanistan, whereas, presumably, to some other countries this should apply only to Afghanistan, A running argument has ensued on this question, and those who started with condemnatory polemics have now come round to prefer a political solution on the lines of the New Delhi Declaration adopted by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries last February [see AI36I116 and Corr.l, annexJ, The Secretary-General is now considering the question and is currently engaged in removing the cobwebs to enable a dialog between the countries concerned. We wish him well in this quest. Meanwhile, the people of Afghanistan can only hope devoutly that the SecretaryGeneral's efforts may succeed; they have such a large stake in his success.
22.	The people and Government of India are saddened by the continuation of the conflict between Iran and Iraq. This conflict has taken a heavy toll in life and property, leading inevitably to the retardation of developmental activities of both these nonaligned countries. On their part, the nonaligned have attempted to find an acceptable solution to the conflict and will continue their efforts in consonance with the mandate of the New Delhi Declaration.
23.	India's ties with the countries of SouthEast Asia are based upon the closest social, cultural and intellectual links developed over the centuries. Having supported them in their struggle for independence, we cannot but be deeply interested in the developments in this region, particularly those affecting international peace and security in our own neighborhood. We continue to be prepared to join in all constructive efforts aimed at seeking a peaceful solution to the problems of the region.
24.	The people of Kampuchea have only just begun to emerge from the holocaust visited upon them by the Pol Pot regime in addition to the privations they had to endure earlier during the struggle of the peoples of IndoChina for national liberation, independence and sovereignty. They have just begun to look to the future with a semblance of hope and expectation. The prospects of famine and disease have receded. At this stage, the effort of the outside world should be to reassure the Kampuchean people that the process they have embarked upon will not be reversed and that their erstwhile persecutors will never be allowed to return and unleash once again a reign of terror upon them. It is, therefore, a great irony of the times that the same despotic regime should bring the stench of their genocidal acts into this august chamber in order to represent, as it were, their own victims in a bizarre inversion of the principles of the Charter. We still hope that before long wiser counsels will prevail. Indeed, at the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs at New Delhi, it was clearly underlined that a comprehensive political solution should be found, providing for the withdrawal of all foreign forces and ensuring full respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all 
States in the region, including Kampuchea. The interference and intervention of outside Powers in the region have exacerbated tensions and must be eliminated. We are convinced that this can be achieved only through a dialog between the countries of the region.
2$. The political situation in West Asia continues to smolder as a result of Israel's adventurism and intransigence. If anything, it has been rendered more serious by IsraeKs arrogation to itself- of the right to launch "preemptive" attacks against its neighbors, as happened recently in southern Lebanon, on the spurious pretext of safeguarding its own security. Similarly, the 7 June attack on and destruction of the Osirak atomic reactor by Israel F16 aircraft a reactor known to have been intended entirely for peaceful purposes was an example of blatant aggression.
26.	A just and comprehensive solution of the West Asian problem can be achieved only by ensuring the total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem, and the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national right to self-determination, including the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, as well as the recognition of the right of all States in the area to live within recognized and secure boundaries. Such a peaceful solution cannot be attained without the full and equal participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people, in any settlement or negotiating process. We have already seen convincing evidence of the failure of a partial solution undertaken without the participation of the PLO.
27.	The recent emergency special session on Namibia has served to focus the attention of the international community on the grave situation in southern Africa. The credibility of the United Nations will be seriously eroded if it is unable to secure freedom and justice for the people of Namibia. Only through an early implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) could the peaceful decolonization of Namibia be achieved. All attempts to dilute, modify or attenuate the details of the United Nations plan to which that resolution refers for any further purpose are unacceptable to the overwhelming majority of world opinion. The Government of India reiterates its full solidarity with the South West Africa People's Organization [SWAPO] as the authentic representative of the Namibian people and will continue to extend moral and material support to it in its struggle for national liberation.
28.	We had all hoped last year that the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea would successfully finalize a comprehensive, convention. However, the Conference has since met twice and our hope has not yet been fulfilled. The Government of India is deeply concerned that the efforts of the Conference have been frustrated, creating uncertainty about its future. Some 150 countries have labored hard for over eight years to arrive at an acceptable compromise package relating to the law of the sea which, in our opinion, serves the best interests of the community of nations as a whole. In this era of multilateral interdependence, national interests of one country cannot override the overwhelming interests of the entire international community. The resources of the international seabed area have been proclaimed the common heritage of mankind. An orderly and safe development and rational management of these resources for the benefit of mankind as a whole are imperative necessities. We do hope that the Conference will successfully complete its task at Caracas in September 1982, without reopening any of the issues already settled.
29.	All of us, each in a different way, have found that peace is stable only when prosperity is equitably shared. Mutatis mutandis, the same is equally true in the context of our global village, this little earth of ours. What are the mechanisms to be evolved so that the worthwhile things in life are within everyone's reach? That is what all of us are striving for in building a new international economic order in which production expands, labor is shared, and the products of labor are available to all, without pockets of misery or wasteful pockets of surpluses.
30.	While there may be no simple solution to the global economic crisis, the erosion of a multilateral framework will certainly make the situation much worse. A withdrawal from the processes of international cooperation is bound to lead to increasing recourse to bilateralism. This was not the vision of the founding fathers of the Charter of the United Nations, to which every speaker before me has expressed an unqualified commitment. Total bilateralism at the expense of multilateral cooperation would run into alliances that may not be in the interest of harmonious relations and relaxation of tensions.
31.	The attempts to erode the multilateral framework of economic cooperation appear even more indefensible in view of the rapid and continuing aggravation of the economic situation of most developing countries. Their terms of trade have further declined, and their exports have faced the rising walls of protectionism erected by several powerful industrialized countries. Food and energy have become more scarce. Balance of payments deficits are growing alarmingly, and external debt is assuming unmanageable proportions.
32.	Developing countries are unable to improve their terms of trade when the wall of protectionism keeps rising in one form or another in response to every innovation that they make. Access to capital markets is practically blocked through artificially inflated interest rates. The result of all these phenomena, which are manipulated by a few centers of economic power and over which the developing countries have no control, becomes manifest in sluggish economic activity at home and further aggravates balance of payments and debt burdens. 
33.	Closely linked to this process is the role of the international financial institutions. Only a few months ago, at the second regular session for 1981 of the Economic and Social Council, we welcomed the many innovative mechanisms evolved by these institutions, making it possible for larger financial resources to become available to developing countries. I must note with some regret, however, that even while more rigorous conditionality has been maintained some of the progressive mechanisms of lending by these institutions have come into question in recent months. After the tremendous effort during the past decade to impart a greater and more effective developmental role to these institutions, this retrograde trend is most unfortunate. I would like to express my strong conviction that the achievements of the past decade and the progress made in making these institutions more responsive to the needs of the developing countries should not be reversed or eroded.
34.	I would also hope that the United Nations system will sincerely take serious measures to implement the policy measures defined in the International Development Strategy so that the goals and objectives of the Third United Nations Development Decade [resolution 35/56] are attained. The Strategy was adopted by consensus, and its goals and objectives are modest. If there is sincerity about interdependence, these modest goals should not be difficult to achieve.
35.	The Caracas high level conference of the Group of 77 made progress in a pragmatic manner in the field of economic cooperation amongst the developing countries. The attitude of the developed countries towards technical cooperation amongst the developing countries has not been negative, though not exactly enthusiastic. In both the SouthSouth and the NorthSouth context a number of proposals designed to alleviate the burden of oil-importing developing countries have been under consideration. It is necessary to devise an early action oriented program to solve this important problem in its various aspects. This has perhaps been delayed because of the failure to launch the global negotiations. The energy resources of the developing countries can be developed on the basis of a definitive expansion of the multilateral flow of public finances, about which interesting ideas have been adumbrated, including that of an energy affiliate of the World Bank. Both the objective and the urgency of these steps need to be underscored.
36.	One of the major obstacles to a meaningful North South dialog so far is the widespread impression that on issues of resources and technology transfer it is the South that needs the North, without having much to offer in return. This is not a correct reflection of the situation. The intimate dependence of the economies of the North on world markets makes it impossible for them, as the Brandt Commission notes in its report to put even their own house in order if they forget the rest of the world. This is the lesson of the 1980s, which the North could ignore only at its own peril.
37.	We would like to reiterate, therefore, that the international community should face squarely the reality of interdependence among nations. The benefits of strengthened international economic cooperation and the dangers inherent in the growing tendency towards isolation and protectionism need to be realized more in practice. This should be reflected in the full participation by all developed countries in the process of solving international economic issues in the context of NorthSouth cooperation. There can be no exception or reservations to this process or any ground whatsoever historical, ideological or merely rhetorical. While the task of apportioning blame should now appropriately belong to academic endeavor, all developed countries should put their shoulders to the wheel.
38.	While saying this I am not underestimating the difficulties that willing Governments of the North would face in convincing their own people of the fact of interdependence in terms intelligible to the members of a self-solicitous affluent society. The realization that the purchase of the next automobile by one family in a developed country would be truly dependent on the availability of the next meal to another, starving family in a developing country is not easy to induce. Yet this is precisely the core of the concept of interdependence. The ancient Indian dictum which treats the whole world as one family seems to be on the verge of complete vindication in a very different context which none of the ancient sages had perhaps anticipated. Ancient intuition and modern scientific experience find a strange coincidence at this point.
39.	Let there be no mistake. The United Nations, being the largest multilateral system, must have the capacity to provide the umbrella under which the urgent and complex task of restructuring international economic relations could and should be undertaken. From an almost purely political institution, the system has gradually come to grapple with complex economic issues lying in the bowels of international relations today. A successful launching of the global negotiations on major economic issues and a coherent and integrated framework in the spirit of mutual benefit will constitute the real success of the United Nations system. We reiterate, therefore, that this process should be started without further delay.
40.	We are today on the eve of the International Meeting on Cooperation and Development, to be held at Cancun, which will bring together leaders of some developed and developing countries to enable a better understanding of each other's perceptions, achieve a real meeting of minds and generate the requisite political impetus to make hopefully a determined assault on all questions concerning international economic relations. The growing frustration and cynicism generated over the years by frequent setbacks to every NorthSouth exercise represent a dangerous trend. We, for our part, will continue our serious commitment to work tirelessly and ceaselessly to reverse this trend. We wish god-speed to the Cancun conclave.
41.	In the course of the general debate so far, we have heard several statements which rekindle one's faith in the desire of the North to engage in a mutually advantageous dialog with the South. I was particularly heartened by the question posed by the Minister for External Relations of France in his statement before the General Assembly on 23 September where he said: "But how often do you hear it . acknowledged . . . that the progress of the North South dialog is a prerequisite for world progress and perhaps even for world peace?" [9th meeting, para. 26.] He himself- provided the answer with characteristic finesse: "The South has become part of the life of the North." [Ibid, para. 27.)
42.	I would like to join wholeheartedly in this statement, as well as in similar inspiring statements made by several colleagues from other developed countries. These pronouncements are indeed refreshing trend-setters, inasmuch as they seek to demolish the hitherto impregnable NorthSouth divide. North and South must, therefore, share the same objectives, as their destinies are intertwined. Together, we can make sure that while following our paths, we can contribute to each other's prosperity as well as security, provided we follow the logic of peaceful cooperation and steer clear of the twin mistakes of isolation and confrontation.

150.	At the outset, I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate Vanuatu and Belize on their independence and welcome them on their admission to the United Nations. On behalf of the Government and the people of Israel, I wish them success and prosperity as independent and sovereign States.
151.	The Government and the people of Israel have always upheld the ideals and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It could not have been otherwise, for Israel's intellectual and moral traditions have given birth to some of the most important elements inherent in the shape and meaning of the Organization. The brotherhood of man, social justice, the rule of law both domestic and international the equality of nations, the peaceful settlement of international disputes and the outlawing of war those and other ideals had grown and taken root among the shepherds and peasants of Judea and Israel long before they came to be accepted as principles of current international life.
152.	Unfortunately, these ideals have been honored more in the breach than in the observance in the practice of the United Nations. In recent years the Organization has repeatedly permitted itself to be abused by Israel's adversaries who enjoy a built-in majority in the Assembly on any issue related to the ArabIsraeli conflict. In recent years Israel has more than once been the victim of discriminatory treatment in the United Nations.
153.	It must be stressed that international organizations which allow their fundamental rules to be violated cause severe damage to themselves and thereby undermine their very raison d'etre. Decisions arrived at in disregard of the relevant provisions of constitutional instruments are illegal, however often repeated and however overwhelming the majority that supported them.
154.	The distortions which pervade the United Nations system have also manifested themselves in the attitude of the Organization towards the Camp David accords and the treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel. By any yardstick, the conclusion of peace between two former enemies is surely not only a legitimate but also a desirable development which should have been welcomed by the United Nations, the primary purpose of which is the promotion and maintenance of international peace. No third party, including the Assembly, has the legal or moral authority to question, let alone to deny, the validity of the accords attained or of any treaties deriving from them,
155.	A major issue that has rightly engaged the attention and growing concern of all mankind is that of international cooperation for development and the widening gap between the standard of living of the poor nations and that of the wealthy nations. However, the NorthSouth dialog has remained largely a debate among nations and groups of nations, and, as might be expected, those suffering hunger and deprivation have not had their lot improved by this debate.
156.	For the last 20 years Israel has been involved in the effort to develop ways and means of raising the standard of living in the less developed societies. It is our wish and we believe that it is within our capacity to make a further contribution of our own to joint efforts to tackle specific development problems and advance towards a solution.
157.	Ever since its establishment Israel has had to cope simultaneously with a wide range of grave social, economic and security problems. We have absorbed and integrated hundreds of thousands of immigrants many of them victims of persecution in the Arab countries from which they had come and at the same time set about creating a progressive and rapidly developing society. With all the urgent problems that weighed upon us, we have spared no effort in cooperating with other young developing nations in such fields as agriculture, hydrology, rural development, health and youth leadership. This fruitful process of international cooperation with dozens of countries, regardless of political outlook, has been constantly moving forward.
158.	In their continuous search for solutions to the evolving challenges of development, Israel's experts have recently formulated some new ideas on development, referred to by them as the Transitional Economy Plan. It is a model for empirical dynamic development, well within the means of the countries concerned. I wish to take this opportunity to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/36/497, circulated at the request of my delegation, which contains a report entitled "An Outline of Development through Promotion of the Transitional Economy". We do not claim that this plan is a panacea for all the world's economic ills. Rather, it aims at applying a gradual, step-by-step, relatively low-cost program of improvements to the rural sector of society, a sector that so far has not been given sufficient attention. We will be happy to cooperate with any national or international organization for the purpose of putting the concepts contained in this plan into practice.
159.	At the thirty-fifth session [15th meeting], we appealed from this rostrum to the Soviet Government to remove all the limitations and obstacles hindering Jews in the Soviet Union from leaving for Israel. Already at that time there were grounds for fearing that the Soviet Union was going to close its gates to those Jews. Unfortunately, those fears have since been substantiated. Over the past year we have been watching with growing anxiety the steady decrease in the number of Jews leaving the Soviet Union to the lowest number for the last 10 years. The Soviet Union is thus forcibly preventing many thousands of them from living in their homeland.
160.	In parallel, we have witnessed again a regrettable increase in the violation of fundamental human rights in the Soviet Union. Over the past six months the number of prisoners of Zion detained under false pretexts and sentenced by Soviet courts to long prison terms has doubled. The sole crime of these people is their desire to live as Jews in their own land. Ida Nudel, Victor Brailovski, Anatoly Shcharansky and others have been gaoled for that desire, while others who have been refused exit permits have been subjected to pressure to refrain from so-called antiSoviet activity. The Assembly should know that the antiSoviet activity in question consists of the study of the Hebrew language and of the reading of books on Jewish history and Judaism.
161.	From this rostrum I wish to appeal once again to the Soviet Union to reopen its gates for Jews who wish to return to their homeland and to cease the persecution of the Jews in the Soviet Union.
162.. There are also other countries in which Jews have been subjected to discrimination and oppression. In particular, 1 must again express anxiety over the condition of the tortured Jewish community in Syria, whose human rights are severely curtailed and many of whom have been imprisoned and have had their property impounded. I would thus also appeal to the Government of Syria to respect the basic human rights of its Jewish community, which it holds hostage and which it prevents from leaving.
163.	Permit me to turn now to the subject of the nuclear menace posed by Iraq. The item on the agenda of the Assembly dealing with the destruction of the Iraqi nuclear reactor has been formulated in a manner clearly intended to prejudge the outcome of the debate. As has been stated by Israel, the decision to destroy that reactor was taken only when it became absolutely certain that Iraq was on the verge of producing nuclear bombs, the principal target of which would have been Israel. People in all parts of the world, including the Middle East, are sleeping more soundly today, secure in the knowledge that that particular reactor has been removed. Iraq's nuclear reactor had to be destroyed before it became operational in the summer of 1981, for its destruction at a later date would have brought about radioactive fallout, endangering the civilian population of Baghdad.
164.	Ever since the establishment of the State of Israel, Iraq has been conspiring against it, both politically and militarily. Iraq set out to acquire nuclear facilities and expertise and then proceeded to assemble all the ingredients required for the development of nuclear weapons. This indicated a calculated effort on the part of Iraq to embark on a nuclear weapons program, Our concern about the Iraqi nuclear program was shared also by authoritative foreign governmental and professional assessments. None the less, six years of diplomatic and public efforts to bring about the cessation of the Iraqi military nuclear program yielded little more than reference to IAEA inspections under the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to which Iraq is a signatory. Israel has had to conclude that a country which acquired a complete fuel cycle and is openly bent on the destruction of Israel will not balk at going ahead with its program, whether or not it is a party to the NonProliferation Treaty.
165.	Let me take this opportunity to reiterate Israel's policy that it will not be the first country in the Middle East to introduce nuclear weapons into the region. Faced as it is with the stark realities of the Middle East, Israel must insist on distinguishing between spurious and genuine safety. As the case of Iraq has clearly demonstrated, the NonProliferation Treaty cannot effectively prevent such a country from resorting to nuclear weapons so as to achieve what more conventional means have failed to do.
166.	The only genuine way to remove the nuclear threat to the Middle East can be found in the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, freely and directly negotiated among the countries of the region and based on mutual assurances, on the pattern of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America. In the Assembly we shall continue to advocate and support constructive steps genuinely advancing the prospect of a Middle East free of nuclear weapons. At the same time, we shall warn against, and oppose, steps designed to exploit this subject as a tool of antiIsrael political warfare.
167.	The situation in Lebanon has been a source of grave concern in our region for a number of years. That country has been subjected to strife and bloodshed from the mid-1970's onwards, due to the exploitation by Syria and by the PLO of domestic rivalries in Lebanon, followed by outright invasion of the country by the Syrian army. The situation has been worsened by the tightening of the PLO's grip on large parts of the country. Furthermore, in order to promote their regional strategic aims, the Syrians have subjected the Lebanese civilian population to brutal attacks which have brought about the destruction of a large portion of the country. Some 120,000 Lebanese civilians have been the victims of Syrian and PLO atrocities. It is characteristic of the double standard practiced in international relations that these atrocities have never been condemned by the international community, including the United Nations. Arab and Soviet bloc supporters of Syria and the PLO have made any such condemnation impossible.
168.	It is our hope that an independent and free Lebanon will soon reemerge and maintain good relations with all its neighbors, including Israel. But this will be very difficult to achieve as long as the PLO is allowed to nest in Lebanon and to hatch schemes aimed at promoting international terrorism and the mounting of brutal and cowardly attacks against the civilian population of Israel, especially in the northern part of our country. There will be no end to the tragedy of Lebanon as long as the Syrian occupation continues and as long as the PLO maintains its terrorist bases in Lebanon, supported by armaments from foreign Powers, mainly the Soviet Union and Libya. The Government of Israel will at all times support the reestablishment of a truly independent Lebanon, within its internationally recognized boundaries, free of Syrian occupation and PLO terror.
169.	The main cause of the ArabIsrael conflict has always been the refusal of Arab States to accept the existence of an independent and secure State of Israel and their avowed commitment to its destruction. The events of the last four years have brought about a major breakthrough in that respect: after Egypt abandoned the path of war and announced its readiness to negotiate peace, peace inevitably followed. Furthermore, while the winds of war have been constantly blowing in other parts of the region, Egypt and Israel, which not long ago were faced with the imminent danger of war, are now learning to coexist in peace and represent an island of stability in the Middle East. Unfortunately, this is not yet the case with regard to the other Arab neighbors of Israel. These Arab States, which have been invited by the signatories of the Camp David framework for peace to join the peace process, have so far refused to do so.
170.	One of the clearest manifestations of their categorical opposition to the peace process is their continuing and unprecedented military buildup through arms purchases from the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc nations, as well as from the United States and Western Europe. Since 1978 the major Arab countries, excluding Egypt, have concluded arms deals valued at $27.8 billion, of which $11.6 billion worth has already been delivered.
171.	These acquisitions of arms reflect a formidable quantitative and qualitative military buildup in those countries. These arms are unfortunately intended primarily for use against Israel. Needless to say, the stepped-up arming of the Arab States serves to strengthen their conviction that the ArabIsrael conflict can still be solved by military means. Moreover, it jeopardizes the internal stability of several of the Arab regimes, as well as of the region as a whole.
172.	The Camp David accords have been and remain the only feasible path to peace; no other viable solution appears on the horizon. Just last week we resumed the negotiations with Egypt, with the participation of the
United States, on the establishment of full autonomy for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district. We hope to bring these negotiations before long to a successful conclusion.
173.	Our people were not handed their State on a silver platter. We fought for liberation against a colonial Power. We then had to fight against a host of Arab armies that sought to prevent the establishment of our State. Subsequently, we have fought four more wars to defend it. We know very well the meaning and the price of combating colonialism, of a struggle for liberation and of fighting for self-determination.
174.	These concepts are now being abused and exploited by a number of Arab Governments in the name of the Palestinian Arabs. The Palestinian Arabs do have a State on a major part of the territory of Palestine. In Jordan, there exists a Palestinian Arab State in everything but name. It is a Palestinian Arab State by virtue of its geography, demography, history, culture, religion and language. It has even been declared as such by an impressive number of Palestinian Arab and Jordanian leaders, There is thus no need to speak further of Palestinian self-determination; their homeland is already in existence. Moreover, in 1964, when the PLO approved the so-called Palestinian National Covenant with a view to "liberating" Palestine, at a time when Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district were still under Jordanian and Egyptian occupation, the real goal of the Arab States was to "liberate" Israel from Israelis, to deprive Israel of its existence. That aim is still fervently pursued today under the cover of the slogan of a "homeland for the homeless Palestinians", which is given immense publicity by Arab propagandists and their supporters.
175.	Israel firmly believes in a vision of peace for our region and will strive towards its realization. The Middle East is rich, not only in history and in spiritual and cultural assets, but also in immense natural resources and manpower. The people of Israel has as much to offer for the development and progress of our region as have the other neighboring peoples, each in its own way.
176.	The Jewish people has reestablished its home in the land of its forefathers, where the Kingdoms of Judea and Israel flourished for centuries. We have now restored our sovereignty over this area after 19 centuries of homelessness, with Jerusalem, which has always been the center and sole focus of the national and spiritual life of the Jewish people, as the undivided and indivisible capital of Israel
177.	We have returned to the land of Israel and have come there to stay. Together all the nations of the Middle East can usher in an era of real peace and cooperation in the region. The opportunity is there. Let us not miss it.
Mr. VicePresident, will you please congratulate President Kittani on his election as President of this Assembly. His long and distinguished service to the international community makes him eminently qualified for that task, and I know that he will guide us with impartiality and skill.
42.	It is a great pleasure to welcome two fellow members of the Commonwealth, Belize and Vanuatu, to this assembly of nations. We are especially gratified that independence has brought one more into the growing family of South Pacific island nations. Their voices, individually and collectively, are going to be heard more and more in the world assembly. The addition to our membership of two more small nations, proud of their independence but limited in resources, brings home to us one of the major issues facing this Assembly the desperate struggle of so many countries simply to reach the most basic level of economic and social development.
43.	The recent United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries sharply focused international attention on this issue. That was useful, but in concentrating on the need for developed countries to raise the level of their official development assistance to a limited number of the poorest developing countries the Conference did not really get to the heart of the matter.
44.	The problems which face the developing countries are well known. They affect some of the developed countries also. They include the soaring cost of imported energy, inflated prices for manufactured imports and fluctuating prices for primary exports. These factors are compounded by increasing protectionist pressures in the advanced economies and a reluctance to contemplate the kind of restructuring which would expand trading opportunities for the developing countries.	^
45.	These problems cannot be solved by financial subsidies alone or even, in itself, by successful internal economic development. Economic self-sufficiency is not a practicable goal for the developing countries, nor is it for most developed countries. Even a modest level of prosperity and economic stability can only be achieved through a continuous expansion of international trade. This, in turn, can only be achieved in a different international climate, in which there is a better balance between access to manufactured goods and access to agricultural products. There is too great a tendency to concentrate on reducing barriers to trade in industrial manufactures and to push aside agriculture as some kind of an exception with which it is too difficult to cope. That cannot be allowed to continue.
46.	It is, surely, self-evident that successful economic development merely creates new problems unless there is a corresponding expansion of trading opportunities. What future is there if the rich countries continue to deny access in order to protect their own agricultures, if prices of agricultural exports fluctuate wildly or are distorted by subsidies and if those prices are far outstripped by the cost of essential industrial goods and services?
47.	The prosperity of my own country depends on the exp<M of a relatively small number of agricultural commodities. That means we share some of the problems faced by developing countries. We know what those problems are. Because we are small, and because we face economic difficulties ourselves, we try in a number of ways to ensure that our development assistance program is efficient and effective. All our aid is given in the form of grants. We make sure it is directed into the kind of projects in which New
Zealand has a recognized expertise. We never embark on a project unless it has been specifically asked for by the recipient Government. It makes sense for us to concentrate our aid efforts in the part of the world that we know best, that is, our immediate neighborhood. Almost 70 per cent of our bilateral development assistance is now channeled to the island nations of the South Pacific.
48.	In our view, the criteria for inclusion in the United Nations list of least developed countries are unduly narrow and rigid. Only one South Pacific country, at present, qualifies for inclusion in that list. A number of others, because they suffer from all the disadvantages of extremely small size, isolation and lack of resources, also deserve the special treatment accorded to the least developed. Indeed, if it were not for the level of aid they do receive, we believe they would qualify even under present criteria. I would certainly like to see those criteria revised and made more flexible.
49.	Because their populations are tiny and because of the poverty of their resources, many of the island nations of the South Pacific are going to have a long and hard struggle to become more viable. And yet their very smallness and isolation, which ought to make the world community more responsive to their special circumstances, has caused them to be overlooked by some of the major donors. Thus there is every reason for New Zealand to concentrate its aid efforts in the South Pacific, and we intend to continue that policy.
50.	External financial assistance, however essential, is not enough in itself to bring about successful development. New Zealand recognizes that the developing island countries need outlets for the goods they produce and has set about meeting that need in a practical manner. Together with Australia, we have joined in a treaty with our neighbors in the South Pacific to give them unrestricted duty-free access, on a nonreciprocal basis, for the great majority of their exports. We have also established an industrial development scheme to promote the growth of the manufacturing sector in the island economies through joint ventures with New Zealand firms. We have given strong support to the establishment of a regional shipping line to ensure that the exports of the island countries reach their markets.
51.	I make no boast that what we have achieved has solved the problems of our developing neighbors. Obviously not, since their economies are still for the most part in a precarious state.
52.	Economic and social development can progress smoothly only in conditions of political stability. Recent history has shown how true that is even in countries which are blessed with great natural wealth, and all the more starkly in others which are not. Sometimes the causes of instability have been internal. Too often they have been made far worse by external pressure, intervention or military invasion. At present there is dangerous instability in several widely separated areas of the world, including SouthEast Asia, SouthWest Asia, the Middle East, southern Africa, eastern Europe and the Korean peninsula.
53.	If I refer first to Kampuchea it is because that is the area of tension nearest to my own land; because New Zealand regards itself as a friend of the Association of
SouthEast Asian Nations [ASEANwhose members are neighbors of Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam; and because we believe the continuance of the situation in Kampuchea poses an eventual threat to our own security. External intervention in Kampuchea has been flagrant. There is no excuse for the continued presence of 200,000 Vietnamese troops in that country. New Zealand has consistently urged the need for a political settlement which would free the Kampuchean people from a foreign presence and permit them freely to choose their own Government. Such a settlement would enable Viet Nam to resume its own economic development, free from both the burden of maintaining its military occupation of a neighboring country and its present dependence on a single superPower for economic and military support.
54.	New Zealand cannot and does not condone the past crimes of Pol Pot and his associates. But, as the latest vote on Kampuchea's credentials shows, there is no disposition amongst the majority of Members of this Assembly to replace the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea by one representing a puppet Government propped up by a military occupation.
55.	We welcome the efforts that are being made to form a more broadly based successor to the present Democratic Kampuchean leadership. We expect that the International Conference on Kampuchea will continue its efforts to find a solution to the Kampuchean problem a solution which takes account of the legitimate interests of all sides. We hope that Viet Nam and the Soviet . Union will be persuaded to join in the negotiating process through the mediating efforts of the Ad Hoc Committee and the President of the Conference. The need for a settlement is urgent, for the longer the fighting continues' within Kampuchea, the greater the risk that it will spread beyond the borders of that war-torn land.
56.	Instability in SouthEast Asia is paralleled in SouthWest Asia by military intervention and continuing hostilities in Afghanistan. International concern will continue to be reiterated in this Assembly until Soviet forces are withdrawn. Whether or not the Soviet Union has come to regard that entanglement as a mistake, my Government most earnestly hopes that the Soviet Government will not compound that error and deal a final fatal blow to detente by similar action against the people of Poland.
57.	Almost since it began, this Organization has been trying to find a solution to the problem of a divided Korea. Yet there is still no genuine dialog between the leaders in the North and those in the South. The latest call by the Republic of Korea for a summit meeting between the two Koreas has been rejected. Surely the Korean people as a whole at least deserve that their leaders should talk seriously about the future of their country. It makes no sense for the two sides in that divided peninsula to go on forever pouring so much of their resources and energies into military preparations. My Government hopes that the authorities in the North will reconsider their stand.
58.	It is a matter of deep regret that all our hopes for urgent and positive steps towards a just and durable Middle East settlement should have had so little to sustain them. New Zealand welcomed the steps agreed upon by Israel and Egypt to restore peace between them. But the process cannot be allowed to come to a stop at this point.
During the last 12 months there has been a deplorable readiness to resort to violence. There is a need for a genuine and renewed commitment to the principles of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). There is a need for Israel's neighbors to accept and respect the existence of Israel as a sovereign and independent State. There is an equal need for a corresponding recognition of the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians, including the right to self-determination. That, in our view, means the right to establish a separate State if that is their wish. The annexation of East Jerusalem and the continuing establishment of settlements in the occupied territories are obstructions to a negotiated settlement. A resurgence of terrorism, a buildup of ever more sophisticated armaments, or recourse to preemptive military strikes simply threaten to undermine what has with such difficulty been accomplished so far. Only a genuine will to negotiate fairly and realistically will bring lasting results.
59.	In southern Africa we still see a people denied the right of nationhood. South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia must end. The Prime Minister of my country said in this forum at the 
thirty-fifth session [109th meeting] that there was no good reason why the few issues that remain outstanding in the search for a settlement in Namibia should not be .settled quickly. We believe that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) provides the basis for that settlement and we support the continuing efforts of those seeking to achieve the early and peaceful independence of Namibia.
60.	We deplore South Africa's aggressiveness against its neighbors and its violation of Angola's territory and sovereignty. In South Africa itself the detestable system of institutionalized racism and injustice apartheid remains entrenched. South Africa's black majority are denied the right to participate in the choice of their Government and are shut out from the full enjoyment of the resources of their own country.
61.	Change in South Africa is inevitable. Whether it will come peacefully or through violence is in South Africa's hands. Time, though, is running desperately short.
62.	We cannot expect international cooperation in bringing about economic and social development to flourish while confrontation and conflict persist in so many parts of the world. Heightened tension threatens not only detente but the orderly development of international law, the negotiation of arms control agreements and the promotion of human rights. ^National security and rearmament become matters of overriding priority for Governments. Legislatures tend to focus more determinedly on domestic political considerations, to the detriment of enlightened foreign policies. The humanitarian and altruistic instincts of ordinary people all too often become dulled. Their natural instinct for peace is overshadowed by a narrower and more belligerent patriotism. Thus is created an international climate inimical to the peaceful settlement of disputes and the orderly conduct of international relations.
63.	All those who have traditionally cherished the rule of law and the fundamental freedoms, of the individual, both at home and abroad, surely have a special duty to resist such dangerous trends and to throw their weight behind the negotiating process by which the United Nations seeks to achieve those objectives.
64.	A prime example is the development of a new law of the sea. A stable order for the oceans, the seabed and coastal waters is essential for world peace. It is most desirable, to say the least, that the major maritime Powers should participate in the new convention. This year the work of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has been slowed down to permit a review of the draft convention by the United States Government. The Conference is now clearly determined to push on to finality in 1982. It is the earnest hope of my Government that, having completed its review, the United States will rejoin the negotiating process and will stand ready with all other nations to make a determined last effort to ensure the adoption by consensus of the draft convention at the next and final negotiating session of the Conference.
65.	In the field of human rights, the United Nations has concentrated, rightly, on the needs of people who are socially disadvantaged or who have been traditional victims of discrimination.
66.	A striking example is the United Nations Decade for Women, now at midpoint. The adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women [General Assembly resolution 34/180] has been one of its major achievements. It is significant that it has come into force so quickly. All nations, whatever their stage of economic development, their cultural traditions or their geographic circumstances, have been reminded not only of the rights of half of humanity but also of the enormous contribution made by women. It was right that the United Nations should lead that world movement, because the discrimination to be eliminated  the discrimination we must "eliminate has been universal. The activities of the Decade have been followed with close attention in New Zealand and its aims have our full support. But the convention will only achieve its aim if it is universally ratified and, more important, given full effect in each country.
67.	Similarly, the current International Year of Disabled Persons has focused attention on the rights of handicapped people. It has provided impetus and the practical framework for action. In my own country, the response has been quite remarkable. A mass fund-raising effort for the disabled resulted in the largest collection of voluntary funds for a charitable purpose in our history. We have been made more aware than ever before not only of the needs of the disabled, but of the contribution they can make to our society as a whole.
68.	Next year we shall be summoned to the second special session devoted to disarmament. Nowhere is the need for a renewed effort to achieve progress in international negotiations more apparent. If we are honest, we must acknowledge that since the first special session the prospects for effective disarmament measures have not advanced. Indeed, they may have receded. Much of the work of the first session has been undercut by the deterioration in the international climate and in relations among the nuclear Powers. I do not consider it unfair to assign to those Powers the principle responsibility for that loss of impetus and to demand that they take the initiative in resuming serious and active negotiations. It is they who have the weapons which, by universal agreement, are the most dangerous and in most urgent need of control and numerical reduction. My delegation's keenest disappointment is that the negotiation of a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty, a step which could serve to check both horizontal and vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons, still hangs fire.

69.	Only the nuclear Powers can negotiate a test-ban treaty which will work or, for that matter, any agreement designed to reduce the threat of nuclear destruction. But the remaining Members of the United Nations have a duty to their peoples to renew their pressure on the nuclear Powers, who are also the largest manufacturers and purveyors of conventional armaments, to resume movement towards disarmament. In that regard, we welcome the decision of the two principal nuclear Powers to resume discussions on the reduction of nuclear weapons in the European theater.
70.	I referred earlier to some of the obstacles in the path of economic progress, especially for developing countries. There is no greater corisumer of development resources than the armaments industry, and none that is more wasteful. We must never lose patience in pursuing international agreements which will cut the burden and the danger of rearmament and strengthen the fragile fabric of peace.
71.	It is natural that each of us should seek to advance the interests of his own country, that we should work for the wellbeing of our own people. National pride and patriotism are admirable and necessary virtues. But every coin, every medallion, has another side. Nationalism and pride of country are not in themselves enough. All of us North and South, committed and uncommitted, East and West belong to one world. We have got to work together. Our world has become too small and too dangerous a place for any of us to pursue narrow nationalism regardless of the interests of others.
72.	We must move the world community away from the dangerous road it has been following: that is, the course of rivalry, confrontation and the naked struggle for power. It can lead only to conflict. We must learn, more than ever before, to couple national pride with a real commitment to international cooperation. There is, I believe, no other way to move ahead, to achieve a decent life for all our people. That, I suggest, is why we are meeting here. For all our peoples, whether our countries are large or small, have an equal right td peace, progress and justice.

Speaking from this rostrum today, I should like first of all to recall that the United Nations enjoys solid credibility among the peoples of the world as a forum whose principal objective is to serve as an effective instrument for the maintenance of peace.
45.	It is well known that the birth of the United Nations was the result of the peoples' determination to preclude another world tragedy. Its establishment reflected the awareness, deeply rooted in people's minds following the great victory over fascism, of the need for them to unite closely in the name of peace and to prevail over the forces of militarism and aggression.
46.	That is why the very first lines of the Charter proclaimed the goal "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". These are clear and emphatic words.
47.	I should like to express the confidence that these words will never fade and will never lose their profound meaning. They are a solemn oath taken by the founding States when creating the United Nations. Today that is the duty of all the 155 countries represented in the United Nations.
48.	There, there are some who now try to contend that there are things more important than peace. However, it is obvious that the peoples have never authorized those leaders to say this on their behalf. Peace is a priceless asset of all people oil earth; it is a decisive prerequisite to progress in any sphere of human endeavor. That was true in the past, and it is all the more true now.
49.	AS Leonid Brezhnev has stressed, "The safeguarding of peace no other task is more important now at the international level for our party, for our people and for all the peoples of the world. By safeguarding peace we are working not only for the people who are living today, and not only for our children and grandchildren; we are working for the happiness of countless future generations."
50.	Acting on that fundamental assumption, the twenty sixth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union the highest forum of the Soviet Communists recently put forward a whole series of proposals on the key problems of international life, which have evoked a broad response in the world. They provide for far-reaching steps designed to limit arms, eliminate hotbeds of tension and strengthen confidence among States. They cover both the political and the military fields, deal with nuclear missile weapons and conventional armaments and bear upon the situation in Europe, in the Near, Middle and Ear East and in other regions of the world. Underlying these proposals is one single desire: to improve the international climate, to ward off the threat of war.
51.	In the international arena the Soviet Union stands shoulder to shoulder with other socialist States. Recently, during their meetings in the Crimea, the leaders of the parties and countries of the socialist community had an opportunity once again to harmonize those countries' assessments and actions in the light of the situation taking shape in the world. The same purpose is served by regular meetings" of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty and by the activities of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
52.	The foreign policy of the socialist countries has been and continues to be a policy of peace. It follows from the very nature of our social system, of whose advantages we are deeply convinced. It is determined by the fact that under this system there are no social strata which would make profits out of war and war preparations or derive benefits from militaristic policies. Nevertheless, we do not impose our social system on anybody. The peoples themselves determine, and should determine, their destinies. That has always been and remains the cornerstone of the scientific world outlook that guides us in both our domestic and our foreign policies.
53.	In building a society free from social and national exploitation and oppression, the socialist countries are following an unexplored path. This is not always easy; but the laws of social development and the strength of our ideals ensure for the socialist countries a steady advance in all spheres of life.
54.	Futile are the attempts by certain circles in Western countries to interfere in the internal affairs of the socialist States. Such attempts are being made, in particular, with regard to the Polish People's Republic. No small effort is being made to shake loose the socialist foundations of the Polish State. It will be recalled, in this connection, that the leaders of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty made die following statement:
"It was reiterated that socialist Poland, the Polish United Workers' Party and the Polish people can firmly count on the fraternal solidarity and support the Warsaw Treaty countries. The representatives of the Polish United Workers' Party stressed that Poland has been, is and will remain a socialist State, a firm link in the common family of the countries of socialism."
55.	The Republic of Cuba is coping with the tasks of socialist development and pursuing a policy of peace in difficult external conditions. The Soviet Union has invariably supported and will continue to support the Cuban people in their struggle to safeguard their sovereignty.
56.	Hostile, criminal intrigues against Cuba on the part of the United States, which have of late been stepped up, must cease. Washington does not like socialist Cuba, but it may well be asked whether the social system of the United States is to everybody's liking. No one has the right to tell the Cuban people how they should manage their internal affairs.
57.	In a bid to besmirch the socialist countries, their social system and their peaceful policies, all kinds of fabrications are being resorted to, and those who resort to them seem to be competing with one another as to who can come up with the most preposterous invention. Some even go so far as to predict an early sunset of socialism. 1 wonder how long it took them to find that word "sunset". These people seem to be endowed with a remarkable gift of inventiveness, but I must say that they do not seem to have a very good idea of the objective processes of historical development. Are they looking for the sunset in the right country? Is that where they should be looking? Are they not looking in the wrong direction?
58.	How many were the prophets who predicted the downfall of socialism, but what of it? Their prophesies have invariably fallen by the wayside, while history has continued inexorably to follow its course.
59.	The Soviet Union has never threatened and is not threatening anybody. Since the days of Lenin, peace and friendship among nations have been inscribed on the banner of the Soviet State, and we have invariably been true to this ideal. Today it is as dear to the people of our country as it was in Lenin's day.
60.	In examining and solving international problems we rely on the ideals of the freedom and progress of nations, on the principles of respect for the independence of all States and all peoples, and aim to consolidate the foundations of life rather than prepare the funeral of mankind.
61.	There exists, however, another trend in world politics, which has quite different goals. It is the course followed in the militarist circles of imperialist States. The sum and substance of that course is to seek domination over other countries and peoples, a domination that means imposing one's will upon them, their economic exploitation and the use of their territories for military strategic purposes. Washington is ever more frequently heard to speak about the American leadership of the world, though no one has entitled die United States to claim such leadership.
62.	The architects of that course see as the main instrument for achieving their objectives, the whipping up of international tensions and the use, as they put; it themselves, of methods of force in politics. Even when they occasionally recognize in words the possibility of a diplomatic alternative they hasten to make it clear that diplomacy, unless it relies on force, does not suit them.
63.	The most typical manifestations of that policy line are: a further whipping up of the arms race; an overt claim to military superiority over the Soviet Union; the setting up of a wide network of military bases and the stationing of American troops on foreign territories; the undermining of the basic principles of SovietAmerican relations worked out earlier as a result of tremendous effort; pressure on other States, particularly in Europe, to curtail their political, trade and economic ties with the socialist countries; and slanderous propaganda against countries adhering to the positions of peace and ejecting claims to world leadership by no matter whom.
64.	And what great pains are taken to drag the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] allies into following that policy. When arguments are lacking and there is a constant lack of them to support such a hopeless and dangerous course crude pressure is brought to bear, so as to give no respite to those who are not always eager to accept militaristic schemes alien to their interests.
65.	It is sometimes said that Washington's present policy does not rule out prospects for developing relations between the USSR and the United States. However, in the same breath it is immediately demanded that our country should change neither more nor less its conduct in international affairs to satisfy American interests. In other words, the Soviet Union must give up defending its legitimate interests, give up its foreign policy.
66.	To put forward such demands is to show a lack of seriousness. The Soviet Union will continue to pursue its course of Leninist peaceful policy. Our country does not intend to deviate from it. We do not encroach on the legitimate interests of others, but nor shall we forgo legitimate interests of our own, including commitments to our allies.
67.	It is to be hoped that Washington will yet be able to take a more sober view of the actual state of affairs, adopt a more realistic approach to international affairs and not overestimate its capabilities while underestimating the capabilities of others.
68.	In order to build policy on a realistic basis one should seek, not clashes and conflicts with other countries, even though those other countries have a different social system, but rather the settlement of controversial problems at the negotiating table.
69.	For our part, we reaffirm once again and the USSR delegation is authorized to say it from this rostrum that the Soviet Union has not sought, nor is it seeking, confrontation with the United States of America. We should like to have normal businesslike relations with the United States. As is known, we are in favor of a dialog in order to seek mutually acceptable solutions to controversial problems. But we are not begging for such a dialog, we are proposing it.
70.	At every session of the General Assembly many States emphasize, quite rightly, that the peoples are greatly endangered by the policy of crude interference in the internal affairs of other countries, support for bloodthirsty dictatorial regimes hated by their own peoples and an all out encouragement of oppressors and hatchet-men of every stripe, including the Pol Pot experts in genocide.
71.	The methods and forms employed in pursuing such a policy are varied. Recently, the United States has all but launched a crusade against international terrorism, leveling accusations against one country after another. These accusations, however, are misdirected. They are utterly false. Terrorism is looked for not where it should be sought and where it really is to be found.
72.	The scheme here is simple to tag the label of terrorism on the struggle of peoples against colonialism and its vestiges. In other words, it is the policy of oppression, cursed by peoples, which is pictured as a struggle against terrorism. At its basis lies unwillingness to take into account the rights of peoples to manage their domestic affairs as they see fit, and refusal to accept social changes occurring in the world.
73.	And surely, the events in El Salvador are a fitting illustration of the policy of imperialist interference in the affairs of other peoples. A real massacre has been committed there before the eyes of the whole world. Patriots defending the independence of their country, thousands of peaceful civilians are being killed. It is well known who is in charge there. And all this goes on at the very moment when we are all sitting in session here in the General Assembly Hall.
74.	What is happening in EI Salvador arouses the legitimate indignation of all honest people on earth. Regrettably, the United Nations has not, yet lifted a finger to assist in putting an end to these crimes against a whole nation.
75.	And how should one view the policy of shameless pressure exerted on Libya and, in particular, the recent armed provocation against that country? Or take the so called rapid deployment force. Apparently, its formation is regarded in Washington as a great invention. But there is nothing great in it. It is nothing but a policeman's club intended to ensure crude interference by the United States in the affairs of independent States and to stifle the freedom of peoples.
76.	At this world forum one cannot ignore either the concept of "American vital interests" cited in justification of such a policy. This concept is importunately repeated in almost every official statement by Washington on the subject of the international situation. It is interpreted in such a way as to enable the United States to declare any part of the world a sphere of its interests and to take any steps there, all the way up to the use of force.
77.	Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America, they are all there. It seems that the only area still missing is the South Pole, but it too may soon be added. Everything is there except the right of the United States to do all this. Neither the United States nor any other country has been granted the right to hold sway over the entire globe. This is nothing but arbitrariness.
78.	As is known, a whole United States naval armada has been assembled in the Persian Gulf. This action is directed against Iran, against the Soviet Union and against a number of independent countries of Asia and Africa. The United States Navy must leave this area. It has nothing to do there, nothing to defend. That would be a sensible act.
79.	Neither the size nor the power nor the resources of this or that State give it the right to impose by force or threat of force its will on other countries and arbitrarily to declare any part of the world as a sphere of its vital interests. If such a right were to be recognized for any country or group of countries, then, apparently, all instruments of international law should be destroyed. Indeed, little would be left then of the United Nations Charter itself.
80.	The ruling circles of a number of NATO countries now worship but one god an unrestrained arms race. Everything that serves this end is acceptable to them. This arms race is invariably accompanied by a torrent of speeches and permeated with militarist frenzy, including speeches by top level statesmen. Those who advocate inflated arms programs resort to any means imaginable. Deception is held in special esteem by them. They deceive one another, they deceive the people, they deceive their kin and strangers alike. They launch a rumor and the next day they quote it as the truth.
81.	The most salient element of deception is the myth of a "Soviet threat". It is repeated endlessly, to the point of stupefaction, day and night. In this manner it is easier to confuse people and extort money for armaments. In these conditions decisions are taken on a huge, increase in military expenditures such as history has never before known.
82.	The urge to expand their military presence wherever possible has now acquired the element of a real Bacchanalia, with half a million United States troops stationed in more than a dozen countries.
83.	Today the policy of the United States is beset by such an obsession, especially in setting up military bases near the borders of the Soviet Union and the areas adjacent to it. Of course, the States against which these bases are aimed have to take all this into account so as safely to protect their security.
84.	Who would believe that it is concern for peace that motivates the accelerated pace of the development of ever new types of weapons, including MX intercontinental ballistic missiles, Trident submarine-launched missiles, the new strategic bomber, various types of cruise missiles and many other things?
85.	What is the purpose of all this? The purpose is to try and upset the established strategic balance, obtain military supremacy and, on this basis, impose one's will upon others.
86.	The Soviet Union condemns this policy as adventurous. The whipping up of the arms race is madness. This has been repeatedly recognized by many political and public figures in the world, scientists and men of culture. Mankind must be saved from it. The present balance of military power is fully in line with the interests of peace and international stability.
87.	Our country has never sought, nor is it now seeking, military superiority. Those who make^ claims to the contrary should not be believed. Leonid Ilich Brezhnev has said this to the entire world many times, and, inter Alia, directly to American Presidents on various occasions. But we shall not permit others to become superior to us. We shall of course adequately meet any challenge so as to maintain the balance of power.
88.	However, the Soviet Union has not done, and is not doing, anything beyond what is absolutely necessary to ensure a peaceful life for its people and the security of its allies and friends. We believe that the ruling circles of NATO know all that. Yet, they do not want to admit that there is no Soviet threat whatsoever, nor do they want to give up practicing deception.
89.	Indeed, what would then be left of exhortations about the need for the notorious "additional armament of the West"? Nothing would remain. That is the reason why use is made of incomparable indicators and of .falsified data on strategic arms, on medium-range nuclear systems in Europe, on armed forces strength of the two sides in Central Europe or on any other aspect of the correlation of forces.
90.	If, by any chance, some NATO official happens to concede that the Soviet Union has really never overtaken the United States and that parity is still there, there immediately follows a tongue lashing from above. And then the record of "Soviet military superiority" is played again in order to support another increase in military appropriations and to substantiate some freshly baked militaristic doctrine.
91.	In some capitals such doctrines pop out as if rolling off the assembly line. Things may well reach the stage where any bureaucrat, especially if he is in the spotlight, will, once installed in an executive office, immediately come up with a strategic doctrine of his own concoction. Thus, quite recently, the world was presented with a "discovery" according to which nuclear war in general should not be feared too much, that it is "admissible" and "acceptable". This is a shameless deception designed to mislead the peoples and paralyze their will to struggle against the nuclear threat.
92.	If the arguments of the proponents of the militaristic policy course are left free of deliberate vagueness and intricacy, and of claims to originality, there remains only one thing, namely, the urge to intensify the arms race, in breadth and in depth, without any restraint.
93.	But have the authors of these militaristic doctrines asked 500 million Europeans, 470 million Africans, 360 million Latin Americans, 2.5 billion Asians and finally, their own people whether they want to perish in die flames of war? Certainly not. They just do not care.
94.	The instigators of the arms race would like to discard everything that hampers their plans. If to this end it is necessary to renege on the obligations already assumed, that is what they do. Thus, the United States refuses to ratify the SALT II Treaty.
95.	Negotiations had been under way for many years before the Treaty was finally agreed upon and signed. Now they say that this Treaty is not to the advantage of the United States and that it is inequitable. Of course, this is not true. The balance of interests of the sides was accurately established and preserved in the Treaty. This is known to anyone familiar with its contents. Therefore, that is not the point. The point is that it is this very principle of equality and equal security reflected in the Treaty which is not to someone's liking.
96.	Counting on people's ignorance, they seek to sap the Treaty by alleging that it does not envisage strategic weapons reductions. But this is not true either. The Treaty explicitly envisages such reductions, and on a substantial scale,
97.	It is also obvious that, once agreement has been leached on strategic arms limitation and the initial reduction of their levels, it is easier to solve the task of their more radical redaction so that the balance reflects a lower arms level.
98.	All that convincingly proves that the significance of the Treaty already agreed to and signed is as great today as at the time of its signing.
99.	How numerous were the cases when talks on the limitation of armaments were held both in the period between the two world wars and after the Second World War. Yet any unbiased person will undoubtedly admit that none of those talks produced results that could be compared even to a small extent to the SALT I agreement, which is in force, and especially to the SALT II Treaty, which has not become operative.
100.	Now a question arises: why smear both the treaty and the SALT process itself? Yet exceptionally reckless politicians are now saying that the entire problem is not urgent at all, at least not till the United States implements its most sweeping arms buildup plans.
101.	Just think of the absurdity of such a stand. The nation which claims to be the most powerful in military terms says "Let me first increase by so many times my armaments and then perhaps I shall talk about their limitation."
102.	What is the main factor in such a stand? Is it aggressive designs it) politics, greatPower expansionist ambitions, a striving to impose on the world monstrous plans for an ever greater stockpiling of weapons for the annihilation of people instead of manufacturing things of material goods, or a desire to have an inexhaustible source of excess profits for those who manufacture armaments? It is hard to say. Most likely it is a complex mixture of all these things.
103.	The United States decision to start the production of the neutron weapon aroused great indignation in the world. That decision is a new step towards intensifying the arms race, towards aggravating the world situation.
104.	The peoples clearly say that they strongly oppose the fiendish neutron weapon, rightly considering it to be a particularly inhuman type of mass-destruction weapon. The neutron weapon must be totally banned. A ban must be imposed on both its production and its use.
105.	Washington has long been making attempts to hold back or even to wreck the negotiations initiated earlier on a number of important problems. Unfortunately, quite a lot has already been done to that end. That was the case, for example, with the talks on the Indian Ocean, on limiting conventional arms transfers, on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests, and on the prohibition of the production of chemical weapons and the destruction of their stockpiles.
106.	It is also appropriate to mention here the current efforts to cast aside the results of many years of work by States within the framework of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
107.	Other developments in international life also have their impact on the world situation. Attention is attracted to the ever-increasing closeness between Washington and Peking.
108.	Who would object to the desire of two countries to have normal relations between them? Nobody would, of course. It is the basis on which this is done that matters. In this particular case the basis is openly hostile to many States, above all to the Soviet Union, and hostile to the cause of detente.
109.	It has been proclaimed to the world that the United States intends to sell weapons to China and to help it build up its military potential. And this is done at a time when Peking is pursuing a policy that runs counter to the interests of peace, a policy of hegemonism and aggression.
110.	The establishment of military cooperation between the United States and China with Japan, for reasons that no one knows, getting involved in it will be duly taken into account by the Soviet Union and, we believe, by other States.
111.	For its part, the Soviet Union has repeatedly expressed the conviction it was recently reiterated by Leonid Brezhnev from the rostrum of the Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union that the Chinese people's interests would best be served by a policy of peace. The Soviet Union would like to build its relations with the People's Republic of China on a good neighbor basis. We have repeatedly reaffirmed that our proposals for normalizing these relations remain valid.
112.	These are the main reasons, as we see them, for the recent exacerbation of the international situation.
113.	What is the conclusion that follows from all this? According to the ideologists of militarism, mankind is to expect a pitch-dark night, an endless spiraling arms race, further conflicts and clashes.
114.	The Soviet Union and, we are sure, many other countries hold different views as to the prospects for world developments. Pessimism and a feeling of doom are alien to our nature. We are convinced that to prevent war is not only necessary 'but also possible if this is actively fought for. Hand in hand with all States, our country is prepared to wage the struggle for curbing the arms race, removing the threat of war, settling outstanding problems. In this respect we are not politically allergic to any partner, irrespective of differences in social systems or ideologies.
115.	The immediate and most pressing task today is to struggle for easing world tensions, curbing the arms race, eliminating * threat of war.
/
116.	The Soviet Union proposes that the General Assembly, acting on behalf of all Member States of the United Nations, adopt a declaration solemnly proclaiming that States and statesmen who would be the first to use nuclear weapons would commit the gravest crime against humanity.
117.	There are and can be no grounds or motives, there are and can be no circumstances or situations which would give a State the right to be the first to use nuclear weapons. It would be a crime against all the peoples, against life itself on earth.
118.	It is likewise necessary to warn that there will never be any justification or pardon for statesmen who would make the decision on the first use of nuclear weapons. To proclaim this in a declaration so that these words be heard in every capital, in every part of the world, would be to remind statesmen who, by virtue of their official position, are involved in making decisions on the use of nuclear weapons, that each and every one of them is personally responsible for the destinies of mankind.
119.	We propose that the declaration further state loudly and clearly that any doctrines allowing for the first use of nuclear weapons are incompatible with human moral standards and the lofty ideals of the United Nations.
120.	It is also most important to draw the attention, especially of leaders of nuclear-weapon States, to the fact that their supreme duty is to act in such a way as to eliminate the risk of outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
121.	The declaration should stress that the nuclear-arms race must be stopped and reversed by joint effort, through negotiations conducted in good faith and cc the basis of equality. What is meant here is that the energy of the atom should be used not against life but for the sake of life, not for the production of weapons but for scientific progress, for improvement of the living standards of people, that is, exclusively for peaceful purposes.
122.	This is the essence of the political document that we are proposing for adoption. We hope that this proposal will meet with wide support.
123.	The adoption of such a document may become a major landmark on the path towards complete elimination of the threat of a nuclear conflict. No single country should stand aside from the solution of this problem.
124.	The Soviet Union is in favor of a dialog on all aspects of the problem of ending the arms race, on all controversial international issues, in favor of a bilateral or a multilateral dialog.
125.	From time to time statements are made which seem to express willingness to negotiate. However, attached to this willingness are all sorts of conditions, linkages and unequal approaches of all sorts. If someone really intends to negotiate in this vein, we must say outright: nothing will come of it. Negotiations can be successful only if they are conducted on the basis of Compliance with the principle of equality and equal security.
126.	The Soviet Union is prepared and has been prepared for a long time to resume negotiations with the United States on the limitation of strategic weapons.
Given mutual desire, headway in the solution of this problem can be made, relying on what has already been achieved and preserving the results achieved.
127.	The SovietAmerican negotiations on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe will apparently be resumed unless winds start blowing again in Washington in a different direction. Of course, the question of limiting medium-range nuclear weapons and those of corresponding forward-based nuclear systems of the United States should be examined and settled concurrently and in organic interrelation, with due account of all factors determining the strategic situation on the continent.
128.	Our country has proposed that the moment negotiations begin, a moratorium should be imposed on the deployment in Europe of new medium-range nuclear missile systems of NATO and the USSR. This proposal is based on the existing approximate parity of their respective armaments. The establishment of a moratorium would certainly exert a favorable influence on the climate of the negotiations.
129.	The Soviet Union is prepared to reach agreement on limiting and, what is more, on reducing medium-range nuclear systems in Europe. As Leonid Brezhnev stated at Berlin on 6 October 1979:
"We are prepared to reduce the number of medium range nuclear weapons deployed in western areas of the Soviet Union from their present level, but only, of course, in the event that no additional medium-range nuclear weapons are deployed in Western Europe."
130.	At the same time we must make it quite clear that should the other side artificially drag out the negotiations and start to deploy new medium-range nuclear weapons in Western Europe, the Soviet Union will have to take measures to restore the balance.
131.	For the purpose of strengthening peace in Europe, it is also important to break the deadlock at the Vienna negotiations on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. The socialist countries have done a good deal to ensure progress at the Vienna negotiations. Should the Western partners show a minimum of goodwill, a solution could be found.
132.	Of great significance is the question of convening a conference on military detente and disarmament in Europe. As is known, this question is under discussion in Madrid at the meeting of representatives of the States participants in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
133.	Wishing to contribute to success, the Soviet Union has gone far to accommodate the West and has declared its willingness to include the entire European part of its territory in the zone of confidence-building measures, provided, of course, the Western side makes a corresponding step in turn. What is required now is precisely such a step,
134.	Military detente on the European continent is intended to strengthen and complement political detente. But this does not depend on us alone.
135.	The Soviet Union is prepared to hold negotiations on all areas of limiting the arms race and of disarmament.
136.	Under current conditions, it is becoming increasingly important to prevent military competition from extending to outer space. Each day brings new evidence that outer space can become an arena of the arms race.
137.	At* the request of the Soviet Union, an item entitled "Conclusion of & treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space" has been included in the agenda of the present session [item 128], The Governments of all States represented here have had an opportunity of familiarizing themselves with the Soviet draft of that treaty. The draft takes into account all major aspects of the problem. We would like the exchange of views on the basis of the Soviet Union's proposal and its outcome to be constructive.
138.	With reference to the need to take measures for curbing the arms race and for disarmament, special note should also be made of the importance of efforts to resolve conflict situations in various parts of the world and to prevent the emergence of new hotbeds of tension. States are capable of coping with this problem provided they strive to ensure a more durable peace.
139.	The struggle of Arab peoples to defend their legitimate rights, trampled underfoot as a result of Israel's aggression, elicits understanding and support on the part of an overwhelming majority of countries. If justice has not so far been restored and the situation in the Middle East remains dangerous, it is because those in Israel's ruling circles persist in their expansionist policies and do not stop their brutal terror against the people of Lebanon, while influential forces outside that area actually encourage this policy and seek to follow the pattern of the anti Arab Camp David deal,
140.	Peace and stability in the Middle East can be assured only through a comprehensive political settlement which would not infringe on the rights of any country or people of that region. Such a settlement must envisage the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied in 1967 and the exercise of the national rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including the right to establish their own State.
141.	The Soviet Union consistently comes out in support of the Arabs' rights and stands for the elimination of the consequences of Israeli aggression. There is growing understanding that the path to a Middle East settlement lies through the convening of an international conference with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO].
142.	A political settlement is needed for the situation created around the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, against which an undeclared war is still being waged. The principal role in this is played by the United States, and Peking is not far behind.
143.	Unfortunately. Pakistan, whose territory serves as the main bridgehead for armed incursions, in effect avoids negotiations with the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. Yet, who else but Islamabad should be primarily interested in establishing lasting peace in the region?
144.	There has been some talk recently about the proposal by certain Western countries to convene an international conference on Afghanistan. But what is striking is that, while the conference is to be on Afghanistan, the main party concerned, the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, has been forgotten. This forgetfulness conceals the attempt to have the internal affairs of Afghanistan, a sovereign nonaligned State, examined in a forum composed of other States, without even the participation of the Afghan Government. Of course that approach is unacceptable.	. ,
145.	There is a basis for a political settlement; it is simple and, given goodwill, can be translated into reality. A constructive program to this effect was set forth in the statement by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan on 24 August of this year [see AI36/457].
146.	The political settlement must ensure the termination and non-resumption of armed or other interference in the affairs of Afghanistan. Such a settlement, including reliable international guarantees, would permit the establishment, by agreement between the Afghan and Soviet sides, of modalities and timing for the withdrawal of the limited contingent of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
147.	In SouthEast Asia, too, there is no other way but negotiations to reduce tensions in the area. We support the well-known proposals by Viet Nam, the Lao People's Democratic Republic and Kampuchea [see A/36/86, annex I, para. 4], including the proposal to hold a regional conference with the participation of the. countries of IndoChina and the States member's of the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations.
148.	However, no one should assume that the maneuvers under way around the nonexistent Kampuchean question can result in anything but harm. It is inadmissible that, under the cover of some pseudo-conferences, executioners overthrown by the people of Kampuchea or former princelings should be imposed once again on that people. They have already made their choice.
149.	Also doomed to failure are the attempts to cast a shadow upon the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which extended a helping hand to the Kampuchean people in their struggle for freedom and independence.
150.	Attention is drawn to the fraudulent allegation put forward in typical Washington wrappings that someone somewhere in SouthEast Asia used toxic chemical substances said to be of Soviet make. It is quite obvious that at work here are those who are themselves guilty of such crimes. Now they are trying to cover their traces.
151.	The situation in the Far East, too, offers possibilities for positive political action. One such could be an agreement on the application of confidence-building measures in the region. The implementation of such measures on a collective or a bilateral basis would make a useful contribution to the cause of detente in that region. The Soviet proposal on this question has been communicated to all the States concerned. We expect that in this regard they will display the required sense of responsibility.
152.	The Korean question still unsettled and thus an old source of tension in the Far East can and must be solved by peaceful means. In our opinion, a suitable basis for solving the problem is provided by the proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea presented by its President Kim II Sung at the Sixth Congress of the Workers' Party of Korea.
153.	Recently the Mongolian People's Republic has taken a timely initiative by proposing a convention on mutual nonaggression and renunciation of force in relations between the States of Asia and the Pacific [see A/36/388]. Our country supports that idea.
154.	The Republic of India is making a major contribution to maintaining stability and peace in Asia and ensuring international security. We value highly its peaceful constructive policy. SovietIndian relations, which rest on the solid basis provided by the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation, are in the interest of our two peoples and positively serve the interests of peace.
155.	Political means can also be effective in settling other dangerous situations and controversial problems, including the conflict between Iraq and Iran, the Cyprus problem, the situation in Western Sahara and that in the Horn of Africa. The indispensable requirement in this regard is that nobody be allowed to pit one State against another and to capitalize on conflicts between them. There should be no room for imperialist intrigues in those areas.
156.	As is well known, the South African racist regime and its accomplices are engaged in maneuvers aimed at thwarting the decolonization of Namibia. It is a matter of honor and is the immediate duty of the United Nations to help the people of Namibia gain their freedom. The racists and all those on whom they rely must realize that the time or colonialism is past.
157.	An end must be put to South Africa's aggressive gangster-like actions against the People's Republic of Angola and a number of other African countries. It is necessary to condemn those actions, to demand that South Africa cease its armed intervention and to adopt international sanctions against it. It is precisely this approach that has recently been manifested by the overwhelming majority of members of the Security Council in voting on a draft resolution submitted by Mexico and other countries.3 However, the United States has prevented the United Nations body from taking inappropriate decision, thus openly defying the African peoples and world public opinion.4
158.	The United States support for South Africa constitutes direct assistance to the aggressor. Such a course must be resolutely condemned. The United Nations should do everything that is needed to put an end to the aggression and call the aggressor to order. The resolution recently adopted by the General Assembly at its emergency special session on Namibia [resolution ES8/2] is a step in the right direction.
159.	The nonaligned movement, which has recently marked its twentieth anniversary, has become an important factor in world politics.* The Soviet Union expresses its solidarity with the anti-imperialist orientation of the nonaligned movement and supports its activities in the interest of strengthening peace.
160.	Much is now being said about the problem of relations between the industrialized and the developing
States. Various bodies, narrow and broad, of the North South type are being proposed. It is obvious, however, that nobody will produce positive results unless developed capitalist States radically change their approach to developing countries, cease discrimination in economic relations with them and renounce the economic plundering of those countries,
161.	Our country will continue to give developing States the necessary support in their struggle for economic independence and for the restructuring of international relations on a genuinely equitable and democratic basis.
162.	The activities of the United Nations cannot be assessed in terms of standard units of measurement. A formal one-dimensional assessment cannot be applied to them. There are, however, grounds for saying that the United Nations has done quite a lot to enable the peoples of the world to live with greater confidence in their future.
163.	Working actively with other socialist countries in all areas of international politics, the Soviet Union continues to make proposals aimed at strengthening peace.
164.	No problem, no matter what its magnitude, can or should overshadow the principal purpose for which the United Nations was created, that is, to preserve peace. It is the individual and collective duty of all States and the duty of every statesman to do for this purpose everything within the capability of human beings, of their intelligence, of their energy and of their dedication to life and its most noble ideals.
165.	It is clearer now than ever before how enormous are the challenges confronting the peoples to meet the rapidly growing needs in the fields of energy, food, health and education, to explore the oceans and outer space, to preserve nature. These problems can be solved provided mankind saves itself from war.
166.	Everything should be done to ensure that in the remaining two decades of the twentieth century people can live in conditions of peace and can cross the threshold of the third millennium of our era, not with fear for the future of our civilization, but with confidence in the boundless prospects for its development. All nations, large and small, that work towards this end will always find the Soviet Union at their side.The United Nations, this parliament of man, offers us a unique opportunity to examine the human condition. We are each called upon to declare our national purposes. We are all obligated to address those problems that obstruct the vision of the Charter.
158.	Let us begin with the vision. The Charter of the United Nations reflects cherished dreams of a world distinguished by peaceful change and the resolution of international disputes without resort to force.
159.	The United States believes in these dreams. They offer the best chance of justice and progress for all mankind. They promise a world hospitable to the values of our own society, including a certain idea of man as a creative and responsible individual, democracy and the rule of law.
160.	The ideals of the United Nations are therefore also American ideals. The Charter embodies American principles. It will always be a major objective of our statecraft to make the United Nations an instrument of peace.
161.	We all know that the realization of our dreams cannot depend on hope alone. Obstacles to progress must be overcome through united efforts. The threats to peace are many; suspicions persist; and the price of inaction is great. Truly we face a most difficult agenda.
162.	As 1 make these comments I am reminded that an observer once said of this annual debate: "Every year ... a great and sacred orator . . . preaches before the assembly of nations a solemn sermon on the text of the Charter". Today, however, 1 would like to focus instead on an issue of compelling interest: international development.
163.	International development reflects the worldwide search for economic progress, social justice and human dignity. Short of war itself, no other issue before us will affect more people, for good or ill, than this search. And peace itself cannot be truly secured if the aspirations of mankind to a better life are frustrated.
164.	Development is therefore an enduring issue. It has preoccupied the United Nations from the beginning. It will survive the agenda of this Assembly and every Assembly far into the future. And although great progress has been made we face today a crucial choice of strategy that will dramatically affect the prospects for future success.
165.	Since the Second World War the progress of development has been uneven but none the less widespread. Enormous economic growth has been registered: for example, in the last three decades average incomes have actually doubled. There have also been great advances in health. Life expectancy has increased dramatically even in the poorest countries and infant mortality has been reduced.
166.	This experience, however, has not been fully shared by all countries and the prospect for the future is now clouded by recent trends.
167.	The pattern of increasing economic growth, critical for development, has been slowed by inflation, high energy prices, severe balance of payments problems, heavy debt and slower growth of markets. Political turmoil and instability have diverted precious resources into arms and conflict. The necessary synthesis of traditional values and modernization, never easy to achieve, has grown more difficult under the impact of accelerating change.
168.	Let us dispense with illusions. We must choose today between two futures: a future of sustainable growth, an expansion of world trade and a reduction of poverty; and a future of economic stagnation, rising protectionism and the spread of poverty. As the World Bank has put it, "By the end of the century, the difference between the two cases amounts to some 220 million more absolutely poor people" .
169.	Clearly, our task is to give a fresh Impetus to development by devising a new strategy for growth. Such a strategy begins by recognizing the highly Complex and difficult situation we face.	'
170.	The poorest developing countries require longterm and generous concessional aid from developed and other developing countries to raise productivity through broadly based education and training, improvements in health and nutrition and better infrastructure. They also need sound economic policies, particularly in the agricultural sector. Ultimately, the objective must be to involve them in the international economic system, thereby strengthening opportunities and incentives for self-sustaining growth.
171.	The middle tier developing countries have made significant progress. Nevertheless, they still suffer from widespread poverty. They are also acutely vulnerable to any economic downturn, especially in volatile commodity markets, because of their narrow range of exports. These countries need foreign capital and assistance in developing the experience and creditworthiness to borrow on international capital markets. Technical support and manpower training are important to ensure that their populations are both productive and competitive. They also need an open international trading system to encourage export development.
172.	The more advanced of the developing countries are able to maintain living standards and economic performance comparable to what some of today's industrialized countries achieved less than a generation ago. Their further development is sustained best by a strong international economy with an open capital and trading system. They must be able to pursue national policies that take advantage of the international opportunities and foster domestic adjustment. These countries also play a key role in helping poorer nations, both directly and as policy models.
173.	The capital surplus oil exporting countries need a stable and prosperous international market for their oil exports and a favorable environment in which to invest their financial assets and to develop their domestic economies. The international system must continue to evolve to reflect the growing importance of these countries as they assume increasing responsibility for the management of that system and for assisting poorer nations.
174.	Finally, the industrialized countries are today suffering from low rates of growth and high rates of inflation. They are trying to increase savings and investment in order to create employment, improve the environment, eliminate pockets of poverty and adjust to the changing competitiveness of their exports. They must sell more abroad to pay for the increased cost of imported energy.
175.	In a slowly growing world these complex and diverse requirements would become potent sources of conflict. But the struggle for the world product can be avoided. The international economy can help all countries to achieve their objectives through a strategy of growth which creates the resources and the employment needed for progress. This cannot be the task of a single nation. As die report of the Independent Commission on International Development Issues, chaired by Willy Brandt, has pointed out: "Above all, the achievement of economic growth in one country depends increasingly on the performance of others".4
176.	It is on this view of a differentiated and interdependent world that we must build a new strategy for growth; but our strategy must also be informed by the lessons of the past. Such lessons, extracted from hard experience, offer the basis for principles to guide us through these austere and difficult times.
177.	First, development is facilitated by an open international trading system. Developed and developing countries together face the challenge of strengthening GATT and the international trading system to create mutual export opportunities for all.
178.	Today the trading system is under enormous stressrising protectionist pressures, new and subtle types of import barriers, restrictive bilateral arrangements, export subsidies and investment policies which distort trade. These are especially troublesome in a period of slow growth. Unless they are reduced or eliminated the international trading system will be seriously weakened. Such a setback to the world economy would inflict the most suffering on the developing countries.
179.	The industrialized countries have a special responsibility to work for a more open trading system with improved rules. We also look to the more successful developing countries to play a fuller role in strengthening the trading system. It will be difficult for each of our countries individually to open markets further unless we are committed to doing so collectively.
180.	For our part, the United States has long supported open markets. Despite current complications, America remains a strong advocate of free trade. Although our gross national product is only one third of the Western industrialized group's total, the United States imports roughly one half of all manufactured goods exported by developing countries. Earnings of developing countries not members of OPEC from exports to the United States amount to some $60 billion more than double the foreign aid coming from all Western developed countries.
181.	We call upon all members of the international community to join in resisting the growth of protectionism. Developing nations must have the greatest possible opportunity to sell their commodities and manufactured products. Let us also work together to achieve a successful conclusion of the multi-fibre agreement.
182.	A dynamic and successful trading system requires a smoothly functioning international financial system. We must therefore continue to work with other countries to encourage their support for IMF and their constructive participation in the Bind's programs to facilitate adjustment. We will continue to cooperate with our developing country colleagues to strengthen the Fund. We share the view that the responsibilities of the developing countries should be increased to keep pace with their growing economic importance.
183.	Secondly, foreign assistance coupled with sound domestic policy and self-help can facilitate the development process. The United States has long believed in assistance as an effective tool in helping to promote development. Over the last three decades the United States has given more than $130 billion in concessional assistance; over the last decade alone the total has exceeded $50 billion; In 1980 the American people provided $7.1 billion, almost twice as much as any other donor.
184.	The United States has also been a major force in the creation and support of the multilateral development banks. The banks represent an important and to many countries an essential feature in the international financial system. In the last five years the United States has authorized and appropriated an average of $1.5 billion per year for support of the multilateral banks. There is no question about their value as development institutions. As intermediaries they help to mobilize the resources of international capital markets to lend to developing countries. The banks' loans for key projects are important catalysts for productive domestic and foreign private investment.
185.	We recognize that many of the poorer developing countries must continue to rely heavily on concessional assistance for some time to come. Moreover, certain kinds of vital development programs will not pay the quick and direct financial returns needed to attract private capital. For this reason a continuing bilateral assistance program and continuing support for the multilateral banks will be essential.
186.	Given today's economic conditions and the limitation on aid budgets in many countries, it is especially important that concessional assistance be utilized as effectively as possible; that it focus on countries which need it most and which use it best; and that it be a more effective catalyst for mobilizing other foreign and domestic resources. We must also recognize that a strategy for growth that depends on a massive increase in the transfer of resources from the developed to the developing countries is simply unrealistic. *
187.	Thirdly, regional cooperation and bilateral consultations can be effective in promoting development. The United States is working with other regional States to promote economic progress in the Caribbean area. We are convinced that the example of the recent multinational cooperation in the case of Jamaica and the broader Caribbean Basin initiative holds promise for other regions.
188.	We are already committed to a close working relationship with the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations [ASEAN]. We have benefited considerably from a better understanding of ASEAN's views on multilateral issues and on ways to strengthen our bilateral commercial ties. The United StatesASEAN Business Council is a model of how our private sectors can work together for mutual benefit.
189.	In Africa we look forward to a close working relationship with the Economic Community of West African States as it attempts to strengthen economic ties within the region. Constructive consultations on trade and investment issues have already occurred. We believe that mutually beneficial cooperation can be strengthened to our common benefit. Similar consultations with the developing countries of southern Africa are desirable. We have a strong interest in the economic health and stability of those nations. Commercial relationships, along with foreign assistance, will help us to attain that objective.
190.	The United States has also worked with the capital surplus members of OPEC on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis. We have been able to combine resources to attack development problems of common interest, such as food production. This cooperation should be continued and expanded.
191.	Finally, we plan to make bilateral consultative groups between our Government and those of developing countries more effective and to give full support to similar private sector arrangements. The United States Chamber of Commerce and its counterparts in many developing countries have developed particularly good relationships. We fully support these efforts and those of the private voluntary agencies. We are searching for means to work more closely with them.
192.	In all of these cases the United States recognizes the need to be sensitive to the diverse character of the societies involved and to the international circumstances in which development must occur.
193.	Fourthly, growth for development is best achieved through reliance on incentives for individual economic performance. The individual is the beginning, the key element and the ultimate beneficiary of the development process. The greatest potential for development lies in the hard work and ingenuity of the farmer, the worker and the entrepreneur. They need incentives to produce and the opportunity to benefit from their labors.
194.	Suppression of economic incentives ultimately suppresses enthusiasm and invention, and the denial of personal freedom can be as great an obstacle to productivity as the denial of reward for achievement.
195.	History cautions against regimes that regiment their people in the name of ideals, yet fail to achieve either economic or social progress. Those Governments that have been more solicitous of the liberties of their people have also been more successful in securing both freedom and prosperity.
196.	The United States can offer what it knows best from its own experience. We have seen that policies which encourage private initiatives will promote better resource allocation and more rapid economic growth. Within a framework basically hospitable to market incentives, foreign private investment can supplement indigenous investment and contribute significantly to development.
197.	But our goal is not to impose either our economic values or our judgments on anyone. In the final analysis, each country's path to development will be shaped by its own history, philosophy and interests.
198.	Fifthly, development requires a certain measure of security and political stability. Political insecurity is a major barrier to development. Fear and uncertainty stifle the productivity of the individual. Scarce resources are squandered in conflict.
199.	The close relationship between security and development cannot be ignored. We are therefore committed to maintain and, where possible, to increase programs essential to deter international aggression and to provide the domestic security necessary to carry out sound economic programs. We have no intention of providing foreign assistance, moral comfort or the prestige of international platforms to countries that foster international violence.
200.	The United Nations has a key role to play in resolving conflict and promoting international stability. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral's efforts to promote inter communal talks and a just settlement on Cyprus. We support a continuing role by the SecretaryGeneral's representative in the IranIraq conflict And South Korea's attempts to initiate a dialog with the North epitomize the search for a peaceful settlement that is at the heart of the Charter.
201.	One of the greatest dangers to the Charter today and to development itself is the willful violation of the national integrity of both Afghanistan and Cambodia by the Soviet Union and Viet Nam. Their behavior challenges the basic rights of all sovereign States. The world's hopes for peace, for security and for development will be jeopardized if "might makes right" becomes the law of nations.
202.	The United States will continue to support security and stability as essential to progress. This is the basis of our active and continuing efforts to strengthen and expand the ceasefire in southern Lebanon. We shall also assist the negotiations specified by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) in order to bring a just and lasting peace to the Middle East. Our policy is to remain a credible and reliable party in the negotiations to bring independence to Namibia on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and in a fashion acceptable to both the nations concerned and the international community.
203.	The United States also believes that efforts to control arms either among regional States or between superPowers can make an important contribution to the security that facilitates development. But these efforts do not occur in a vacuum. The international community has tended over the years to overestimate the beneficial effects of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] in dampening regional conflict. We have also tended to underestimate the impact of such conflict on the negotiations themselves.
204.	The United States is strongly committed to balanced and verifiable arms control. We are equally committed to the peaceful resolution of regional disputes. Clearly the restraint implied by arms control must become a more widespread phenomenon if such agreements are to survive and to make their proper contribution to a more secure environment for development.
205.	The United States is confident that a strategy for growth guided by these principles can succeed. We believe that three areas of action deserve immediate international attention.
206.	The first is a global expansion of trade. Plans could be formulated for the 1982 GATT ministerial meeting with special concerns of growth in mind. A major priority should be to integrate more fully the developing countries into the international trading system on the basis
of shared responsibilities and shared benefits.
207.	The second area is an increase in investment. Our common objective should be to stimulate domestic and international private investment. We must encourage and support the individual investor.
208.	The third is stronger international cooperation in food and in energy. The recent United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy recommended that the developing countries be assisted in assessing their energy resources and determining the best way to exploit them.3 The United Nations Development program and the World Bank have important follow-up responsibilities. We must all work to engage more effectively private participation in exploration and production in oil importing developing nations.
209.	Domestic and international action must also go hand in hand to achieve food security. The United States continues to be the largest donor of food aid and places a paramount emphasis on its bilateral program to help developing countries increase food production. Greater attention should also be given to scientific and technological research that will yield more bountiful food supplies.
210.	I have outlined today the broad principles that guide America's approach to a new strategy for growth. In the immediate future, and prior to the Cancun meeting, we will announce specific proposals to deal with this and other issues of development.
211.	These broad principles reflect our view that the United States can and indeed will continue to make an essential contribution to the process of development. We do not claim to have all the answers, but we believe that our collective responsibilities for the future allow no more time to be lost in sterile debate and unrealistic demands. The time has come for a reasoned dialog with promise for the future,
212.	The search for economic progress, social justice and human dignity has been supported by the American people, themselves an example of successful development. Our initiatives and resources, through bilateral programs, the United Nations and other multilateral agencies, have made major contributions to the process of modernization throughout the world. For the United States, support of development constitutes a practical imperative.
213.	At the Ottawa meeting the United States reaffirmed its willingness to join its partners in exploring all avenues of consultation and cooperation with developing countries. In October President Reagan will go to the meeting in Cancun. He looks forward to a genuine and open exchange of views on questions of economic development and international cooperation. That meeting offers a novel opportunity to gain fresh understandings of the problems we face together. The United States will join in a constructive and cooperative spirit. Our objective is to bring about a new era of growth. But the purpose of both growth and development goes beyond simple materialism. As Winston Churchill said: "Human beings and human societies are not structures that are built, or machines that are forged. They are plants that grow and must be treated as such".
214.	Despite the difficulties of the moment, we should go forward in a spirit of optimism. We have the vision bequeathed to us by this Charter. We have the potential of all the peoples represented in this Hall. Let us go forward together to achieve a new era of growth for all mankind.
Allow me, first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of this session of the General Assembly. I should also like to take this opportunity to express warm congratulations to the people of Belize, who have attained independence after a long period of efforts, and to extend a cordial welcome to the Republic of Vanuatu, which has been admitted to membership in the United Nations.
127.	In the past year, the people of various countries have waged effective struggles against imperialism, hegemonism, colonialism and racism and have increased their mutual support and assistance, thus contributing significantly to the maintenance of world peace. However, the world is still fraught with tension and turbulence. While old issues remain unsettled, new problems keep cropping up. Outrageous violations of the norms of international relations have not been stopped and the third world countries have been the major victims. The world is still faced with the danger of war.
128.	We cannot ignore the fact that the Soviet Union is trying hard to consolidate and increase its military strength and is stepping up its global deployment for war. On the one hand, it continues to occupy foreign territories and massacre the local inhabitants by the use of force and to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries by the threat of force. On the other hand, it has been paving the way for further expansions by carrying out political and economic infiltrations and stirring up troubles wherever possible. AN this shows that the Soviet Union has not given up its bid for world hegemony and that the corollary strategy of a southward drive remains unchanged.
129.	However, because of repeated setbacks and its own vulnerabilities, the Soviet Union, while adhering to a policy of aggression and expansion, has increasingly resorted to political tricks. It has launched a new peace offensive by putting forward so-called proposals regarding disarmament, political solutions and so on in order to confuse public opinion, to^ disguise its own hegemonism and to deceive or lull the people of the world. In these circumstances, it would be contrary to the objective realities of the international scene to suggest that the Soviet Union is harmless and on the defensive or that its deep predicament is forcing it to consider a retreat. Aggression and expansion by Soviet hegemonism continue to be the major threat to world peace. Hence, the struggle against hegemonism remains the primary task for the maintenance of world peace.
130.	The events in Afghanistan and Kampuchea major instances  which threaten the peace and security of the world and grossly violate the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations.
131.	The Soviet armed invasion of Afghanistan and the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea with Soviet support are both aimed at totally subjugating and occupying a neighboring country by force. If such lawlessness is not firmly stored, but instead accepted as a fait accompli, it will only  the appetite of the aggressors and convince them the they can go on practicing the law of the jungle unimpeded In that case, what would be left of justice and the code of conduct for the international community? How, then, can there be any security for the States Members of the United Nations, particularly the weaker third world countries?
132.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and its support for the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea are not only aimed at subjugating the two countries, but also at using them as springboards for further expansion, so as to close the ring around the oil-rich region of the Middle East, push towards the Strait of Malacca and increase the threat to the surrounding countries and to the peace and security of the rest of the world. Many mo. countries will corns to grief if the aggression against Afghanistan and Kampuchea is not checked and if the Soviet Union is allowed to press forward with its strategy of a southward drive.
133.	Meanwhile, as the Soviet Union is going ahead steadily with its global strategic deployment, the risk of war will increase. Only by firmly putting an end to the aggression against Afghanistan and Kampuchea will it be possible to salvage the independence of these two nations, and to blunt or check the momentum of the Soviet Union's southward drive, curb its expansion in other parts of the world and upset its global strategic plan. The heroic struggles in the past three years of the Kampuchean people under the leadership of the Government of democratic Kampuchea and the widespread resistance movement of the Afghan people have made brilliant contributions not only to the defense of their own independence and sovereignty but also to the maintenance of world peace and the security of all countries.
134.	It is obvious that Afghanistan and Kampuchea are die priority issues in the overall world situation and that a fair and reasonable settlement can only be achieved by waging unremitting struggles. We trust that all justice upholding and peace-loving countries and peoples will continue to be deeply concerned with these issues and will strengthen their fighting will in view of the protracted nature of the struggle.
135.	It is understandable that quite a few countries have called for a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues. But the question is: on what principles should the political settlement be based? The resolutions on Afghanistan and Kampuchea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, the declarations adopted by the Third Islamic Conference, held last January, by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non Aligned Countries, held last February, and by the International Conference on Kampuchea, last July, have all stressed that all foreign troops should be withdrawn from both countries and that any settlement of these issues must be based on the principles of respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all States and the right of all peoples to determine their own destiny free from any foreign interference.
136.	China is in favor of such a political settlement and is ready to work with other Member States towards this end. However, the withdrawal of all foreign troops is the primary condition for any political settlement. The Soviet Union and Viet Nam backed by the Soviet Union adamantly refuse to leave Afghanistan and Kampuchea, respectively. This is the basic reason why the Afghan and Kampuchean issues have remained unresolved till now. Under these circumstances, the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples are bound to carry on their sacred war in defense of their own countries. Lately, the patriotic forces of both countries have been closing their ranks in order to fight more effectively against the aggressors. For its part, the international community is duty bound to continue to support and assist in various ways the just struggles of the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples.
137.	Only when the aggressors have suffered heavier and heavier blows on the battlefield and have been subjected to mounting pressure from the international community will they be forced to consider pulling out their troops. Therefore, to increase the pressure on die aggressors from all sides is precisely the way towards creating conditions for a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues. Conversely, any attempt to weaken or break up the armed struggle against aggression or to strike a deal at the expense of the victimized peoples in exchange for concessions from the aggressors would only embolden the hegemonists and hurt the chance of a genuine settlement.
138.	The recent proposals offered by the Soviet Union and Viet Nam for settling the Afghan and Kampuchean questions are all based on the acceptance of the fait accompli created by their armed aggression. A compromise on such a basis' would be tantamount to accepting a new Munich agreement by allowing the aggressors to gain easily at the negotiating table what they have failed to get on the battlefield. That is obviously impermissible. The
Chinese Government maintains that all foreign troops must be withdrawn from Afghanistan and Kampuchea immediately and unconditionally, that these two countries must be restored to their independent and nonaligned status, and that the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples must be free to choose their own political systems and governments.
139.	TJie Chinese Government reiterates its position that following the settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions in accordance with the aforementioned principles, the countries concerned should join in an international guarantee that there shall be no interference whatsoever in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and Kampuchea and that their territory shall not be occupied or used for encroachment on the independence and sovereignty of other countries in either region. We hope that the General Assembly will adhere to the principles set forth in the resolutions adopted at its previous sessions and make renewed efforts towards a settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues.
140.	In the past year the situation in the Middle East, rather than improving, has become more tense. Israel is still clinging obstinately to an expansionist position. It has not only continued to obstruct a reasonable settlement of the Middle East question, but has become more reckless by committing fresh atrocities against the Arab countries and peoples in violation of the Charter and the norms of international relations. It flagrantly raided Iraq's nuclear reactor, repeatedly invaded Lebanon and frequently bombed Palestinian refugee camps in open defiance of the relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations. Israel's lawlessness is intolerable and must be stopped. The Chinese Government and people sternly condemn these Israeli acts of aggression and firmly support the just struggles of the Arab people. We maintain that Israel must withdraw from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem; that the Palestinian people must regain their national rights, including the right to return to their homeland and the right to self-determination and establishment of a state; that the PLO, as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, is entitled to participate on an equal footing in a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question; and that all countries in the Middle East have the right to independence and existence. We are pleased to note that many Arab countries, the European Community and others, have been making positive efforts to bring about a settlement of the Middle East question. Our attitude is that we welcome all initiatives that are conducive to a comprehensive and just settlement of the Middle East question and to peace and stability in the region.
141.	In southern Africa, the white racist regime is becoming more and more unbridled in trampling upon the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations. Not only does it continue to occupy Namibia illegally in defiance of United Nations resolutions and to strengthen the system of apartheid in South Africa, but it has launched repeated armed attacks against the front line States. Not long ago it even carried out a large-scale invasion of Angola. These outrages constitute a flagrant provocation to the African people and to the people of the entire world. In our view, Namibia should attain genuine national independence immediately on the basis of territorial integrity and national unity and in conformity with the aspirations of the Namibian people and the relevant United" Nations resolutions; the system of apartheid in South Africa must be completely abolished; and the international community should apply, without reservation, comprehensive sanctions against South Africa. We firmly support the solemn resolution adopted at the emergency special session on the question of Namibia [iES8/2]. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) must be fully implemented without further delay.
142.	The Middle East and southern Africa are two important regions rich in strategic resources. The Soviet Union has always regarded them as important targets for its aggression and expansion. Masquerading as a supporter of national liberation movements, it has long since infiltrated these regions in an attempt to expand its influence there. The crimes committed by Israel and South Africa have not only brought untold sufferings to the countries and peoples of those regions, but have also provided the hegemonists with more opportunities and pretexts for infiltration, thereby posing a greater threat to peace in the Middle East, southern Africa and the rest of the world.
143.	It must be pointed out that the arrogance and defiance of Israel and South Africa are attributable, in large measure, to United Stales support and protection. The United States has repeatedly expressed its willingness to improve its relations with the third-world countries and to join them in safeguarding world peace. But what is the sense of expressing such sentiments when Israel and South Africa are being condoned and given support instead of being denounced for their flagrant breaches of die norms of international relations? This only antagonizes the hundreds of millions of Arab and African peoples and a large number of third-world countries.
144.	The situation in the Caribbean region merits our attention. The peoples in some of the countries there have long been subjected to imperialist and colonialist exploitation and oppression and unbearable domestic, political and economic conditions. It is their inalienable right to uphold their national independence and State sovereignty, develop their national economy and carry out democratic reforms. This should be recognized in the first place. On the other hand, it must be noted that another superPower and its proxies have been meddling in the internal affairs of those countries and trying hard to infiltrate the region under the guise of supporting the progressive movements. In our opinion, the people of the region should be left alone to solve their own problems. We are opposed to all outside interferences no matter where they come from.
145.	The situation in NorthEast Asia is also not tranquil. The United States has thus far failed to withdraw its troops from South Korea. The peaceful reunification of Korea continues to meet with obstructions from the authorities in South Korea. In October 1980, President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea put forward a new formula for the establishment of a Democratic Confederal Republic of Koryo, which would incorporate both North and South Korea. This reflects die fervent hope of the broad masses of the Korean people for the reunification of their fatherland and provides a practical way for its realization. We maintain that resolution 3390 ft (XXX) on the question of Korea, sponsored by 43 countries and adopted by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session, should be implemented expeditiously so as to create. favorable conditions for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea.
145. Over the past year, the world has not only witnessed a series of major political events, but has also been faced with serious economic problems. The economic conditions of many developing countries have further deteriorated and the economic contradictions between the North and South have become more acute. Faced with worsening terms of trade, the developing countries are plagued with greater deficits in their international balance of payments and heavier burdens of foreign debts. They basically remain powerless in international economic relations. Certain developed countries are clinging to the old international economic order and trying to shift the consequences of the economic crises onto others, thus creating greater obstacles for the developing countries to build independent economies and making it more difficult for them to achieve the objectives of their, development strategies.
147.	The efforts of the developing countries to achieve economic independence after winning political independence represent an irresistible trend of our time. The major developed countries, however, refuse to go along with this trend by changing their unequal and unfair relationship with the developing countries. This is the root cause for the ever sharpening economic contradictions between the North and South.
148.	The economies of nations are closely interrelated. The developed countries are increasingly dependent on the developing countries for their economic growth. From the longterm point of view, the prolonged impoverishment of the latter will not be in the economic interests of the former. A number of developed countries have come to realize that their own economic "stagflation" may be alleviated as a result of the economic growth of the developing countries. We are of the view that the principle of equality and mutual benefit, which is the norm of international relations, should also apply to the economic field.
149.	Moreover, one must not lose sight of the fact that the economic difficulties of the developing countries and the resultant domestic political turmoil, as well as the worsening NorthSouth contradictions, will provide the hegemonists with opportunities to stir up troubles. To support the developing countries in building their independent economies and to promote appropriate reforms in the international economic order so as to establish step by step a new international economic order is therefore not a purely economic matter but a vital political question that affects the maintenance of world peace and stability.
150.	It is pure hope that the major developed countries, proceeding from the overall situation of the world, will give serious consideration to the legitimate desires and demands of the developing countries, promptly come to an agreement at the current session or at the forthcoming Cancun summit to launch the global negotiations, and take practical and feasible measures to meet the urgent needs of the developing countries and improve North South relations.
151.	The political and economic situation of the world today is grim indeed. The maintenance of peace is the common aspiration of the people of the world. However, We have to struggle for peace; we cannot beg for it. To
defend world peace it is imperative to oppose hegemonism. To this end, the peoples of all countries should unite and coordinate their actions, taking into account their respective situations. In order to achieve greater unity against hegemonism it is necessary for all parties to respect each other's sovereign rights and interests and to treat each other as equals. On the eve of the Second , World War certain countries failed to discern in time the source of the threat and failed to unite effectively to oppose it. The people of the world ended up paying a heavy price and the world learned a bitter lesson.
152: China has consistently pursued a foreign policy of peace. Having suffered enormously from foreign aggressions and wars in the past, the Chinese people know only too well how precious peace is. Today, as the Chinese people are engaged in building China into a modernized socialist country, they need all the more a lasting peaceful international environment. However; in pursuing the policy of safeguarding world peace and opposing hegemonism, China is motivated not simply by its own interests, but also takes into account the interests of the people of the whole world.
153.	China is a developing socialist country; it belongs and will always belong to the third world. China is ready to work together with other third-world countries as well as all countries that uphold justice and love peace and to contribute all it can to the defense of the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations and to the cause of opposing hegemonism and maintaining world peace.
53.The English version of his statement was supplied by the delegation. *Mr. President, I should like, first of all, to take this opportunity to convey to you the congratulations of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to this high office. We see in you a man of distinction who, in his long and active involvement in the work of the United Nations, has shown exceptional qualities. We see in you the representative of one of the leading members of the non aligned movement, a country with which we have had good, longstanding relations.
54.	I should also like to express my country's gratitude to the President of the thirty-fifth session of the General As sembly, Mr. Riidiger von Wechmar. He discharged the du ties of his office with a sense of awareness of the new reality of global interdependence. In so doing he was able to count on the full approval and support of the Federal Republic of Germany.
55.	At the same, time, I wish to thank the Secretary General for his dedicated work over the past 12 months on behalf of the Organization, and thus also on behalf of peace.
56.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany, I extend a warm welcome to Vanuatu as a new Member of the United Nations.
57.	For a decade now, the world economy has been in a critical phase of readjustment: inflation, recession and unemployment in the industrialized countries, but, above all, stagnating indeed, declining per capita incomes in many developing countries. The want and distress of the poor in the third world are increasing. At the same time, the world population continues to grow rapidly: over the next 20 years it will increase from 4.5 billion to approximately 6.5 billion people. This means that food, clothing and housing, schools and jobs have to be provided for 2 billion people. That is equivalent to the population of 2,000 completely new cities, each with 1 million inhabitants. This shows that mankind as a whole is faced with great and global challenges.
58.	Yet and this is the disturbing part of it is not these problems that are the focal point of world politics and of world interests: the headlines of the international press tell us, rather, about an arms race and tensions between nations, about war, civil war and intervention. At a time when global interdependence and global cooperation have become a question of survival, the human race is in danger of once again pitting its strength against itself.
59.	Now, at a time when we ought to be concentrating our material as weK as our intellectual resources on the task of bringing the world economy out of its structural crisis, on development in the third world and on preserving the conditions of life on our planet, $500 billion is being wasted on arms. But our children and grandchildren will judge us solely by whether we have succeeded in setting me world on the road to peace, development and survival, or whether we have declined into confrontation, an arms race and, ultimately, catastrophe.
60.	We can preserve world peace and master the great challenges to mankind only if all countries act in accordance with principles that are commensurate with the provisions and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. This calls for renunciation of force, that is to say, renunciation of the use and threat of use of force, since conflicts must be settled by peaceful means; for no aspiration to domination over others, no interference in the internal affairs of other coun tries and respect for the right of self determination of all nations; for responsible action with an awareness of global interdependence, using moderation and restraint in pursuing one's own interests; for readiness for dialogue, negotiation and cooperation; for no aspiration to superiority, but rather a desire for balance at the lowest possible level of arma ments, adhering to an active policy of preserving peace through cooperation on issues of international security and, in particular, of arms control and disarmament; and, finally, for elimination of the NorthSouth confrontation as part of a policy of worldwide partnership and the safeguarding of peace.
61.	In the search for a solution to these global problems, very great importance attaches to the development of East West relations. At the beginning of the 1970s we all hoped that the efforts increasingly to reduce the differences between East and West and to expand cooperation would prove successful, and considerable progress in the development of East-West relations was indeed achieved in the first half of that decade. But of late the East-West confrontation has intensified yet again. It threatens to push the North South dialog to the periphery of world affairs once more. Indeed, the East-West confrontation threatens to spread to the South.
62.	That must not be allowed to happen. East and West must do everything possible to pull themselves back onto a course leading to stability in their relations and to cooperation. On no account must East and West allow the third world to become a theater for the continuation of their conflict. The countries of the South have problems enough and should not also be made the scene of the contest be tween East and West.
63.	Negotiations on arms control and disarmament with the aim of establishing a balance at the lowest possible level are more urgent than ever. There must not be another arms race.
64.	In the 1970s the Soviet Union made extraordinary efforts in all fields of armaments. They were not matched by comparable efforts on the part of the West; quite the contrary.
65.	The West has noted with great concern how the Soviet Union has not only increased its superiority as regards conventional forces but has at the same time stepped up its medium-range nuclear weapons and given them new quality, in particular with the SS20 missile and the "Backfire" bomber. Our concern about these developments can only be dispelled if the current and proposed East-West negotiations are successful. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will contribute all it possibly can to the achievement of that aim.
66.	We hope that the meeting between Secretary of State Haig and Foreign Minister Gromyko will mark the beginning of a new, constructive phase in the dialog between the United States and the Soviet Union, which is of such importance for the whole world. The importance and weight of the United States and the Soviet Union give both countries a special responsibility for world peace. Dialog, negotiation and cooperation between East and West must 'be intensified and further developed. This also includes the continuation of the SALT process.
67.	We also hope that the meeting between the United States Secretary of State and the Soviet Foreign Minister will above all give a signal for the start of negotiations on medium-range nuclear weapons. We have advocated such negotiations for quite some time. We have been involved in the preparations for them with our allies, and we will continue to follow them in the future. We want medium-range nuclear missiles on both sides to be limited to equal ceilings at the lowest possible level, and the more the Soviet Union reduces its arms buildup, the lower that level can be. If that arms buildup is eliminated altogether, there will no longer be any need for the West to deploy medium-range weapons as envisaged.
68.	The Government and people of the Federal Republic of Germany long for nothing more dearly than a result of that kind, which to us would be the ideal result. But it is not only a question of nuclear weapons. In the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe, we are resolutely pursuing the aim of achieving a balance of forces in central Europe by means of mutual reductions, in order to improve military stability and to rid the peoples of central Europe of the fear of possible surprise attack.
69.	As a result of the Madrid review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, we want a conference or disarmament in Europe as a forum for agreement on concrete confidence building measures for the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals.
70.	It is not only East and West that have to tackle the task of arms control and disarmament. That task is universal and applies to all regions and to all countries.
71.	The United Nations already proclaimed the 1970s the United Nations Disarmament Decade, but we are all pain fully conscious of the scant success of our efforts to stop the worldwide arms spiral.
72.	My country has put forward as its contribution to the General Assembly's second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held in 1982, a draft comprehensive pro gramme or disarmament.4 Its purpose is to facilitate world wide disarmament negotiations, to describe the conceptual framework for such negotiations, to define the criteria and principles, and thus to carry out important preparatory work for concrete negotiations and results.
73.	1 wish to mention four principles in particular: balance, openness, verifiability and confidence building.
74.	Disarmament negotiations can only prove successful if they enhance the security of all concerned. Whoever seeks one sided "advantages in disarmament negotiations or tries to hold on to those already gained will create a deadlock. The aim must be balance at the lowest possible level. Superiority of one side causes instability and this in turn poses a threat to peace. Balance and parity constitute the recognized central principle of the SALT negotiations.
75.	But that principle must not be restricted to the SALT process. In their joint declaration of 6 May 1978, General Secretary Brezhnev and Federal Chancellor Schmidt said that "both sides deem it important that no one should seek military superiority and that they proceed on the assumption that approximate equality and parity suffice to safeguard defense".
76.	It is now necessary to ensure that in the disarmament negotiations between East and West this principle is translated into practical, concrete policies.
77.	Disarmament presupposes transparency of the force relationship. Each side must openly give information about its own force strengths and armaments. Anyone trying to evade this is sowing the seeds of mistrust and casting doubt upon his intentions. The United Nations has elaborated a standardized reporting system with a view to making military budgets comparable. My country, like some other Western and nonaligned countries, has submitted a report on its defense budget in line with that system. All other countries should follow that example.
78.	I repeat my proposal that the United Nations should set up two registers: first, one which records how much each industrial country spends per capita on armaments and how much it spends on development assistance; and secondly, another register which lists worldwide exports and imports of weapons. This would be an important first step. The international community cannot look on indifferently as military spending in East and West and in the third world continues to increase while development aid budgets stagnate.
79.	The obligations assumed in disarmament negotiations must be verifiable. The verification procedure must in each individual case be tailored to the treaty to which it is to apply. We can do some important preliminary work in that respect in the United Nations if we develop procedures and instruments of verification which have been internationally agreed upon and, where possible, also tried out in practice.
80.	Anyone who opposes on site inspections or refuses to accept verification in other forms will be open to the suspicion of wanting to hide something and deceive others; he will be destroying confidence rather than building it.
81.	The Geneva Committee on Disarmament is discussing a comprehensive prohibition of the manufacture and stock piling of chemical weapons. Here, too, the most difficult problem still to be solved is that of verification. We hope for an early agreement on the verifiable prohibition of chemical weapons.
82.	Real disarmament can be achieved only through mutual confidence among States. Concrete confidence building measures are therefore indispensable for successful dis armament. The Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, signed at Helsinki on 1 August 1975, makes provision for initial confidence building measures. The proposed conference on disarmament in Europe could be a new qualitative step in the process of confidence building. confidence building measures can al$oNbe conducive to stability and arms limitation in the third world. It was with that in mind that, during the thirty-fourth session, we launched an initiative with a view to giving a global dimension to efforts to achieve confidence building meas ures.
83.	We hope that the SecretaryGeneral's study now before us [At36/474 and Corr. 1] will generate effective impulses for concrete measures to speed up the confidence building process all over the world. We need a code of confidence building.
84.	Those four principles for disarmament negotiations balance, openness, verifiability and confidence building are four prerequisites for success. They can serve as four cornerstones for the construction of a comprehensive security partnership around the world.
85.	The foremost objective of my country's foreign policy is actively to safeguard peace. We want peace and freedom. But to us, peace means more than the mere avoidance of war. We want a world of cooperation based on partnership among nations.
86.	Together with other European democracies we have formed the European Community in order to shape our common future together. By developing the European Community into a European union, we shall be able to work even more effectively as a force for peace and progress in Europe and in the world.
87.	We have united with our European allies and the United States of America and Canada in the North Atlantic Alliance. That alliance rests on the common values of free dom, human dignity and self determination. Its sole pur pose is to preserve common security and safeguard peace. It derives its strength from the friendship and trust between Europeans and Americans.
88.	On the basis of the European Community and the North Atlantic Alliance we, the Federal Republic of Germany, have, by means of our Ostpolitik, made an important contribution to the stabilization of peace in Europe. We shall continue that realistic policy of dialog, of reducing tensions and of strengthening cooperation.
89.	The line that divides East and West also divides the German nation. Consequently, no one is more severely affected by any deterioration of the East-West relation ship than the Germans; no one has a more direct interest in improving East-West relations. There must be no re lapse into the cold war.
90.	The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany of concluding treaties with its neighbors in the East the Moscow Treaty, the Warsaw Treaty, the treaty with Czechoslovakia and the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic are testimony to our longterm policy of cooperation and detente. We abide by those treaties. It is our wish that General Secretary Brezhnev's visit to Bonn in November will strengthen our bilateral relations and will favourably influence East-West relations as a whole.
91.	The developments in Poland are of particular importance for the situation in Europe and in the world. It is up to Poland alone to determine its path. We expect all other signatories of the Final Act of Helsinki, like ourselves, to refrain from any interference in the internal affairs of the Polish People's Republic.
92.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its conviction that the two German States bear special responsibility for peace in Europe. Never again must war originate on German soil, as stated by Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and Chairman of the German Democratic Republic State Council, Erich Honecker.
93.	Especially in the present difficult phase of East-West relations, the following must be axiomatic to both German' States: we must carefully preserve what we have achieved between us and what we have contributed to peace in Eu rope over the past decade; in our mutual relationship and in relations with all our neighbors we must exercise restraint and consideration; the GermanGerman relationship must never be an additional cause of strain on the East West relationship; we must continue the dialogue at all levels without any preconditions; it must be our common goal to achieve the largest measure of progress in implementing all parts of the Final Act of Helsinki,
94.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany intends to promote cooperation between the two German States, and we want to provide more opportunities for contacts between Germans on both sides. Those and other improvements which make life easier for the Germans in their mutual relationship are not only a dictate of humanity but are an indispensable contribution to peace and cooperation in Europe.
95.	Our aim is and will remain to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self determination. The wall which divides the Germans will not prove durable. The will of the people is not to preserve, still less to deepen, the division between them, but to remove it.
96.	The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin has helped to calm the situation in and around Berlin. That must remain so. Each side must realize that the Agreement can produce a stabilizing effect on Berlin and favourably influence East-West relations only if all sides strictly observe and fully implement it.
97.	Another impressive testimony to United States solidarity with Berlin was the visit by the American Secretary of State Mr. Haig on 13 September 1981.
98.	As in our bilateral policy, we are also striving within the multilateral framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to improve East' West relations in Europe. The Final Act of Helsinki is a document which manifests the will for cooperation in Europe, and it should be consistently implemented by all signatories to make Europe a region of lasting peace based on respect for human rights.
99.	We are acutely aware how much still remains to be done in that respect. Together with om Western partners, we are making every effort to ensure that the follow-up to the Conference, in Madrid, will produce a final document which, in all fields covered by the Final Act, will bring progress for cooperation among the countries of Europe and make for better relations among their citizens.
100.	The process of the Conference on Security and Co operation in Europe must be continued. It is the great hope of many people, not only in Europe. The Madrid Conference must issue a concrete mandate for a conference on disarmament in Europe if it is to meet the need for security in Europe.
101.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany also wishes to contribute to peace and the peaceful settlement of conflicts outside Europe. The agenda for this session of the General Assembly includes items on four major international conflicts: the Middle East, southern Africa, Afghanistan and Kampuchea.
102.	At the previous meeting, the President of the European Community also spoke on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. Following.his statement, let me say that we have a vital interest of our own in lasting, comprehensive and equitable peace in the Middle East. Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries is just as indispensable for such peace as is recognition of the right of self determination of the Palestinian people. The efforts to achieve a comprehensive, lasting and equitable peace settlement must be intensified. The starting point for this must be the renunciation of force by all sides.
103.	It is with a sense of concern for world peace and deep sympathy for the suffering of the people that we watch events in Lebanon. All efforts undertaken by the Lebanese Government to bring about national conciliation and to restore Lebanon's sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity have our full support.
104.	In the context of the initiative of the five Western States, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is emphatic that Namibia should at long last gain independence through free elections on the basis of Security Council .resolution 435 (1978). This must happen in 1982. The independence of Namibia must not be delayed any longer. We acknowledge the constructive contribu tions of the OAU towards a settlement of the Namibia question. The remnants of colonialism and racism in southern Africa must be eliminated.
105.	We condemn South Africa's intervention in An gola; the Republic of South Africa has taken a grave responsibility upon itself.
106.	My country stands side by side with the non aligned and Islamic countries in an effort to terminate the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and to achieve a political solution which will restore to that sorely tried people self determination and independence and reestablish Afghanistan's status as a genuinely nonaligned State. The European Council has proposed a conference on Afghanistan with the aim of achieving that goal in two phases. The continuing occupation of Afghanistan is a heavy strain on international relations.
107.	The Federal Republic of Germany actively sup ports the efforts of the international community, and especially the ASEAN countries, to restore the political in dependence and territorial integrity of Kampuchea.
108.	We are following with concern developments in Central America where, in El Salvador, and also else where, the use of force and bloodshed are on the in crease. The people of that region must be enabled to determine their own destiny free from direct or indirect intervention from outside. 
109.	All democratic forces in those countries should act in awareness of their common responsibility and dissociate themselves from the forces of violence. Like the whole of the third world, like the whole of Latin America, Central America, too, must be kept out of the East West conflict. Political and social reforms must create a more equitable and stable order, and with it the conditions which will allow Central America to become a region of peace. The European Community can be a good partner to such a Central America.
110.	At its thirty-fifth session, the General Assembly included in its agenda a new item entitled "International cooperation to avert new flows of refugees". In resolution 35/124, it expressed the conviction that the refugee issue is no longer a humanitarian one only, but also affects world peace. As the resolution stated, the flows of hundreds of thousands, indeed millions, of refugees '"jeopardize the stability of entire regions and thus "endanger international peace and security".
111.	We, the Federal Republic of Germany, favour general guidelines for the conduct of States, as well as practical measures which will make it possible to prevent any fresh flows of refugees, and ws propose that this be discussed by an ad hoc committee.
112.	The General Assembly is commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the Conference of Heads of State of Government of NonAligned Countries held at Belgrade in 1961. The nonaligned countries constitute a powerful movement in the world of today, but their goal has not yet been fully attained.
113.	Colonialism is almost everywhere a thing of the past, but the independence that has been gained by for mer colonies is threatened by attempts to dominate them in other ways. In 1979, in fact, the world witnessed an ideologically motivated attempt to make the nonaligned movement itself, as it was called, the "natural ally" of one of the two systems of the North. That attempt failed. It had to fail, because the wheel of history cannot be turned back. There is no longer any future in hegemonic aspirations, nor in interventions in the internal affairs of other countries, but they can still be a threat to peaceful relations between nations.
114.	With its model of a pluralistic world of nations who have chosen their own destiny, the nonaligned movement is a force_working for the cause of progress. It is at the same time a force working for the cause of peace and stability because today both these aims can be achieved only within an international order in which nations cooperate with one another in partnership and on the basis of free self determination and equality. The Federal Republic of Germany stands side by side with the nonaligned countries in the pursuit of this goal.
115.	The desire for independence also manifests itself in the regional groupings which are being formed and are growing in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
116^ After the European Community, there is now an other association, ASEAN, which has already developed extensively. A powerful influence for peace and liability in Asia emanates from that organization.
117.	Regional cooperation is also progressing elsewhere in the third world. Cooperation among the Gulf States, the groupings that have been formed in Latin America, and those already established or to be established in Africa, which were all molded into a grand design by the Conference of Lusaka, are proof of this. These groupings also provide small and medium-sized countries with an opportunity to shape their independence and their future
together.
118.	Together with the other members of the European Community, we promote this development towards plurality and partnership based on equality. Stable economic and social development in the third world is indispensable for lasting international peace;
119.	The common goal of the industrial and developing countries in the 1970s was to accelerate growth in the developing countries in the context of constant global economic growth, but it did not turn out that way. Today, at the beginning of the Third United Nations Development Decade, the growth of per capita incomes has stopped in many oil-importing countries of the third world. Indeed, real per capita incomes in most of the poorest countries are even declining. We view with concern this crisis of development.
120.	We also view with concern the fact that the North South dialog has lost momentum. In spite of the progress achieved in many individual areas, it is marking time on the major issues. That is why we look towards the forthcoming International Meeting on Cooperation and Development, to be held at Cancun. An important idea of the Brandt Commission becomes a reality. The great opportunity afforded by this unprecedented Cancun meeting must be seized. We want it to generate a new resolve to settle the urgent problems of the world econ omy and development by means of solidarity and global cooperation. Lastly, we want it to pave the way for the beginning at long last of global negotiations. We want to work for a global energy strategy which will create security among both producers and consumers. We want to work for a global food strategy in order to guarantee food security and thus eliminate hunger.
121.	The outcome of the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, to be held in 1982, will be crucial. Its importance for the future of the North-South dialog Can hardly be overestimated because, as the SecretaryGeneral has emphasized, it is a question of whether we in the United Nations are capable of negotiating solutions for global problems which strike a fair balance between the elementary and basic interests of all nations and at the same time serve the world as a whole,
122.	A return to world economic growth and development calls, first and foremost, for energetic efforts on the part of all countries. The industrial countries must break the back of inflation and thus restore the basis for constant growth and the elimination of unemployment. The nations of the third world, on the other hand, must adopt development strategies that involve the masses of the poor in the growth process. Labor intensive agricultural production and industries, coupled with an effective population policy, must form the nucleus of development plans. But if they are to be successful, the efforts of the developing countries themselves need adequate support from outside. All countries in a position to do so should contribute their share. The Communist industrial countries must no longer shirk their duty to help the nations of the third world in a spirit of solidarity.
123.	The Federal Republic of Germany gives high priority cooperation in the field of development. This means, first, that in spite of our own economic difficulties we shall not relax our efforts to provide financial and technical assistance. Even our budget for 1982, which is one of self-restraint for our citizens, allows our development aid to grow at a greater rate than that of the budget as a whole. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the programme of action adopted at the United Nations Conference en the Least Developed Countries, held recently in Paris, because these countries are the ones that depend most on official development aid.  
124.	Secondly, we are still strongly in favor of markets in industrial countries being kept open and widened to take in the exports of developing countries. There must be no lapse into protectionism. We do not try to solve our problem of unemployment by erecting trade barriers, but by promoting structural change with the necessary supporting social measures. Only with free world trade can North and South advance.
125.	Thirdly, to many developing countries, exports of raw materials are still the main source of foreign exchange. These countries in particular are suffering as a result of the decline in the growth of the world economy, a situation which has lasted for several years now and which has checked demand for raw materials and caused prices to drop. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany attaches great importance to the problems confronting commodity-exporting developing countries. We have just decided to make a substantial voluntary contribution to the Second Account of the Common Fund for Commodities.
126.	Fourthly, the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy has, for the first time, made energy issues a subject of negotiations within a global framework. We must continue along this path. The steep, abrupt increase in the price of energy has placed a heavy burden on the industrial countries. To the oil-importing developing countries, it has become a question of their very existence. We need partnership and cooperation between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries [OPEC], industrial countries and oil-importing developing countries. This is the only way the world can come through the transition to the post-oil era intact. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany also advocates the establishment of a World Bank affiliate for energy which could help considerably to resolve the energy problems of the third world.
127.	We must not allow national egoism to gain the upper hand in the process of NorthSouth cooperation. We are called upon to play our part the industrial countries of the West and of the East and the developing countries. The NorthSouth problem is not merely the global social issue; it is a task of world peace which we shall have to accomplish if we want to ensure the survival of mankind.
128.	To the Federal Republic of Germany, respect for and protection of the dignity aild the rights of man are fundamental to all policies. Efforts to secure the exercise of human rights throughout the world are therefore one of the central elements of our participation in the work of the United Nations. We deem it the responsibility of the Organization to raise its voice whenever fundamental human rights are violated, irrespective of where and by whom.
129.	The United Nations has created procedures and institutions to foster respect for human rights all over the globe. These procedures are still relatively weak, but they are having a growing effect. It is important to continue this work with determination and to develop further the possibilities open to the United Nations for protecting human rights. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany continues to support the idea of an international court of human rights.
130.	We have rioted with satisfaction that our initiative regarding a convention on the ultimate abolition of the death penalty has met with a favorable response from many countries. The draft convention takes the form of a second optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. This form should make for constructive discussion leading to progress in this field.
131.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is aware that other legal traditions, religious convictions and historical experiences have led many countries to take a different view of the death penalty. But no one can overlook the frequent abuses of the death penalty in the world of today and the growing incidence of executions without regard for the due process of law. Equally depressing is the fact that people are still subjected to torture. This makes the struggle to abolish the death penalty and torture more urgent than ever.
132.	Mankind has reached the highest point to date in its level of knowledge and in its capabilities. It can use that knowledge and those capabilities to resolve the problems vital to its survival, but it can also use them to destroy the earth's civilization and, perhaps, even the human species.
133.	Only if we act in awareness of our responsibility for the safeguarding of peace and respect for the dignity of man, and only if we act with the desire for global solidarity, will we find the way to a good future. This is the foremost task of the Organization. The Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its trust in the United Nations.

My first words are addressed to the delegation of Vanuatu on the occasion of the admission of that country to membership in the Organization. France is tied with the people of Vanuatu in many ways and we therefore welcome this one hundred and fifty-fifth Member of the United Nations into our midst.
2.	The Assembly's decision to entrust to you, Sir, the presidency of the thirty-sixth session is one that we find fully justified, and I should like to express to you my delegation's warmest congratulations. You are well aware of the ties that bind our two countries. Your personality and experience in international affairs guarantee that our work will be conducted with all necessary vigor and authority.
3.	My next remarks are addressed to you, Mr. Secretary General. All of us here are familiar with your political acumen and your commitment to international order. We have had many occasions to meet and to become acquainted over the years. To my Government's tribute to your qualities I should like to add my own personal expression of friendship and high esteem.
4.	We also know that we can count on the competence and active participation of the Secretariat. We can be sure of its invaluable support, however onerous the tasks imposed by the successful operation of a session such as this. I wish to express my congratulations and thanks to them for this.
5.	A radical political change recently occurred in the political life of my country, France. On 10 May, a new President of the Republic was elected. On 21 June, by sweeping a majority of the left into power in a most spectacular way, the people of France reaffirmed their will to turn over a new leaf and to enter a new era. The world of today arid of tomorrow is not and cannot be build in the image of the world of yesterday.
6.	For many years now, a majority of the States of the world have been heralding in this very forum the new international economic order. This order will not be solely economic nor will it be exclusively international. My country is aware of this change and the Socialist Government of France has embarked upon a definition of this new order, an order which will be more just and more equitable for the least privileged, the weak, those who languish on the periphery of society, those who for too long have been ignored. These people form the most important element of our majority in France; they also form the majority here in this hall. To all of them we wish to propose a future, an ideal consisting of progress and hope.
7.	The message of which my Government feels itself to be the bearer therefore transcends our own frontiers. Of course there is no question of proposing to others solutions that must be defined and adopted only by each people according to its own constitutional authority. The right of each people to define its own destiny is sacred. But there are principles and aspirations that our national community intends to assert and ^defend, and which we . believe have universal value, since they will form the international order.
8.	After those preliminary remarks, it goes almost without saying that our conduct in its entirety is devoted to man himself. Man is the fundamental value. Man is the starting point and the ultimate objective of all policies. France denounces all forms of totalitarianism and authoritarianism. We denounce and will fight discrimination in all its forms, whether religious, sexist or racist. France declares war on contempt.
9.	Our common fight in this Organization therefore must be waged resolutely to ensure respect and freedom for men. It is inconceivable that a State should base its strength and prosperity on the oppression of its citizens, or, worse still, on the humiliation and rejection of a part of its population who are denied the status of citizenship.
10.	Some will object that the Charter of the United Nations, like the rules of international law, prohibits interference in affairs falling within the national jurisdiction of a State. But in this context I should like to make two comments.
11.	The first which hardly needs to be made in this Assembly is that the very practices of our Organization testify to a significant evolution in this regard. Little by little, massive and flagrant violations of fundamental human rights appear to be falling within the competence of the international community, as one can judge from conventions and other international agreements adopted in recent years at world and regional levels.
12.	Who today still doubts that apartheid and other manifestations of racism can and should be denounced be fore the principal United Nations bodies? Who has not welcomed the progress inadequate as it may be brought about thanks to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, held at Helsinki? With regard to violations less broad in scope, they are, as representatives are aware, the object, particularly within the Commission on Human Rights whose tenacity we admire of procedures which are often discreet but which gradually are permitting certain practices to be corrected.
13.	I would add that in the field of human rights the actions of international institutions truly complement those of nongovernmental organizations. I should like to pay a tribute 19*, them today, as well as to the associations, labor unions, political parties, youth movements, religious groups and, of course, to the mass media, the audiovisual medium in particular, which have helped so much to arouse public opinion and mobilize it in express sing its indignation when shocking situations have arisen that need to be condemned.
14.	Human rights are inseparable from the rights of peoples and nations. I have already emphasized the right of each people to decide its own destiny, in total independence, and therefore to choose its political regime, its economic system, its social structures and its friendships; freedom to enter into a network of alliances or to prefer neutrality or nonalignment. France has always been and remains conscious and jealous of its independence. Its geographical situation, its cultural affinities and the fact that the world is, unfortunately, a dangerous place have prompted France to adhere freely to the Atlantic Alliance, to which it brings a loyal contribution in the defense of values that are common to all members of the Alliance  the values of freedom and civilization.
15.	However, France reserves the right to make its sovereign judgment of the threats and dangers that could lead to the gravest decisions. It hopes, too, that negotiations between the greatest Powers will make it possible to reduce the growing threats resulting from recent over-armament. Further, it reaffirms its determination to contribute to establishing confidence building measures from the Urals to the Atlantic. The relations that it has maintained for many years with the Soviet Union and the people's democracies of Eastern Europe allow it to express itself clearly, to let its convictions and worries be known directly, without going through intermediaries, and to contribute in this way to establishing between the countries of Western and Eastern Europe relations promoting the fullest development of all peoples.
16.	The right which we claim to determine our own future is something which we believe it is only fair that other States, both small and large, weak and strong, peoples of the South and of the North, should be allowed to possess, too. France will therefore be on the side of those who fight for the recognition of the rights of their people or for the independence of their nation.
17.	We have the greatest sympathy for those who, still remaining outside the mainstream of East-West confrontation, wish to escape from spheres of influence. We salute the nonaligned movement and wilt be happy to lend our support to genuine efforts at nonalignment, whenever that nonalignment is proposed fry an authentic member of that movement. The world is not inexorably condemned to be divided into two enemy camps. The tensions which sometimes exist between neighbors must not be artificially transformed into duels between champions of the East and West. The sole object of a recent Franco-Mexican statement on El Salvador was to serve as a reminder of the need to let each people settle its own affairs by political and democratic processes.
18.	Faithful to its principles, France condemns outside interference and therefore denounces all undertakings .of force against any people and any State. Violence cannot create right. This elemental truth must not be forgotten, whatever the circumstances, the status or reasons of those who occupy territories against the will of the population that has been invaded and subjugated. Without comparing the occupying Powers, their reasons or their methods, condemnation must be applied equally to the Republic of South Africa, when it sends its tanks into Angola and ignores United Nations resolutions on Namibia; to Viet Nam, when it continues its occupation of Kampuchea; and to the Soviet Union, when it intervenes with its troops in Afghanistan.
19.	In the Middle East, it is not through violenceof which our Ambassador to Lebanon, Mr. Louis Delamare, recently became an innocent victim that peace will finally return to this part of the world, which was the cradle of so many civilizations and which has become the crucible of so much suffering!. The people and cultures of this region, who through the centuries have been caught in the web of historical evolution, victims of contempt and hatred, have a right to peace; their States should be able to develop in security; their peoples should be allowed to build their future in justice.
20.	Violation of the resolutions of the Organization is not the way to ensure the necessary security for the countries in the Middle East, for all the countries, including Israel. War is not the way for the peoples of this region, all the peoples, including the Palestinian people, to see all their rights recognized, including the right to a homeland and a State.
21.	There, as elsewhere in the world, negotiation among all the parties concerned is the only acceptable means of dealing with the reasons that have led one or another of them to act by sword and fire. Negotiation is the golden rule of the Organization. If this rule is broken once, just once, how can its observance be required elsewhere and in all cases?
22.	Let those here who are tempted to justify violence in one instance reflect on the fact that one day they may themselves be the victims of some other violence and be destroyed by it. Justice for peoples, security for States, respect for international decisions, negotiation: these are the principles that will guide France in the position it takes on the Middle East and throughout the world.
23.	Here then are quite a number of situations characterized by attacks on the principles of self determination and national sovereignty. All of us together in this room must agree to maintain the necessary pressure. Let us proclaim our willingness to resort to dialog, to discussion, to objective analysis of the concerns and motivations
of all parties. We are convinced that such an approach is
valid in the case of most of the crises that the world community has to face,
24.	Let me remind you forcefully that in the case of many of these crises it would be sufficient if the provisions of resolutions already adopted by the United Nations were respected. Think, for example, of southern Lebanon, occupied, torn asunder and removed from the legitimate Lebanese authority; think of Namibia, whose independence and sacred right to sovereignty are endlessly delayed. The time has come solemnly to affirm from this rostrum and I do so now in the name of France that every possible means must be brought to bear to ensure that Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 435 (1978) are applied in full without delay. My country is ready to make a contribution to this effort on whatever lines are decided on by this Organization.
25.	In certain situations we must go even further, and here again the United Nations has a significant role to play. Once Namibia has finally gained its freedom and independence through the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), it must be helped, and probably guaranteed, in its first few years. Angola, which has suffered so much from war, must be assured of all kinds of support during its reconstruction. Kampuchea, already rescued from famine by international efforts, must be able one day to determine its future freely and democratically, and it too, of course, will need guarantees and assurances of every kind. Afghanistan, if it is not to run the risk of interference which has recently been denounced in some quarters, and if it is to put an end to the interference now made evident by the bloodshed of the battlefield, will need some guarantee of the status it seeks. In many quarters, and in the face of threats of quite different kinds, the same idea has been advanced, namely, to accept, acknowledge and guarantee the wishes of a people to be freed from the tensions that surround it and threaten its independence and its desire for nonalignment. France believes that this similarity of ideas about very different areas and situations provides material for consideration and a common approach at the international level.
26.	I am often surprised to note that in most circles the true dimension of NorthSouth problems is not understood. Some talk of charity for unfortunate starveling of some devastated country, others demand higher prices for their products or a transfer of some special technology. But how often do you hear it acknowledged, as it has rightly been acknowledged by the members of the Brandt Commission,  that the progress of the NorthSouth dialog is a prerequisite for world progress and perhaps even for world peace?
27.	The South has become part of the life of the North. How much longer will it take for people to understand this? This is an essential aspect of the new age that is upon us whether we like it or not. What position will the South occupy and what part will it play? Those are questions that must be asked.
28.	From the political standpoint, I have already mentioned cases where the fundamental principles of the life of our people and our societies are being threatened or violated. Obtaining respect for such principles in southern Africa, the Middle East and Latin America is essential for those who believe in those principles. The French Government considers itself to be one of these countries. 1 will not return to this point, except to remind you how much our young people, the moving spirit of our so cities, are concerned with these problems, with which they are more familiar today, now that the media are tel ling them what is really taking place in the South, which was not the case a few decades ago,
29.	However, solidarity and interdependence transcend the political and moral realm. The world is riven by crisis, causing the number of unemployed to soar and condemning the most unfortunate to despair. Who can claim that this crisis will be set to rights or brought under control solely by the forces and mechanisms of the market place, and solely within the framework of the most advanced economies?
30.	Economic revival, which we all need urgently and this is particularly true of the most underprivileged countries requires the development of the countries of the South. This is not just a matter of a few hundred million dollars, but of tens of billions of dollars, which must be injected wherever they are most desperately needed and where their effect will be almost immediate in improving purchasing power and, as a result, in expanding markets. Elsewhere I have spoken ? a planetary "new deal" in order to recall this obvious truth which President Roosevelt, when confronted with America's great depression, identified in his day.
31.	It is important, therefore, for all of us together to tackle the issue of financing development and indeed the issue of the very survival of those who are most deprived. Where can the available resources be found? How can we organize the use of those resources? Where should we channel them? What kind of link should be established between the funds that all those who can should contribute, the lending capacity and administrative supervision of competent institutions, and the rightful concern of lenders and investors to guarantee the security of their investments? A few answers are ready and have been proposed. They must no longer be delayed or distorted. But they will not be enough, so let us strive to see how we can do more and better.
32.	Naturally, since the resources to be shared are unfortunately inadequate, our thoughts should turn first to those who are suffering most, sometimes to the point of death. My country was very happy to host in Paris the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.

33.	My Government notes with satisfaction that commitments were entered into by the international community and we are pleased that the countries of the European Community decided to commit 0.15 per cent of their total gross national product to help the least developed countries. France, for its part, as the President of the Republic has said and I repeat, will attain the United Nations aid target of 0.7 per cent of its gross national product, excluding the French overseas departments, before the end of Mr. Mitterrand's seven-year term. This in fact commits us to doubling in real terms our aid to the developing countries. France's effort will, starting in 1982, give priority to increasing its voluntary contributions on a multilateral basis and to aid countries with which it has special ties, particularly in Africa. 
34.	As we are all aware, it is not enough just to increase financial aid. So I ought to say something now of special aspects that should take priority: food, energy and trade. However, the time allotted for these remarks will not sufficed Allow me to focus on two aspects of the new international order that I believe to be essential.
35.	Predictability has now become an essential feature of tomorrow's order. Without 'it, how can one plan, organize, formulate and invest in a rational manner? But never before in history have the principal factors of economic life been so unpredictable. You only have to think of the prices of basic commodities imported by countries in the South, the prices for raw materials exported by the developing countries, the exchange rates and interest rates that influence all transactions. We are living in a world with out order, a chaotic world, an insane world. We the European countries without significant natural resources are suffering along with the countries of the South. In the face of speculation and uncertainty, our interests are those of the South; in this debate, we are with the South.
36.	It is important therefore gradually to introduce a system of law in world economic relations. We must seek contracts, treaties and international agreements. One of the innovations of the Lome Conventions between the European Community and 61 developing countries is to make the relations they embody predictable and reliable.
37.	Another feature of those Conventions is their comprehensiveness. Even more so at the world level, all of the economic, financial and technological problems should be discussed and negotiated simultaneously and jointly. The foregoing is justification enoughs France and its European partners are resolved that global negotiations should be started at the United Nations at the earliest possible time. We shall exert all our influence to see that no further delay is imposed. This is to be confirmed in a month at Cancun, at the International Meeting on Cooperation and Development.
38.	The global nature of NorthSouth problems seems evident to almost all of us. But have we given sufficient thought to the interaction between those external problems and our domestic problems? The new order will include major structural changes in each of the industrialized countries. The overall progress made possible by this renewal will be reflected in certain sectors by a decline in activity that will be more than compensated for in other sectors. New directions will be taken, and they will come up against resistance.
39.	These things will not be done if in the industrialized countries discussions are limited to diplomats, bankers, administrators and other experts. It is important to involve public opinion, the workers who are directly concerned and the young people whose future is at stake. The media have a key role to play here, and they can do so. There are times when strong feelings are aroused in towns and in the country side, when the misery and suffering of a downtrodden people give the more fortunate television viewer a moment of discomfort and indignation, or when despair in a crisis becomes unbearable.
40.	I have just mentioned the NorthSouth dialog in its worldwide framework. But we must also consider it in the regional framework.
41.	The region is in fact the natural context in which peoples can express their special identity; the similarity of problems, cultural affinities and sometimes even rivalries, as well as common threats, make it possible to multiply ties within a region or subregion. The more highly structured and grouped a region is, the less outside influences come into play there. This is an important way to avoid the contagion of East-West division in areas that are not directly involved. In the economic domain also, the cooperation that is so desirable among the countries of the South can .be encouraged in a rational manner, as was so clearly demonstrated at the very interesting HighLevel Conference on Economic Cooperation among Developing Countries, held recently at Caracas.
42.	It is premature to try to take stock of the activities of the major regional organizations because their responsibilities and importance continue to grow. As a Frenchman, however, I am sure I will not surprise the Assembly when I say something about the European Community. It is still far from perfect, but its results are already evident in a number of different areas agriculture, the monetary system, the Lome policy, the generalized system of preferences and its authority is growing rapidly in the world. The French Government is planning to launch soon a number of new and exciting programs industrial, social and others within the Community.
43.	In the economic sphere, reference should also be made to the United Nations regional commissions. The role of the Latin American countries as precursors in identifying a regional image and regional pride should be noted. We should mention the various regional groups such as the Association of South East Asian Nations [ASEAN], and quite a number of African regional organizations. I should like to pay a tribute to the most important of them, the Organization of African Unity [OAU], which at its recent Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held at Nairobi, dealt in a masterly fashion with some of today's most difficult problems. Thanks to the OAU we now have some hope of seeing a united and independent Chad, free from foreign interference, resume its place in Africa's concert of nations. And it is of course thanks to the OAU that we are hoping to see a referendum of self determination take place soon among the peoples of Western Sahara.
44.	The development of regional cooperation has been so convincing in some parts of the world that we are tempted to set new goals. For historical and cultural reasons disputes may exist between neighbors, sometimes going back several centuries. There are many of us in this Assembly who are worried that East-West rivalry may be superimposed on those differences. Mutual distrust between two neighbors may indeed lead to an arms race. The risk then becomes great that they will all come to depend on increasingly sophisticated and therefore more costly arms supplies. What will then remain of self determination, independence and nonalignment, to which both parties are entitled?
45.	Can we not rather imagine that the group of countries most concerned by a confrontation of this kind among two or more neighbors might have the wisdom to limit the effects of the dispute, to establish a regional or subregional system for the evaluation of military forces, and even to conclude a genuine regional agreement on self-limitation of armaments, accompanied, of course, by appropriate means of control and verification?
46.	France has been shocked, as have so many others, by the disproportionate efforts that so many third-world countries must devote to arms and defense. We are disturbed by the growing dependence that this evolution inevitably en tails, and we fervently hope that the attempts that have already been made to slow this trend will be encouraged by our Organization and supported by world public opinion.
47.	Whatever the interests in a regional approach to arms limitation, the effort should, of course, culminate in this Organization. Nothing durable or solid can be built without the endorsement of an institution whose role it is to be universal. There is hardly a domain that is outside its jurisdiction, and the wholly democratic structures it possesses serve to guarantee the value of its decisions. On this rostrum from which I am speaking, every speaker and therefore every country is equal.
48.	The fact that emphasis should generally be placed on the unique role of the United Nations in the most dangerous crises is only normal, because one immediately thinks of Cyprus, southern Lebanon, Namibia and also UNHCR, UNICEF and so many other organizations which, in tragic circumstances, have so well demonstrated human solidarity. But we know that the United Nations has other functions and that, in meeting places that figure less often jn the major international press, ideas are compared that gradually lead to a consensus that will generate progress. I have in mind also the arms limitation talks, where gains have been made and where decisive steps are still to be taken among others, the establishment of an international satellite monitor ing agency.
49.	Other ideas, still more ambitious, direct our attention well beyond the immediate future. Next year the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament will give all of us an opportunity to shoulder our responsibilities. My country will play its part, and we will make a loyal and far-reaching contribution to the search for ways of defining conditions for a just and sure limitation of arms.
50.	Nor do 1 forget that in many ways this Organization and the specialized agencies play an operational role, whether in terms of technical or humanitarian aid, or in more general regulations. In this regard, I should like to emphasize my country's special interest in the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The convention that that Conference is busy drafting will soon define how these riches of the world should be rationally organized in the future. It will mark extraordinary constitutional progress and will leave its imprint on the history of the world. The United Nations can and should be proud of it. Consequently, and in spite of a few reservations on details, the French delegation believes it essential that the work of the Conference on the Law of the Sea be concluded as soon as possible. We appeal to one and all to cease the maneuvers which have had the effect of jeopardizing the progress made over so many years of persevering effort.
51.	My last remark should confirm what has already become obvious from my observations namely, France's commitment to the United Nations, from which the world expects so much.
52.	Our status as a permanent member of the Security Council, our human and economic resources, the independence of our policy towards all, whether States or great corporations, and our sympathy although that is too weak an expression our feeling of fraternity with the weakest, most deprived peoples, assure us, we believe, of special relations with most of the world. But they also create for us special obligations. At the global level, as indeed in France itself, the Government of which I am a member knows what is expected of it. We are ready.


The United Kingdom currently occupies the presidency of the European Community. My statement this year is therefore made on behalf of the Community and its member States and in the interests of brevity I shall not make the customary remarks on a national basis.
59.	In this capacity, it is a particular pleasure to convey to you, Mr. President, at the outset of the thirty-sixth session of the Assembly, our very sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency at this session. I know that with your distinguished career and your considerable experience in the Organization you will guide our proceedings with skill and authority.
60.	I should also like to convey my warmest congratulations and admiration to the outgoing President for his efficient and capable conduct of the proceedings of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly and also the eighth emergency special session.
61.	The 10 members of the European Community also wish to express their gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for a further year of strenuous efforts in the cause of peace, and I should like tojoin with my other colleagues who have congratulated the Republic of Vanuatu on its independence and its membership of this body.
62.	Three principles are fundamental to the European Community and underlie its activity in the world today and the role it seeks to play in the United Nations. First, the community was born from a determination to avoid the recurrence of war and from a desire for permanent and fruitful reconciliation. Secondly, it looks to partnership and collaboration between neighbors as a way to stimulate social and economic progress. And thirdly, it is based on a belief in the fundamental importance of human rights.
63.	The first principle, its commitment to international reconciliation, explains why the European Community feels a duty to help where it can with the problems that afflict the world. AH conflicts, local, regional or global, adversely affect the possibilities for peace and progress throughout the world. All of them add up to the sum of human misery.
64.	The conflict which perhaps poses most dangers is the ArabIsrarl dispute. The European Community believes that it has a distinctive role to play in the , search for a negotiated, comprehensive settlement which must be both just and lasting. The Community's view of the principles according to which a settlement can be devised, starting from Security Council resolution 242 (1967), was set out in the Venice and Luxembourg Declarations.of 13 June and, 2 December 1980 respectively. The starting point must be the right to existence and security of all States in the area, including Israel, and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination. Acceptance of these principles by the parties concerned would remove a major obstacle to progress.
>
65.	The members of the Community will pursue their efforts to promote a peace settlement energetically. Nevertheless, we must be clear about what the European Community can and cannot achieve. Ultimately it is for the parties to negotiate a lasting settlement themselves. In our view, a comprehensive settlement can only be negotiated if all the parties concerned, including the Palestinian people and the PLO, which will have to be associated with negotiations, accept the principles which we set out in the Venice Declaration and play their full part. One of Europe's main aims is to facilitate such negotiations, complementing the efforts of others towards the same objective. These thoughts underlay the Venice Declaration and the subsequent diplomatic efforts of the Community, notably the contacts made by Britain's predecessors in the presidency.
66.	If a settlement is to be possible a climate of confidence must first be built up between the parties. Both sides must refrain from words or acts, particularly acts of violence as in recent months, which only complicate the search for a settlement The Community members are bound to repeat that the Israeli policy of settlements is contrary to international law and a major obstacle to progress towards peace. While pursuing its efforts in every other possible way, the European Community will work to encourage a climate of confidence as a contribution to a comprehensive settlement. The Community therefore welcomes all clear statements of interest in a peaceful settlement, including that made last month by Crown Prince Eahd of Saudi Arabia.
67.	I should like to put on record the European Community's sympathy for human suffering in Lebanon and our support for the efforts of the Lebanese Government to promote security and national reconciliation. We believe that the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon can only be assured if all concerned uphold the authority of the legal Government and avoid all actions tending to undermine it. In this context, the Community values the work of the Quadripartite Committee of the Arab League. In south Lebanon, the ceasefire has been a valuable achievement and we hope it will be possible to reinforce it and build upon it. The Community members welcome and support all diplomatic efforts to this end. In .particular, they believe that UNIFIL should be enabled to carry out in full the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council and, we applaud the courageous and responsible work of the Force and express our sympathy for its losses; arid I take this opportunity to reaffirm the Community's support for the valuable peacekeeping work of the United Nations in other areas.
68.	If history and traditional and geographical proximity make the Middle East of particular concern to Europe, we are no less concerned about the other crises which strike at the very basis on which international peace and stability must rest.
69.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which constitutes a grave breach of the Charter, is one such crisis. It is an affront to international opinion that the Soviet military occupation there should continue. It has brought untold suffering for millions of Afghan people and untold problems for the countries to which large numbers of them have fled. It is to seek relief for that suffering and to contribute to international peace and stability that the European Council put forward its plan for a two-stage conference on Afghanistan.7
70.	The Council's proposal for such a conference has received widespread support. It is therefore a great disappointment that the Soviet Union's response has so far been negative.
71.	If the Soviet Union is sincere in its stated desire to withdraw its troops in the context of a political solution, then the proposal of the Council offers a way for negotiations to begin. If, however, the Soviet Union's only real concern is to obtain the acquiescence of the international community in its occupation of Afghanistan, and increased status and recognition for a regime which is rejected by the Afghan people and world opinion, then the outlook for any negotiations is grim indeed.
72.	The members of the European Community support any efforts which will bring foreign intervention in Afghanistan to an end and allow that country to return to its traditional independence and nonaligned status. It is essential that the principles of the resolution of the Assembly should be observed. We support the efforts of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral to find a way to a peaceful settlement in accordance with those resolutions.
73.	Another country which has been invaded and then occupied by a more powerful neighbor is Kampuchea. Thanks to the admirable efforts of the international emergency relief operation Jed by UNICEF and the International Committee of the Red Cross, the physical condition of much of the population of Kampuchea has been transformed in the last two years. The European Community and its member States have played a major part in the financing of the relief.
74.	But now that the immediate cause of suffering has been removed, it is time to turn to the political problems that still afflict that country. As with Afghanistan, the aim of the international community must be a comprehensive political settlement. The basis of that settlement should be an independent and neutral Kampuchea with"' a genuinely representative Government. The position of the European Community was set out fully in the statement which, as President of the Community, I made to the International Conference on Kampuchea held here last July.
75.	The Declaration on Kampuchea adopted by that Conference puts forward a reasonable and practical basis for a settlement of the Kampuchean problem. The Community endorsed that Declaration, which we believe would protect the legitimate rights of all concerned. We call on Viet Nam to agree to withdraw its forces and join the process of peaceful negotiations set in train at that meeting. The Kampucheans must be allowed to exercise their right to self-determination without disruption, intimidation or coercion.
76.	The Community members are also very concerned at the continuing denial of the right to self-determination which lies at the root of the problem of Namibia. We deeply regret that the settlement leading to the independence of Zimbabwe has not been followed by further progress towards a speedy solution of the problems in that region.
77.	The outcome of the pre-implementation meeting on Namibia at Geneva in January was a great disappointment. We saw no justification for South Africa's prevarication. We hope that the renewed efforts of the five Western States will succeed in finding an acceptable basis for pursuing negotiations on the implementation of the United Nations plan in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). This provides the only possibility of a peaceful transition to internationally recognized independence for Namibia in accordance with a precise and rapid timetable.
78.	The European Community has condemned the South African incursion into Angola, the violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity which it has involved, and the loss of life and suffering it has brought. We have demanded the immediate withdrawal of South African forces from Angola.
79.	Within South Africa itself, the Community can find little cause for optimism. Virtually none of the expectations of worthwhile change in recent years have been fulfilled. Reforms promised by the South African Government, mostly still not implemented, do not deal with the fundamental problem of the political as well as the social and economic aspirations of blacks, coloreds and Asian South Africans.
80.	Without an early move towards government by consent and the abandonment of the system of apartheid, which we ail abhor, the trend in South Africa can only be one of accelerating conflict and violence. The European Community appeals with the utmost urgency to those in South Africa who can act decisively to face this reality, and to show the imagination, the boldness, and the leadership that are necessary to reach a political solution. In the meantime, the members of the Community continue to press South Africa to bring about peaceful change in that country.
81.	In this catalog of unsolved problems I am glad to be able to mention one small chink of light. The European Community commends the efforts of the Secretary General on the question of Cyprus. Under his auspices the inter-communal talks have been established on a regular basis and conducted in a constructive manner. We have been pleased to note that there have been encouraging developments recently. We earnestly hope that there will be further progress towards a just and lasting solution to this grave problem.
82.	Simply to discuss specific crises does not give an adequate impression of the Community's approach to the problems facing us all. To be faithful to the principle of reconciliation we must work not just for the resolution of conflicts when they occur, but to lessen the tensions that give rise to them.
83.	Europe is fortunate to have been free from war for 36 years, but it is the area where the tension between East and West is felt most strongly. It contains the greatest concentration of military forces in the world. Community members recognize the need to lessen tension by maintaining a dialog between East and West. Efforts must be intensified to reduce the appallingly high level of armaments on both sides, while maintaining undiminished security for all States.
84.	Many of the hopes that we entertained for concrete measures of arms control and disarmament as we entered the 1970's have been cruelly disappointed. Nevertheless, the members of the European Community believe that there can be no substitute for painstaking negotiation resulting in agreements which tackle specific problems of arms control in a way which increases confidence and assures the security of all States.
85.	We strongly support negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on the mutual limitation of nuclear forces, and in particular the forthcoming negotiations on theater nuclear forces. Success will not be easy. Despite the difficulties, we believe that the objective should be to strike the balance at the lowest possible level. Nonproliferation of nuclear weapons remains a vital element for the security of us all.
86.	The control of nuclear forces, in Europe as in the rest of the world, is only one side of the coin. It is equally important to reduce the size of conventional forces. In Europe the negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions continue to work towards that. The members of the European Community have also given their full support to the French proposal for a conference on disarmament in Europe* to negotiate confidence building measures of real military significance, which will be binding, verifiable, and applicable to the whole of Europe. We are seeking agreement on this important proposal at the Madrid review meeting on the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and we remain convinced that confidence-building measures which meet these criteria will make a real contribution to reducing the tensions and dangers of armed conflict. Such an approach could be useful in other regions of the world.
87.	The European Community's second principle is cooperation. Here, duty and inclination point the same way. The Community is the world's biggest international trader. The handling of economic questions in harmony goes to the heart of the Community's interests.
88.	To draw harmony from a variety of existing instruments is a challenge for the whole world community. The International Development Strategy, to take one example, is addressed to developed and developing countries alike, and recognizes their mutual interdependence. The greatly increased assistance provided by IMF and, especially, the World Bank, to take another, deserves acknowledgment and support, and we welcome both,
89.	The current problems of the world economy accentuate the need for cooperation. They do not automatically make it easier. Adjustment to slower or negative economic growth, higher energy prices and weaker demand is taking time. Inflation, unemployment and interest rates remain high, and exchange markets volatile. The shoe pinches very hard for many countries, especially in the developing world. As was stressed at the European Council at its meeting last June, the Community is of the opinion that cooperation with developing countries and the intensification of international economic relations serve the interest of all concerned, and that they are necessary not only to strengthen the economies of the developing countries, but also to promote the recovery of the world economy.
90.	We in the Community see no room for defeatism. I shall examine some issues which are getting our active attention.
91.	Trade is vital if the developing countries are to achieve sustained economic growth. This concept underpins the close and friendly ties we have with the developing countries, reflected in the Lome Convention 10 the generalized system of preferences and the Community's other arrangements. The Second Lome Convention" has further improved the trade Advantages extended by the Community to the African, Caribbean and Pacific signatories. It has also made available substantially increased amounts of aid.
92.	Meanwhile, the Community stands firm for the maintenance of an open trading system and continued resistance to protectionism. GATT has served the international community well. The Community attaches importance to the full implementation of the Tokyo Round. It endorses the broad agreement within GATT that the contracting parties should envisage a ministerial meeting in the coming year to consider the overall condition of world trade.
93.	Let there be no doubt, equally, about the importance we attach to official development assistance. We welcome the intense diplomatic activity surrounding the problems of development. Despite real budgetary difficulties, we in the Community remain committed to the target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national product and have accepted the target of 0.15 per cent as aid for the least developed countries. The Community and its member States individually already provide development assistance worth over $12 billion a year. This is 39 per cent of all aid given to the developing countries, more than half the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development total and six or seven times that given by the countries of Eastern Europe. We see room for a matching effort here. 
94.	The Community was pleased to see the progress made at the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy at Nairobi last month. This was the beginning of a long but vital road. We were closely involved in the preparation of the Program of Action, and we welcome its adoption. The Conference will be seen as a milestone in the search for global solutions to energy problems that affect developed and developing countries alike.
95.	We in the Community know full well that the problems of the world economy, which affect us all, create a particular hardship for developing countries, and especially the poorest among them. That is why we welcomed the successful conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries held at Paris and will do our best to ensure that it is followed by positive and concrete results which will help the least developed countries to overcome their fundamental problems.
96.	No discussion of the international economy would be complete without a tribute to the efforts of the outgoing President of the General Assembly to bring all sides together in order to launch a new round of global negotiations. Last June the European Council expressed the view that preparations for the new round of global negotiations should be completed as soon as possible and called on the summit conferences in Ottawa and Cancun to give a positive impetus to those preparations. The Community wants to see relations between developed and developing countries take a new and constructive course.
97.	In this connection, we were happy to note that those countries attending the Economic Summit at Ottawa declared themselves ready to participate in a mutually acceptable process of global negotiations in circumstances offering the prospect of meaningful progress. We welcome the recognition at the Ottawa summit of the importance of making increased resources available for the purposes of accelerated food production and food security in the developing world.
98.	The Cancun summit will provide an exceptional opportunity, and we hope that the exchanges there will be imaginative and spontaneous. A twoday summit cannot achieve miracles, but the discussion could mark an important step forward in mutual understanding and provide a political impetus in the NorthSouth dialog. The atmosphere of the preparatory meeting for Cancun was an encouraging augury.
99.	The third principle which governs the European Community's activities on the international stage is the defense of human rights. The Community is a group of States founded on a commitment to democratic principles. Our citizens participate in a political system which guarantees and respects the fundamental freedoms of the individual. Inevitably, therefore, the defense of human rights is a matter of concern to them.
100.	We stand for the promotion and protection of all categories of human rights: civil and political as well as economic, social and cultural. We especially condemn cases of torture, detention without trial or arbitrary execution. We think it deplorable that there should still be situations where people disappear without trace, or where they are persecuted on grounds of race or religion, or for defending human rights.
101.	It is now accepted that these and other violations of human rights are a subject of proper and necessary concern for discussion at the United Nations. As States Members of the United Nations we all have the obligation to promote the protection of human rights in our own countries and in the international community as a whole. We shall continue to speak out against violations of human rights in appropriate United Nations forums and also at the Madrid review meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
102.	Too often in the past the United Nations has been unable or has failed for reasons of political expediency to respond to flagrant violations of human rights. This undermines the credibility of the United Nations. We must not overlook such violations of human rights no matter where they occur. Rather, we should work together to protect the victims and to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to promote respect for human rights.
103.	I hope that I have demonstrated that the European Community is a force for peaceful progress in a turbulent and troubled world. We threaten the security of no one. We have no ideology or system that we wish to impose on those of other cultures and traditions. We respect the right of all nations to self-determination and freedom from foreign interference, and we wish to help them in their pursuit of stable economic growth. It is our conviction that among the vast majority of the members of the Assembly there is an enormous potential for common understanding and cooperation which could only be for the benefit of all mankind.
I convey to you, Sir, the warm felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly. It was a memorable election, not without its drama. We have every confidence that under your dynamic and competent leadership the General Assembly will be able to deal effectively and comprehensively with the many tasks before it.
2.	I would also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation of the resolute and efficient leadership provided to the Assembly during its thirty-fifth session by your predecessor, Mr. Rudiger von Wechmar.
3.	The tolerance and patient diplomacy of the Secretary General are well known. I would like to place on record our sincere appreciation of the statesmanlike manner in which he has carried the awesome responsibility of his post.
4.	On behalf of the people and Government of India, I have great pleasure in welcoming Vanuatu and Belize, which have recently achieved their independence and joined the United Nations.
5.	The contours of the world landscape have indeed changed within the past year to such an extent that the shifts and turns make some of us wonder whether international peace and security can at all be preserved intact if the present slide continues. The tension around us is very palpable. Confrontation has become acceptable for bolstering up otherwise sagging egos. Meanwhile, those who are weak and small in terms of defense capability and economic muscle worry about their very survival as free nations. Additional weapons are being injected on a large scale into fragile regimes and areas where tensions are already high. There is a conscious and declared attempt to make relations with the developing countries function of the EastWest variable and to evaluate these relations in terms of the utility factor in the EastWest game. Considerations of the material wellbeing, peace or stability of a country are being subordinated to those of strategic superiority and containment.
6.	The grim international situation is perhaps both the cause and the consequence of the vast inequities and disequilibrium of the world economy. Tfe present structure is so designed and managed as to preserve and perpetuate its oases of privilege and affluence amidst a desert of dearth and deprivation. There is a strange scenario consisting of the economic problems of the developed world caused by what has been called a "system overload" arising from the divergent pulls of economic surplus, deceleration of demand, inflationary spirals and exiguous unemployment on the one hand, and of the grim problem of diminishing economic opportunities faced by the developing countries on the other. It is this dramatic contrast which is in part responsible for the mood of frustration and desperation in the world today. But what is most surprising is that there is an increasing tendency to tackle economic problems through political means. Obviously this will not work in the new context of a world composed of States having sovereign equality but steeped in gaping economic inequalities. No, it is time to realize that there can no longer be political solutions to economic problems.
7.	The pursuit of such a strategy for development can at best be described as misguided and unfortunate. We do not presume to prescribe panaceas to others, but we cannot possibly accept a denial of our own experience, namely, that an unbridled play of the forces of profit and acquisition can lead to concision and anarchy in economic relations. In structurally weaker economies it leads inevitably to an unbalanced allocation of priorities, distorting the social fabric by widening disparities, heightening tensions and leading ultimately to destabilization. Particularly in the developing countries, the State is the main instrument of change and almost the sole repository of power. It would be very unfortunate indeed if State power were employed to support those who are already powerful in the society, resulting in a disequilibrium which inevitably would generate centrifugal forces that would tend to destroy the society itself-. This is already threatening a number of recently emancipated societies. Such societies therefore need a structure wherein State power uncompromisingly stands by the powerless and maintains a balance between the underdog and those who have a long enough reach and strong enough hands to help themselves, no matter what. Within this overall structure there ought to be full scope for individual initiative, entrepreneurship and & civilized, as opposed to anarchic, interaction of market forces. I have no doubt that this logic holds good in international economic relations as well.
283
A/36/PV. 15
8.	The Charter of the United Nations is based upon the yearning of mankind for peace and prosperity: peace 
which is not merely the absence of a shooting war and prosperity that is not the enrichment of one at the expense of others. We cannot remain indifferent witnesses to the crumbling of detente. The great Powers have long sought security through a balance of mutual vulnerability. Raising the level of deterrence is not going to add any further to their sense of security. Hence a search is on for new strategic partners and allies. I would like to be optimistic, but true optimism invariably has to be based on a realistic and, objective assessment. The determined quest for new political and strategic arrangements on a global scale, with an almost callous disregard for the longterm interests of mankind, does not really leave much room for optimism.
9.	We in India have asked ourselves some basic questions and found some answers to them. The philosophy behind the answers is a simple one and was beautifully articulated by Jawaharlal Nehru in a broadcast he made to the United States of America on 3 April 1948 from New Delhi. It was entitled "The Age of Crisis". He said:
"Today, fear consumes us all fear of the future, fear of war, fear of the peoples of the nations we dislike and those who dislike us . . . But fear is an ignoble emotion and leads to blind strife. Let us try to get rid of this fear . . . and then gradually the crisis of the spirit will be resolved, the dark clouds that surround us may lift and the way to the evolution of the world based or. freedom will be clear."
10.	It is against this background that we see the destiny of India, both within, and in the world, more especially in our own region. Within India the reaffirmation of the policies set out by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi has been accompanied by a renewed dedication to national reconstruction and the consolidation of a secular and pluralistic political system. The stresses and strains of the international economy have impinged upon various aspects of our own economic growth but have not shaken the self- confidence of our people. Our dedication to our chosen objectives, especially to self-reliance, remains undiminished. If the successful inauguration of the APPLE geostationary satellite by our scientists represents one frontier of India's efforts and achievements, the harnessing of animal power through redesigning the bullock cart or the grinding wheel is symbolic of another equally relevant application of technology.
11.	Our self-reliance consists in trying to find solutions to our problems primarily according to our own genius. Our problems are basically simple food, clothing, shelter, health and education. It is their sheer magnitude that is baffling, not their complexity. There are no psychosomatic ailments, no paranoia of any kind afflicting us. We will therefore persevere, in our massive effort to lift ourselves up as a whole mass and not piecemeal, using methods and technology most relevant to our situation, ringing from the most sophisticated to the most simple, neglecting nothing useful because of its plainness, taking nothing irrelevant because of its dazzle. I am sure that many more developing countries now accept this pattern and that some of them have arrived at it by the circuitous and hard route of disillusionment arising from inappropriate models.
12.	India's relations with its neighbors are based on a recognition of the fact that the interests of the countries are so linked that there is no reason for us to be on any terms other than friendly. These relations are based on sovereign equality, a recognition of mutuality of interests and mutuality of perceptions to the extent possible. Where this mutuality does not obtain there is no undue keenness whatsoever to impose unwanted identities on one another. Whatever the depth of relationship at a given time, our sole interest is in promoting an environment of peace and stability that will enable all countries of the region to engage in fruitful development endeavors, avoiding outside influences.
13.	Some constructive steps in the direction of strengthening regional cooperation among the States of South Asia have been considered. We are confident that, given a sense of realism and the requisite political will, such cooperation would be feasible in advancing the development of the countries in this region. I would like to pay a special tribute to the wisdom and foresight of former President ZiaurRahman of Bangladesh for his dedicated efforts in this direction.
14.	All countries in our region face similar economic problems, and we should devote our energies towards development and development alone. India wants to have strong and self-reliant neighbors, since we are convinced that this alone is in our interest. We are, however, gravely concerned by the deteriorating security environment in our region. While India does not find itself- helpless in any way, we view with deep concern the possibility of the strategic calculations of outside Powers engulfing countries in our region.
15.	We are committed to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We are committed to the principles of nonalignment. Our twin commitments in the field of foreign policy are based on the objective necessity to contribute in a positive manner towards the creation of a peaceful and cooperative world. In India today, I am glad to say, there is complete unanimity regarding the content and relevance of the policy of nonalignment and the principles of Pancha Shila. Our commitment to nonalignment has made us unafraid to stand by ourselves, if need be, on our own conviction, whenever a point of principle is involved.
16.	More than two decades ago Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru spoke of the threat of the cold war coming to our doorstep. After a slight letup, this threat seems once again to have come back today. IWenty years since its inception, the nonaligned movement once again faces a situation which calls for the utmost ingenuity and pure purposefulness. However, despite the changes in the environment tending to exert pressure on the movement itself-, the nonaligned countries can still bring a semblance of sanity in international relations. No one has claimed or should ever claim that the nonaligned movement is a monolith. Its resilience and effectiveness, which unfortunately seem to be lost on some, are being recognized by more and more countries. It is not for nothing that every new independent nation promptly joins the nonaligned; the delicate plant of nascent freedom needs a nonaligned climate in order to grow and find its identity. Alignment saps it; alliances spell blight for it. It is a happy augury, both for the movement and for humanity as a whole, that on an increasingly large number of issues, such as decolonization, rejection of apartheid, the Middle East question, more equitable international economic relations, global interdependence and, we hope, many others that will emerge in due course, there has come about an identity of views between the nonaligned and several non non-aligned countries. We fervently hope that both the trend and the tribe will increase to a point where alignment ceases to be either fashionable or profitable.
17.	I shall now briefly refer to some of the world's unresolved problems, whose number unfortunately tends only to increase with each succeeding session of the General Assembly. The most important of the problems is, of course, the very survival of mankind.
18.	Nothing proves the unreality and mockery of international politics today so much as the failure of all attempts at disarmament. Despite this unreality, the world cannot afford to ignore the fateful implications of the arms race, particularly in its nuclear aspects, for the very future of life on this planet. Along with increasing levels of sophistication, new claims are being made regarding the possibility of waging "winnable" wars. On top of everything, we now have the neutron weapons. This development will set the stage for a qualitative jump in the nuclear arms race. While the Governments of the nuclear weapon States ostensibly practice deterrence, the choice which they are presenting their own people with seems to be one of death by their own bombs or by those of the enemy. Most certainly, it is not a choice between death and survival. I have no doubt that in spite of the intense psychosis created by these Governments in a variety of ways the people of the nuclear weapon States themselves feel disaster in their bones all the time. It is time that this feeling finds increasing articulation and leads to active opposition before it is too late. It goes without saying that for the rest of mankind this is a matter of the greatest concern. The world cannot afford to permit any State or States to endanger the survival of a)I mankind. peace-loving States should assume, in a more strident manner, the moral responsibility to urge nuclear disarmament on a high priority basis.
19.	The nonaligned countries have clearly and consistently stressed the primacy of their concern about nuclear issues. We are aware that each time there is a move to modernize a weapons system on one side, a corresponding mirror image action is taken by the other, resulting in the escalation of fear, anxiety and suspicion in the whole world. Each upward spiral in the arms race becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. It is our sincere belief that this vicious cycle of action and response can be broken. We hope that the dialog between the United States and the USSR which has just started will result in genuine and practical measures to give a fresh start in this respect. Meanwhile the world waits with bated breath, teetering on the brink of disaster.
20.	The Indian Ocean is another theater witnessing a great accumulation of sophisticated military hardware. This is in flagrant violation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace adopted in 1971 [resolution 2832(XXVI)], in which the General Assembly expressed opposition to the military presence of the great Powers in the context of their rivalry and calls for its elimination. There is an effort to divide the littoral and hinterland States. Arguments are being improvised to justify greatPower presences in the Indian Ocean area. There is a need for determined efforts to stop these moves, which ruin our security environment. Further, it needs to be reiterated that greatPower presences in the
Indian Ocean are unacceptable not only in the context of their rivalry but under any circumstances whatsoever. Were they to agree among themselves to stay put in this Ocean they would still be equally unwelcome. Together or separately, we want them out.
21.	India has consistently expressed its disapproval of all kinds of outside intervention and interference in any country. We have unequivocally opposed the presence of foreign troops in any country and all countries. For us this includes Afghanistan, whereas, presumably, to some other countries this should apply only to Afghanistan, A running argument has ensued on this question, and those who started with condemnatory polemics have now come round to prefer a political solution on the lines of the New Delhi Declaration adopted by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries last February [see AI36I116 and Corr.l, annexJ, The Secretary-General is now considering the question and is currently engaged in removing the cobwebs to enable a dialog between the countries concerned. We wish him well in this quest. Meanwhile, the people of Afghanistan can only hope devoutly that the SecretaryGeneral's efforts may succeed; they have such a large stake in his success.
22.	The people and Government of India are saddened by the continuation of the conflict between Iran and Iraq. This conflict has taken a heavy toll in life and property, leading inevitably to the retardation of developmental activities of both these nonaligned countries. On their part, the nonaligned have attempted to find an acceptable solution to the conflict and will continue their efforts in consonance with the mandate of the New Delhi Declaration.
23.	India's ties with the countries of SouthEast Asia are based upon the closest social, cultural and intellectual links developed over the centuries. Having supported them in their struggle for independence, we cannot but be deeply interested in the developments in this region, particularly those affecting international peace and security in our own neighborhood. We continue to be prepared to join in all constructive efforts aimed at seeking a peaceful solution to the problems of the region.
24.	The people of Kampuchea have only just begun to emerge from the holocaust visited upon them by the Pol Pot regime in addition to the privations they had to endure earlier during the struggle of the peoples of IndoChina for national liberation, independence and sovereignty. They have just begun to look to the future with a semblance of hope and expectation. The prospects of famine and disease have receded. At this stage, the effort of the outside world should be to reassure the Kampuchean people that the process they have embarked upon will not be reversed and that their erstwhile persecutors will never be allowed to return and unleash once again a reign of terror upon them. It is, therefore, a great irony of the times that the same despotic regime should bring the stench of their genocidal acts into this august chamber in order to represent, as it were, their own victims in a bizarre inversion of the principles of the Charter. We still hope that before long wiser counsels will prevail. Indeed, at the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs at New Delhi, it was clearly underlined that a comprehensive political solution should be found, providing for the withdrawal of all foreign forces and ensuring full respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all 
States in the region, including Kampuchea. The interference and intervention of outside Powers in the region have exacerbated tensions and must be eliminated. We are convinced that this can be achieved only through a dialog between the countries of the region.
2$. The political situation in West Asia continues to smolder as a result of Israel's adventurism and intransigence. If anything, it has been rendered more serious by IsraeKs arrogation to itself- of the right to launch "preemptive" attacks against its neighbors, as happened recently in southern Lebanon, on the spurious pretext of safeguarding its own security. Similarly, the 7 June attack on and destruction of the Osirak atomic reactor by Israel F16 aircraft a reactor known to have been intended entirely for peaceful purposes was an example of blatant aggression.
26.	A just and comprehensive solution of the West Asian problem can be achieved only by ensuring the total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem, and the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national right to self-determination, including the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, as well as the recognition of the right of all States in the area to live within recognized and secure boundaries. Such a peaceful solution cannot be attained without the full and equal participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people, in any settlement or negotiating process. We have already seen convincing evidence of the failure of a partial solution undertaken without the participation of the PLO.
27.	The recent emergency special session on Namibia has served to focus the attention of the international community on the grave situation in southern Africa. The credibility of the United Nations will be seriously eroded if it is unable to secure freedom and justice for the people of Namibia. Only through an early implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) could the peaceful decolonization of Namibia be achieved. All attempts to dilute, modify or attenuate the details of the United Nations plan to which that resolution refers for any further purpose are unacceptable to the overwhelming majority of world opinion. The Government of India reiterates its full solidarity with the South West Africa People's Organization [SWAPO] as the authentic representative of the Namibian people and will continue to extend moral and material support to it in its struggle for national liberation.
28.	We had all hoped last year that the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea would successfully finalize a comprehensive, convention. However, the Conference has since met twice and our hope has not yet been fulfilled. The Government of India is deeply concerned that the efforts of the Conference have been frustrated, creating uncertainty about its future. Some 150 countries have labored hard for over eight years to arrive at an acceptable compromise package relating to the law of the sea which, in our opinion, serves the best interests of the community of nations as a whole. In this era of multilateral interdependence, national interests of one country cannot override the overwhelming interests of the entire international community. The resources of the international seabed area have been proclaimed the common heritage of mankind. An orderly and safe development and rational management of these resources for the benefit of mankind as a whole are imperative necessities. We do hope that the Conference will successfully complete its task at Caracas in September 1982, without reopening any of the issues already settled.
29.	All of us, each in a different way, have found that peace is stable only when prosperity is equitably shared. Mutatis mutandis, the same is equally true in the context of our global village, this little earth of ours. What are the mechanisms to be evolved so that the worthwhile things in life are within everyone's reach? That is what all of us are striving for in building a new international economic order in which production expands, labor is shared, and the products of labor are available to all, without pockets of misery or wasteful pockets of surpluses.
30.	While there may be no simple solution to the global economic crisis, the erosion of a multilateral framework will certainly make the situation much worse. A withdrawal from the processes of international cooperation is bound to lead to increasing recourse to bilateralism. This was not the vision of the founding fathers of the Charter of the United Nations, to which every speaker before me has expressed an unqualified commitment. Total bilateralism at the expense of multilateral cooperation would run into alliances that may not be in the interest of harmonious relations and relaxation of tensions.
31.	The attempts to erode the multilateral framework of economic cooperation appear even more indefensible in view of the rapid and continuing aggravation of the economic situation of most developing countries. Their terms of trade have further declined, and their exports have faced the rising walls of protectionism erected by several powerful industrialized countries. Food and energy have become more scarce. Balance of payments deficits are growing alarmingly, and external debt is assuming unmanageable proportions.
32.	Developing countries are unable to improve their terms of trade when the wall of protectionism keeps rising in one form or another in response to every innovation that they make. Access to capital markets is practically blocked through artificially inflated interest rates. The result of all these phenomena, which are manipulated by a few centers of economic power and over which the developing countries have no control, becomes manifest in sluggish economic activity at home and further aggravates balance of payments and debt burdens. 
33.	Closely linked to this process is the role of the international financial institutions. Only a few months ago, at the second regular session for 1981 of the Economic and Social Council, we welcomed the many innovative mechanisms evolved by these institutions, making it possible for larger financial resources to become available to developing countries. I must note with some regret, however, that even while more rigorous conditionality has been maintained some of the progressive mechanisms of lending by these institutions have come into question in recent months. After the tremendous effort during the past decade to impart a greater and more effective developmental role to these institutions, this retrograde trend is most unfortunate. I would like to express my strong conviction that the achievements of the past decade and the progress made in making these institutions more responsive to the needs of the developing countries should not be reversed or eroded.
34.	I would also hope that the United Nations system will sincerely take serious measures to implement the policy measures defined in the International Development Strategy so that the goals and objectives of the Third United Nations Development Decade [resolution 35/56] are attained. The Strategy was adopted by consensus, and its goals and objectives are modest. If there is sincerity about interdependence, these modest goals should not be difficult to achieve.
35.	The Caracas high level conference of the Group of 77 made progress in a pragmatic manner in the field of economic cooperation amongst the developing countries. The attitude of the developed countries towards technical cooperation amongst the developing countries has not been negative, though not exactly enthusiastic. In both the SouthSouth and the NorthSouth context a number of proposals designed to alleviate the burden of oil-importing developing countries have been under consideration. It is necessary to devise an early action oriented program to solve this important problem in its various aspects. This has perhaps been delayed because of the failure to launch the global negotiations. The energy resources of the developing countries can be developed on the basis of a definitive expansion of the multilateral flow of public finances, about which interesting ideas have been adumbrated, including that of an energy affiliate of the World Bank. Both the objective and the urgency of these steps need to be underscored.
36.	One of the major obstacles to a meaningful North South dialog so far is the widespread impression that on issues of resources and technology transfer it is the South that needs the North, without having much to offer in return. This is not a correct reflection of the situation. The intimate dependence of the economies of the North on world markets makes it impossible for them, as the Brandt Commission notes in its report to put even their own house in order if they forget the rest of the world. This is the lesson of the 1980s, which the North could ignore only at its own peril.
37.	We would like to reiterate, therefore, that the international community should face squarely the reality of interdependence among nations. The benefits of strengthened international economic cooperation and the dangers inherent in the growing tendency towards isolation and protectionism need to be realized more in practice. This should be reflected in the full participation by all developed countries in the process of solving international economic issues in the context of NorthSouth cooperation. There can be no exception or reservations to this process or any ground whatsoever historical, ideological or merely rhetorical. While the task of apportioning blame should now appropriately belong to academic endeavor, all developed countries should put their shoulders to the wheel.
38.	While saying this I am not underestimating the difficulties that willing Governments of the North would face in convincing their own people of the fact of interdependence in terms intelligible to the members of a self-solicitous affluent society. The realization that the purchase of the next automobile by one family in a developed country would be truly dependent on the availability of the next meal to another, starving family in a developing country is not easy to induce. Yet this is precisely the core of the concept of interdependence. The ancient Indian dictum which treats the whole world as one family seems to be on the verge of complete vindication in a very different context which none of the ancient sages had perhaps anticipated. Ancient intuition and modern scientific experience find a strange coincidence at this point.
39.	Let there be no mistake. The United Nations, being the largest multilateral system, must have the capacity to provide the umbrella under which the urgent and complex task of restructuring international economic relations could and should be undertaken. From an almost purely political institution, the system has gradually come to grapple with complex economic issues lying in the bowels of international relations today. A successful launching of the global negotiations on major economic issues and a coherent and integrated framework in the spirit of mutual benefit will constitute the real success of the United Nations system. We reiterate, therefore, that this process should be started without further delay.
40.	We are today on the eve of the International Meeting on Cooperation and Development, to be held at Cancun, which will bring together leaders of some developed and developing countries to enable a better understanding of each other's perceptions, achieve a real meeting of minds and generate the requisite political impetus to make hopefully a determined assault on all questions concerning international economic relations. The growing frustration and cynicism generated over the years by frequent setbacks to every NorthSouth exercise represent a dangerous trend. We, for our part, will continue our serious commitment to work tirelessly and ceaselessly to reverse this trend. We wish god-speed to the Cancun conclave.
41.	In the course of the general debate so far, we have heard several statements which rekindle one's faith in the desire of the North to engage in a mutually advantageous dialog with the South. I was particularly heartened by the question posed by the Minister for External Relations of France in his statement before the General Assembly on 23 September where he said: "But how often do you hear it . acknowledged . . . that the progress of the North South dialog is a prerequisite for world progress and perhaps even for world peace?" [9th meeting, para. 26.] He himself- provided the answer with characteristic finesse: "The South has become part of the life of the North." [Ibid, para. 27.)
42.	I would like to join wholeheartedly in this statement, as well as in similar inspiring statements made by several colleagues from other developed countries. These pronouncements are indeed refreshing trend-setters, inasmuch as they seek to demolish the hitherto impregnable NorthSouth divide. North and South must, therefore, share the same objectives, as their destinies are intertwined. Together, we can make sure that while following our paths, we can contribute to each other's prosperity as well as security, provided we follow the logic of peaceful cooperation and steer clear of the twin mistakes of isolation and confrontation.

150.	At the outset, I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate Vanuatu and Belize on their independence and welcome them on their admission to the United Nations. On behalf of the Government and the people of Israel, I wish them success and prosperity as independent and sovereign States.
151.	The Government and the people of Israel have always upheld the ideals and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It could not have been otherwise, for Israel's intellectual and moral traditions have given birth to some of the most important elements inherent in the shape and meaning of the Organization. The brotherhood of man, social justice, the rule of law both domestic and international the equality of nations, the peaceful settlement of international disputes and the outlawing of war those and other ideals had grown and taken root among the shepherds and peasants of Judea and Israel long before they came to be accepted as principles of current international life.
152.	Unfortunately, these ideals have been honored more in the breach than in the observance in the practice of the United Nations. In recent years the Organization has repeatedly permitted itself to be abused by Israel's adversaries who enjoy a built-in majority in the Assembly on any issue related to the ArabIsraeli conflict. In recent years Israel has more than once been the victim of discriminatory treatment in the United Nations.
153.	It must be stressed that international organizations which allow their fundamental rules to be violated cause severe damage to themselves and thereby undermine their very raison d'etre. Decisions arrived at in disregard of the relevant provisions of constitutional instruments are illegal, however often repeated and however overwhelming the majority that supported them.
154.	The distortions which pervade the United Nations system have also manifested themselves in the attitude of the Organization towards the Camp David accords and the treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel. By any yardstick, the conclusion of peace between two former enemies is surely not only a legitimate but also a desirable development which should have been welcomed by the United Nations, the primary purpose of which is the promotion and maintenance of international peace. No third party, including the Assembly, has the legal or moral authority to question, let alone to deny, the validity of the accords attained or of any treaties deriving from them,
155.	A major issue that has rightly engaged the attention and growing concern of all mankind is that of international cooperation for development and the widening gap between the standard of living of the poor nations and that of the wealthy nations. However, the NorthSouth dialog has remained largely a debate among nations and groups of nations, and, as might be expected, those suffering hunger and deprivation have not had their lot improved by this debate.
156.	For the last 20 years Israel has been involved in the effort to develop ways and means of raising the standard of living in the less developed societies. It is our wish and we believe that it is within our capacity to make a further contribution of our own to joint efforts to tackle specific development problems and advance towards a solution.
157.	Ever since its establishment Israel has had to cope simultaneously with a wide range of grave social, economic and security problems. We have absorbed and integrated hundreds of thousands of immigrants many of them victims of persecution in the Arab countries from which they had come and at the same time set about creating a progressive and rapidly developing society. With all the urgent problems that weighed upon us, we have spared no effort in cooperating with other young developing nations in such fields as agriculture, hydrology, rural development, health and youth leadership. This fruitful process of international cooperation with dozens of countries, regardless of political outlook, has been constantly moving forward.
158.	In their continuous search for solutions to the evolving challenges of development, Israel's experts have recently formulated some new ideas on development, referred to by them as the Transitional Economy Plan. It is a model for empirical dynamic development, well within the means of the countries concerned. I wish to take this opportunity to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/36/497, circulated at the request of my delegation, which contains a report entitled "An Outline of Development through Promotion of the Transitional Economy". We do not claim that this plan is a panacea for all the world's economic ills. Rather, it aims at applying a gradual, step-by-step, relatively low-cost program of improvements to the rural sector of society, a sector that so far has not been given sufficient attention. We will be happy to cooperate with any national or international organization for the purpose of putting the concepts contained in this plan into practice.
159.	At the thirty-fifth session [15th meeting], we appealed from this rostrum to the Soviet Government to remove all the limitations and obstacles hindering Jews in the Soviet Union from leaving for Israel. Already at that time there were grounds for fearing that the Soviet Union was going to close its gates to those Jews. Unfortunately, those fears have since been substantiated. Over the past year we have been watching with growing anxiety the steady decrease in the number of Jews leaving the Soviet Union to the lowest number for the last 10 years. The Soviet Union is thus forcibly preventing many thousands of them from living in their homeland.
160.	In parallel, we have witnessed again a regrettable increase in the violation of fundamental human rights in the Soviet Union. Over the past six months the number of prisoners of Zion detained under false pretexts and sentenced by Soviet courts to long prison terms has doubled. The sole crime of these people is their desire to live as Jews in their own land. Ida Nudel, Victor Brailovski, Anatoly Shcharansky and others have been gaoled for that desire, while others who have been refused exit permits have been subjected to pressure to refrain from so-called antiSoviet activity. The Assembly should know that the antiSoviet activity in question consists of the study of the Hebrew language and of the reading of books on Jewish history and Judaism.
161.	From this rostrum I wish to appeal once again to the Soviet Union to reopen its gates for Jews who wish to return to their homeland and to cease the persecution of the Jews in the Soviet Union.
162.. There are also other countries in which Jews have been subjected to discrimination and oppression. In particular, 1 must again express anxiety over the condition of the tortured Jewish community in Syria, whose human rights are severely curtailed and many of whom have been imprisoned and have had their property impounded. I would thus also appeal to the Government of Syria to respect the basic human rights of its Jewish community, which it holds hostage and which it prevents from leaving.
163.	Permit me to turn now to the subject of the nuclear menace posed by Iraq. The item on the agenda of the Assembly dealing with the destruction of the Iraqi nuclear reactor has been formulated in a manner clearly intended to prejudge the outcome of the debate. As has been stated by Israel, the decision to destroy that reactor was taken only when it became absolutely certain that Iraq was on the verge of producing nuclear bombs, the principal target of which would have been Israel. People in all parts of the world, including the Middle East, are sleeping more soundly today, secure in the knowledge that that particular reactor has been removed. Iraq's nuclear reactor had to be destroyed before it became operational in the summer of 1981, for its destruction at a later date would have brought about radioactive fallout, endangering the civilian population of Baghdad.
164.	Ever since the establishment of the State of Israel, Iraq has been conspiring against it, both politically and militarily. Iraq set out to acquire nuclear facilities and expertise and then proceeded to assemble all the ingredients required for the development of nuclear weapons. This indicated a calculated effort on the part of Iraq to embark on a nuclear weapons program, Our concern about the Iraqi nuclear program was shared also by authoritative foreign governmental and professional assessments. None the less, six years of diplomatic and public efforts to bring about the cessation of the Iraqi military nuclear program yielded little more than reference to IAEA inspections under the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to which Iraq is a signatory. Israel has had to conclude that a country which acquired a complete fuel cycle and is openly bent on the destruction of Israel will not balk at going ahead with its program, whether or not it is a party to the NonProliferation Treaty.
165.	Let me take this opportunity to reiterate Israel's policy that it will not be the first country in the Middle East to introduce nuclear weapons into the region. Faced as it is with the stark realities of the Middle East, Israel must insist on distinguishing between spurious and genuine safety. As the case of Iraq has clearly demonstrated, the NonProliferation Treaty cannot effectively prevent such a country from resorting to nuclear weapons so as to achieve what more conventional means have failed to do.
166.	The only genuine way to remove the nuclear threat to the Middle East can be found in the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, freely and directly negotiated among the countries of the region and based on mutual assurances, on the pattern of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America. In the Assembly we shall continue to advocate and support constructive steps genuinely advancing the prospect of a Middle East free of nuclear weapons. At the same time, we shall warn against, and oppose, steps designed to exploit this subject as a tool of antiIsrael political warfare.
167.	The situation in Lebanon has been a source of grave concern in our region for a number of years. That country has been subjected to strife and bloodshed from the mid-1970's onwards, due to the exploitation by Syria and by the PLO of domestic rivalries in Lebanon, followed by outright invasion of the country by the Syrian army. The situation has been worsened by the tightening of the PLO's grip on large parts of the country. Furthermore, in order to promote their regional strategic aims, the Syrians have subjected the Lebanese civilian population to brutal attacks which have brought about the destruction of a large portion of the country. Some 120,000 Lebanese civilians have been the victims of Syrian and PLO atrocities. It is characteristic of the double standard practiced in international relations that these atrocities have never been condemned by the international community, including the United Nations. Arab and Soviet bloc supporters of Syria and the PLO have made any such condemnation impossible.
168.	It is our hope that an independent and free Lebanon will soon reemerge and maintain good relations with all its neighbors, including Israel. But this will be very difficult to achieve as long as the PLO is allowed to nest in Lebanon and to hatch schemes aimed at promoting international terrorism and the mounting of brutal and cowardly attacks against the civilian population of Israel, especially in the northern part of our country. There will be no end to the tragedy of Lebanon as long as the Syrian occupation continues and as long as the PLO maintains its terrorist bases in Lebanon, supported by armaments from foreign Powers, mainly the Soviet Union and Libya. The Government of Israel will at all times support the reestablishment of a truly independent Lebanon, within its internationally recognized boundaries, free of Syrian occupation and PLO terror.
169.	The main cause of the ArabIsrael conflict has always been the refusal of Arab States to accept the existence of an independent and secure State of Israel and their avowed commitment to its destruction. The events of the last four years have brought about a major breakthrough in that respect: after Egypt abandoned the path of war and announced its readiness to negotiate peace, peace inevitably followed. Furthermore, while the winds of war have been constantly blowing in other parts of the region, Egypt and Israel, which not long ago were faced with the imminent danger of war, are now learning to coexist in peace and represent an island of stability in the Middle East. Unfortunately, this is not yet the case with regard to the other Arab neighbors of Israel. These Arab States, which have been invited by the signatories of the Camp David framework for peace to join the peace process, have so far refused to do so.
170.	One of the clearest manifestations of their categorical opposition to the peace process is their continuing and unprecedented military buildup through arms purchases from the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc nations, as well as from the United States and Western Europe. Since 1978 the major Arab countries, excluding Egypt, have concluded arms deals valued at $27.8 billion, of which $11.6 billion worth has already been delivered.
171.	These acquisitions of arms reflect a formidable quantitative and qualitative military buildup in those countries. These arms are unfortunately intended primarily for use against Israel. Needless to say, the stepped-up arming of the Arab States serves to strengthen their conviction that the ArabIsrael conflict can still be solved by military means. Moreover, it jeopardizes the internal stability of several of the Arab regimes, as well as of the region as a whole.
172.	The Camp David accords have been and remain the only feasible path to peace; no other viable solution appears on the horizon. Just last week we resumed the negotiations with Egypt, with the participation of the
United States, on the establishment of full autonomy for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district. We hope to bring these negotiations before long to a successful conclusion.
173.	Our people were not handed their State on a silver platter. We fought for liberation against a colonial Power. We then had to fight against a host of Arab armies that sought to prevent the establishment of our State. Subsequently, we have fought four more wars to defend it. We know very well the meaning and the price of combating colonialism, of a struggle for liberation and of fighting for self-determination.
174.	These concepts are now being abused and exploited by a number of Arab Governments in the name of the Palestinian Arabs. The Palestinian Arabs do have a State on a major part of the territory of Palestine. In Jordan, there exists a Palestinian Arab State in everything but name. It is a Palestinian Arab State by virtue of its geography, demography, history, culture, religion and language. It has even been declared as such by an impressive number of Palestinian Arab and Jordanian leaders, There is thus no need to speak further of Palestinian self-determination; their homeland is already in existence. Moreover, in 1964, when the PLO approved the so-called Palestinian National Covenant with a view to "liberating" Palestine, at a time when Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district were still under Jordanian and Egyptian occupation, the real goal of the Arab States was to "liberate" Israel from Israelis, to deprive Israel of its existence. That aim is still fervently pursued today under the cover of the slogan of a "homeland for the homeless Palestinians", which is given immense publicity by Arab propagandists and their supporters.
175.	Israel firmly believes in a vision of peace for our region and will strive towards its realization. The Middle East is rich, not only in history and in spiritual and cultural assets, but also in immense natural resources and manpower. The people of Israel has as much to offer for the development and progress of our region as have the other neighboring peoples, each in its own way.
176.	The Jewish people has reestablished its home in the land of its forefathers, where the Kingdoms of Judea and Israel flourished for centuries. We have now restored our sovereignty over this area after 19 centuries of homelessness, with Jerusalem, which has always been the center and sole focus of the national and spiritual life of the Jewish people, as the undivided and indivisible capital of Israel
177.	We have returned to the land of Israel and have come there to stay. Together all the nations of the Middle East can usher in an era of real peace and cooperation in the region. The opportunity is there. Let us not miss it.
Mr. VicePresident, will you please congratulate President Kittani on his election as President of this Assembly. His long and distinguished service to the international community makes him eminently qualified for that task, and I know that he will guide us with impartiality and skill.
42.	It is a great pleasure to welcome two fellow members of the Commonwealth, Belize and Vanuatu, to this assembly of nations. We are especially gratified that independence has brought one more into the growing family of South Pacific island nations. Their voices, individually and collectively, are going to be heard more and more in the world assembly. The addition to our membership of two more small nations, proud of their independence but limited in resources, brings home to us one of the major issues facing this Assembly the desperate struggle of so many countries simply to reach the most basic level of economic and social development.
43.	The recent United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries sharply focused international attention on this issue. That was useful, but in concentrating on the need for developed countries to raise the level of their official development assistance to a limited number of the poorest developing countries the Conference did not really get to the heart of the matter.
44.	The problems which face the developing countries are well known. They affect some of the developed countries also. They include the soaring cost of imported energy, inflated prices for manufactured imports and fluctuating prices for primary exports. These factors are compounded by increasing protectionist pressures in the advanced economies and a reluctance to contemplate the kind of restructuring which would expand trading opportunities for the developing countries.	^
45.	These problems cannot be solved by financial subsidies alone or even, in itself, by successful internal economic development. Economic self-sufficiency is not a practicable goal for the developing countries, nor is it for most developed countries. Even a modest level of prosperity and economic stability can only be achieved through a continuous expansion of international trade. This, in turn, can only be achieved in a different international climate, in which there is a better balance between access to manufactured goods and access to agricultural products. There is too great a tendency to concentrate on reducing barriers to trade in industrial manufactures and to push aside agriculture as some kind of an exception with which it is too difficult to cope. That cannot be allowed to continue.
46.	It is, surely, self-evident that successful economic development merely creates new problems unless there is a corresponding expansion of trading opportunities. What future is there if the rich countries continue to deny access in order to protect their own agricultures, if prices of agricultural exports fluctuate wildly or are distorted by subsidies and if those prices are far outstripped by the cost of essential industrial goods and services?
47.	The prosperity of my own country depends on the exp<M of a relatively small number of agricultural commodities. That means we share some of the problems faced by developing countries. We know what those problems are. Because we are small, and because we face economic difficulties ourselves, we try in a number of ways to ensure that our development assistance program is efficient and effective. All our aid is given in the form of grants. We make sure it is directed into the kind of projects in which New
Zealand has a recognized expertise. We never embark on a project unless it has been specifically asked for by the recipient Government. It makes sense for us to concentrate our aid efforts in the part of the world that we know best, that is, our immediate neighborhood. Almost 70 per cent of our bilateral development assistance is now channeled to the island nations of the South Pacific.
48.	In our view, the criteria for inclusion in the United Nations list of least developed countries are unduly narrow and rigid. Only one South Pacific country, at present, qualifies for inclusion in that list. A number of others, because they suffer from all the disadvantages of extremely small size, isolation and lack of resources, also deserve the special treatment accorded to the least developed. Indeed, if it were not for the level of aid they do receive, we believe they would qualify even under present criteria. I would certainly like to see those criteria revised and made more flexible.
49.	Because their populations are tiny and because of the poverty of their resources, many of the island nations of the South Pacific are going to have a long and hard struggle to become more viable. And yet their very smallness and isolation, which ought to make the world community more responsive to their special circumstances, has caused them to be overlooked by some of the major donors. Thus there is every reason for New Zealand to concentrate its aid efforts in the South Pacific, and we intend to continue that policy.
50.	External financial assistance, however essential, is not enough in itself to bring about successful development. New Zealand recognizes that the developing island countries need outlets for the goods they produce and has set about meeting that need in a practical manner. Together with Australia, we have joined in a treaty with our neighbors in the South Pacific to give them unrestricted duty-free access, on a nonreciprocal basis, for the great majority of their exports. We have also established an industrial development scheme to promote the growth of the manufacturing sector in the island economies through joint ventures with New Zealand firms. We have given strong support to the establishment of a regional shipping line to ensure that the exports of the island countries reach their markets.
51.	I make no boast that what we have achieved has solved the problems of our developing neighbors. Obviously not, since their economies are still for the most part in a precarious state.
52.	Economic and social development can progress smoothly only in conditions of political stability. Recent history has shown how true that is even in countries which are blessed with great natural wealth, and all the more starkly in others which are not. Sometimes the causes of instability have been internal. Too often they have been made far worse by external pressure, intervention or military invasion. At present there is dangerous instability in several widely separated areas of the world, including SouthEast Asia, SouthWest Asia, the Middle East, southern Africa, eastern Europe and the Korean peninsula.
53.	If I refer first to Kampuchea it is because that is the area of tension nearest to my own land; because New Zealand regards itself as a friend of the Association of
SouthEast Asian Nations [ASEANwhose members are neighbors of Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam; and because we believe the continuance of the situation in Kampuchea poses an eventual threat to our own security. External intervention in Kampuchea has been flagrant. There is no excuse for the continued presence of 200,000 Vietnamese troops in that country. New Zealand has consistently urged the need for a political settlement which would free the Kampuchean people from a foreign presence and permit them freely to choose their own Government. Such a settlement would enable Viet Nam to resume its own economic development, free from both the burden of maintaining its military occupation of a neighboring country and its present dependence on a single superPower for economic and military support.
54.	New Zealand cannot and does not condone the past crimes of Pol Pot and his associates. But, as the latest vote on Kampuchea's credentials shows, there is no disposition amongst the majority of Members of this Assembly to replace the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea by one representing a puppet Government propped up by a military occupation.
55.	We welcome the efforts that are being made to form a more broadly based successor to the present Democratic Kampuchean leadership. We expect that the International Conference on Kampuchea will continue its efforts to find a solution to the Kampuchean problem a solution which takes account of the legitimate interests of all sides. We hope that Viet Nam and the Soviet . Union will be persuaded to join in the negotiating process through the mediating efforts of the Ad Hoc Committee and the President of the Conference. The need for a settlement is urgent, for the longer the fighting continues' within Kampuchea, the greater the risk that it will spread beyond the borders of that war-torn land.
56.	Instability in SouthEast Asia is paralleled in SouthWest Asia by military intervention and continuing hostilities in Afghanistan. International concern will continue to be reiterated in this Assembly until Soviet forces are withdrawn. Whether or not the Soviet Union has come to regard that entanglement as a mistake, my Government most earnestly hopes that the Soviet Government will not compound that error and deal a final fatal blow to detente by similar action against the people of Poland.
57.	Almost since it began, this Organization has been trying to find a solution to the problem of a divided Korea. Yet there is still no genuine dialog between the leaders in the North and those in the South. The latest call by the Republic of Korea for a summit meeting between the two Koreas has been rejected. Surely the Korean people as a whole at least deserve that their leaders should talk seriously about the future of their country. It makes no sense for the two sides in that divided peninsula to go on forever pouring so much of their resources and energies into military preparations. My Government hopes that the authorities in the North will reconsider their stand.
58.	It is a matter of deep regret that all our hopes for urgent and positive steps towards a just and durable Middle East settlement should have had so little to sustain them. New Zealand welcomed the steps agreed upon by Israel and Egypt to restore peace between them. But the process cannot be allowed to come to a stop at this point.
During the last 12 months there has been a deplorable readiness to resort to violence. There is a need for a genuine and renewed commitment to the principles of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). There is a need for Israel's neighbors to accept and respect the existence of Israel as a sovereign and independent State. There is an equal need for a corresponding recognition of the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians, including the right to self-determination. That, in our view, means the right to establish a separate State if that is their wish. The annexation of East Jerusalem and the continuing establishment of settlements in the occupied territories are obstructions to a negotiated settlement. A resurgence of terrorism, a buildup of ever more sophisticated armaments, or recourse to preemptive military strikes simply threaten to undermine what has with such difficulty been accomplished so far. Only a genuine will to negotiate fairly and realistically will bring lasting results.
59.	In southern Africa we still see a people denied the right of nationhood. South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia must end. The Prime Minister of my country said in this forum at the 
thirty-fifth session [109th meeting] that there was no good reason why the few issues that remain outstanding in the search for a settlement in Namibia should not be .settled quickly. We believe that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) provides the basis for that settlement and we support the continuing efforts of those seeking to achieve the early and peaceful independence of Namibia.
60.	We deplore South Africa's aggressiveness against its neighbors and its violation of Angola's territory and sovereignty. In South Africa itself the detestable system of institutionalized racism and injustice apartheid remains entrenched. South Africa's black majority are denied the right to participate in the choice of their Government and are shut out from the full enjoyment of the resources of their own country.
61.	Change in South Africa is inevitable. Whether it will come peacefully or through violence is in South Africa's hands. Time, though, is running desperately short.
62.	We cannot expect international cooperation in bringing about economic and social development to flourish while confrontation and conflict persist in so many parts of the world. Heightened tension threatens not only detente but the orderly development of international law, the negotiation of arms control agreements and the promotion of human rights. ^National security and rearmament become matters of overriding priority for Governments. Legislatures tend to focus more determinedly on domestic political considerations, to the detriment of enlightened foreign policies. The humanitarian and altruistic instincts of ordinary people all too often become dulled. Their natural instinct for peace is overshadowed by a narrower and more belligerent patriotism. Thus is created an international climate inimical to the peaceful settlement of disputes and the orderly conduct of international relations.
63.	All those who have traditionally cherished the rule of law and the fundamental freedoms, of the individual, both at home and abroad, surely have a special duty to resist such dangerous trends and to throw their weight behind the negotiating process by which the United Nations seeks to achieve those objectives.
64.	A prime example is the development of a new law of the sea. A stable order for the oceans, the seabed and coastal waters is essential for world peace. It is most desirable, to say the least, that the major maritime Powers should participate in the new convention. This year the work of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has been slowed down to permit a review of the draft convention by the United States Government. The Conference is now clearly determined to push on to finality in 1982. It is the earnest hope of my Government that, having completed its review, the United States will rejoin the negotiating process and will stand ready with all other nations to make a determined last effort to ensure the adoption by consensus of the draft convention at the next and final negotiating session of the Conference.
65.	In the field of human rights, the United Nations has concentrated, rightly, on the needs of people who are socially disadvantaged or who have been traditional victims of discrimination.
66.	A striking example is the United Nations Decade for Women, now at midpoint. The adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women [General Assembly resolution 34/180] has been one of its major achievements. It is significant that it has come into force so quickly. All nations, whatever their stage of economic development, their cultural traditions or their geographic circumstances, have been reminded not only of the rights of half of humanity but also of the enormous contribution made by women. It was right that the United Nations should lead that world movement, because the discrimination to be eliminated  the discrimination we must "eliminate has been universal. The activities of the Decade have been followed with close attention in New Zealand and its aims have our full support. But the convention will only achieve its aim if it is universally ratified and, more important, given full effect in each country.
67.	Similarly, the current International Year of Disabled Persons has focused attention on the rights of handicapped people. It has provided impetus and the practical framework for action. In my own country, the response has been quite remarkable. A mass fund-raising effort for the disabled resulted in the largest collection of voluntary funds for a charitable purpose in our history. We have been made more aware than ever before not only of the needs of the disabled, but of the contribution they can make to our society as a whole.
68.	Next year we shall be summoned to the second special session devoted to disarmament. Nowhere is the need for a renewed effort to achieve progress in international negotiations more apparent. If we are honest, we must acknowledge that since the first special session the prospects for effective disarmament measures have not advanced. Indeed, they may have receded. Much of the work of the first session has been undercut by the deterioration in the international climate and in relations among the nuclear Powers. I do not consider it unfair to assign to those Powers the principle responsibility for that loss of impetus and to demand that they take the initiative in resuming serious and active negotiations. It is they who have the weapons which, by universal agreement, are the most dangerous and in most urgent need of control and numerical reduction. My delegation's keenest disappointment is that the negotiation of a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty, a step which could serve to check both horizontal and vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons, still hangs fire.

69.	Only the nuclear Powers can negotiate a test-ban treaty which will work or, for that matter, any agreement designed to reduce the threat of nuclear destruction. But the remaining Members of the United Nations have a duty to their peoples to renew their pressure on the nuclear Powers, who are also the largest manufacturers and purveyors of conventional armaments, to resume movement towards disarmament. In that regard, we welcome the decision of the two principal nuclear Powers to resume discussions on the reduction of nuclear weapons in the European theater.
70.	I referred earlier to some of the obstacles in the path of economic progress, especially for developing countries. There is no greater corisumer of development resources than the armaments industry, and none that is more wasteful. We must never lose patience in pursuing international agreements which will cut the burden and the danger of rearmament and strengthen the fragile fabric of peace.
71.	It is natural that each of us should seek to advance the interests of his own country, that we should work for the wellbeing of our own people. National pride and patriotism are admirable and necessary virtues. But every coin, every medallion, has another side. Nationalism and pride of country are not in themselves enough. All of us North and South, committed and uncommitted, East and West belong to one world. We have got to work together. Our world has become too small and too dangerous a place for any of us to pursue narrow nationalism regardless of the interests of others.
72.	We must move the world community away from the dangerous road it has been following: that is, the course of rivalry, confrontation and the naked struggle for power. It can lead only to conflict. We must learn, more than ever before, to couple national pride with a real commitment to international cooperation. There is, I believe, no other way to move ahead, to achieve a decent life for all our people. That, I suggest, is why we are meeting here. For all our peoples, whether our countries are large or small, have an equal right td peace, progress and justice.

Speaking from this rostrum today, I should like first of all to recall that the United Nations enjoys solid credibility among the peoples of the world as a forum whose principal objective is to serve as an effective instrument for the maintenance of peace.
45.	It is well known that the birth of the United Nations was the result of the peoples' determination to preclude another world tragedy. Its establishment reflected the awareness, deeply rooted in people's minds following the great victory over fascism, of the need for them to unite closely in the name of peace and to prevail over the forces of militarism and aggression.
46.	That is why the very first lines of the Charter proclaimed the goal "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". These are clear and emphatic words.
47.	I should like to express the confidence that these words will never fade and will never lose their profound meaning. They are a solemn oath taken by the founding States when creating the United Nations. Today that is the duty of all the 155 countries represented in the United Nations.
48.	There, there are some who now try to contend that there are things more important than peace. However, it is obvious that the peoples have never authorized those leaders to say this on their behalf. Peace is a priceless asset of all people oil earth; it is a decisive prerequisite to progress in any sphere of human endeavor. That was true in the past, and it is all the more true now.
49.	AS Leonid Brezhnev has stressed, "The safeguarding of peace no other task is more important now at the international level for our party, for our people and for all the peoples of the world. By safeguarding peace we are working not only for the people who are living today, and not only for our children and grandchildren; we are working for the happiness of countless future generations."
50.	Acting on that fundamental assumption, the twenty sixth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union the highest forum of the Soviet Communists recently put forward a whole series of proposals on the key problems of international life, which have evoked a broad response in the world. They provide for far-reaching steps designed to limit arms, eliminate hotbeds of tension and strengthen confidence among States. They cover both the political and the military fields, deal with nuclear missile weapons and conventional armaments and bear upon the situation in Europe, in the Near, Middle and Ear East and in other regions of the world. Underlying these proposals is one single desire: to improve the international climate, to ward off the threat of war.
51.	In the international arena the Soviet Union stands shoulder to shoulder with other socialist States. Recently, during their meetings in the Crimea, the leaders of the parties and countries of the socialist community had an opportunity once again to harmonize those countries' assessments and actions in the light of the situation taking shape in the world. The same purpose is served by regular meetings" of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty and by the activities of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
52.	The foreign policy of the socialist countries has been and continues to be a policy of peace. It follows from the very nature of our social system, of whose advantages we are deeply convinced. It is determined by the fact that under this system there are no social strata which would make profits out of war and war preparations or derive benefits from militaristic policies. Nevertheless, we do not impose our social system on anybody. The peoples themselves determine, and should determine, their destinies. That has always been and remains the cornerstone of the scientific world outlook that guides us in both our domestic and our foreign policies.
53.	In building a society free from social and national exploitation and oppression, the socialist countries are following an unexplored path. This is not always easy; but the laws of social development and the strength of our ideals ensure for the socialist countries a steady advance in all spheres of life.
54.	Futile are the attempts by certain circles in Western countries to interfere in the internal affairs of the socialist States. Such attempts are being made, in particular, with regard to the Polish People's Republic. No small effort is being made to shake loose the socialist foundations of the Polish State. It will be recalled, in this connection, that the leaders of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty made die following statement:
"It was reiterated that socialist Poland, the Polish United Workers' Party and the Polish people can firmly count on the fraternal solidarity and support the Warsaw Treaty countries. The representatives of the Polish United Workers' Party stressed that Poland has been, is and will remain a socialist State, a firm link in the common family of the countries of socialism."
55.	The Republic of Cuba is coping with the tasks of socialist development and pursuing a policy of peace in difficult external conditions. The Soviet Union has invariably supported and will continue to support the Cuban people in their struggle to safeguard their sovereignty.
56.	Hostile, criminal intrigues against Cuba on the part of the United States, which have of late been stepped up, must cease. Washington does not like socialist Cuba, but it may well be asked whether the social system of the United States is to everybody's liking. No one has the right to tell the Cuban people how they should manage their internal affairs.
57.	In a bid to besmirch the socialist countries, their social system and their peaceful policies, all kinds of fabrications are being resorted to, and those who resort to them seem to be competing with one another as to who can come up with the most preposterous invention. Some even go so far as to predict an early sunset of socialism. 1 wonder how long it took them to find that word "sunset". These people seem to be endowed with a remarkable gift of inventiveness, but I must say that they do not seem to have a very good idea of the objective processes of historical development. Are they looking for the sunset in the right country? Is that where they should be looking? Are they not looking in the wrong direction?
58.	How many were the prophets who predicted the downfall of socialism, but what of it? Their prophesies have invariably fallen by the wayside, while history has continued inexorably to follow its course.
59.	The Soviet Union has never threatened and is not threatening anybody. Since the days of Lenin, peace and friendship among nations have been inscribed on the banner of the Soviet State, and we have invariably been true to this ideal. Today it is as dear to the people of our country as it was in Lenin's day.
60.	In examining and solving international problems we rely on the ideals of the freedom and progress of nations, on the principles of respect for the independence of all States and all peoples, and aim to consolidate the foundations of life rather than prepare the funeral of mankind.
61.	There exists, however, another trend in world politics, which has quite different goals. It is the course followed in the militarist circles of imperialist States. The sum and substance of that course is to seek domination over other countries and peoples, a domination that means imposing one's will upon them, their economic exploitation and the use of their territories for military strategic purposes. Washington is ever more frequently heard to speak about the American leadership of the world, though no one has entitled die United States to claim such leadership.
62.	The architects of that course see as the main instrument for achieving their objectives, the whipping up of international tensions and the use, as they put; it themselves, of methods of force in politics. Even when they occasionally recognize in words the possibility of a diplomatic alternative they hasten to make it clear that diplomacy, unless it relies on force, does not suit them.
63.	The most typical manifestations of that policy line are: a further whipping up of the arms race; an overt claim to military superiority over the Soviet Union; the setting up of a wide network of military bases and the stationing of American troops on foreign territories; the undermining of the basic principles of SovietAmerican relations worked out earlier as a result of tremendous effort; pressure on other States, particularly in Europe, to curtail their political, trade and economic ties with the socialist countries; and slanderous propaganda against countries adhering to the positions of peace and ejecting claims to world leadership by no matter whom.
64.	And what great pains are taken to drag the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] allies into following that policy. When arguments are lacking and there is a constant lack of them to support such a hopeless and dangerous course crude pressure is brought to bear, so as to give no respite to those who are not always eager to accept militaristic schemes alien to their interests.
65.	It is sometimes said that Washington's present policy does not rule out prospects for developing relations between the USSR and the United States. However, in the same breath it is immediately demanded that our country should change neither more nor less its conduct in international affairs to satisfy American interests. In other words, the Soviet Union must give up defending its legitimate interests, give up its foreign policy.
66.	To put forward such demands is to show a lack of seriousness. The Soviet Union will continue to pursue its course of Leninist peaceful policy. Our country does not intend to deviate from it. We do not encroach on the legitimate interests of others, but nor shall we forgo legitimate interests of our own, including commitments to our allies.
67.	It is to be hoped that Washington will yet be able to take a more sober view of the actual state of affairs, adopt a more realistic approach to international affairs and not overestimate its capabilities while underestimating the capabilities of others.
68.	In order to build policy on a realistic basis one should seek, not clashes and conflicts with other countries, even though those other countries have a different social system, but rather the settlement of controversial problems at the negotiating table.
69.	For our part, we reaffirm once again and the USSR delegation is authorized to say it from this rostrum that the Soviet Union has not sought, nor is it seeking, confrontation with the United States of America. We should like to have normal businesslike relations with the United States. As is known, we are in favor of a dialog in order to seek mutually acceptable solutions to controversial problems. But we are not begging for such a dialog, we are proposing it.
70.	At every session of the General Assembly many States emphasize, quite rightly, that the peoples are greatly endangered by the policy of crude interference in the internal affairs of other countries, support for bloodthirsty dictatorial regimes hated by their own peoples and an all out encouragement of oppressors and hatchet-men of every stripe, including the Pol Pot experts in genocide.
71.	The methods and forms employed in pursuing such a policy are varied. Recently, the United States has all but launched a crusade against international terrorism, leveling accusations against one country after another. These accusations, however, are misdirected. They are utterly false. Terrorism is looked for not where it should be sought and where it really is to be found.
72.	The scheme here is simple to tag the label of terrorism on the struggle of peoples against colonialism and its vestiges. In other words, it is the policy of oppression, cursed by peoples, which is pictured as a struggle against terrorism. At its basis lies unwillingness to take into account the rights of peoples to manage their domestic affairs as they see fit, and refusal to accept social changes occurring in the world.
73.	And surely, the events in El Salvador are a fitting illustration of the policy of imperialist interference in the affairs of other peoples. A real massacre has been committed there before the eyes of the whole world. Patriots defending the independence of their country, thousands of peaceful civilians are being killed. It is well known who is in charge there. And all this goes on at the very moment when we are all sitting in session here in the General Assembly Hall.
74.	What is happening in EI Salvador arouses the legitimate indignation of all honest people on earth. Regrettably, the United Nations has not, yet lifted a finger to assist in putting an end to these crimes against a whole nation.
75.	And how should one view the policy of shameless pressure exerted on Libya and, in particular, the recent armed provocation against that country? Or take the so called rapid deployment force. Apparently, its formation is regarded in Washington as a great invention. But there is nothing great in it. It is nothing but a policeman's club intended to ensure crude interference by the United States in the affairs of independent States and to stifle the freedom of peoples.
76.	At this world forum one cannot ignore either the concept of "American vital interests" cited in justification of such a policy. This concept is importunately repeated in almost every official statement by Washington on the subject of the international situation. It is interpreted in such a way as to enable the United States to declare any part of the world a sphere of its interests and to take any steps there, all the way up to the use of force.
77.	Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America, they are all there. It seems that the only area still missing is the South Pole, but it too may soon be added. Everything is there except the right of the United States to do all this. Neither the United States nor any other country has been granted the right to hold sway over the entire globe. This is nothing but arbitrariness.
78.	As is known, a whole United States naval armada has been assembled in the Persian Gulf. This action is directed against Iran, against the Soviet Union and against a number of independent countries of Asia and Africa. The United States Navy must leave this area. It has nothing to do there, nothing to defend. That would be a sensible act.
79.	Neither the size nor the power nor the resources of this or that State give it the right to impose by force or threat of force its will on other countries and arbitrarily to declare any part of the world as a sphere of its vital interests. If such a right were to be recognized for any country or group of countries, then, apparently, all instruments of international law should be destroyed. Indeed, little would be left then of the United Nations Charter itself.
80.	The ruling circles of a number of NATO countries now worship but one god an unrestrained arms race. Everything that serves this end is acceptable to them. This arms race is invariably accompanied by a torrent of speeches and permeated with militarist frenzy, including speeches by top level statesmen. Those who advocate inflated arms programs resort to any means imaginable. Deception is held in special esteem by them. They deceive one another, they deceive the people, they deceive their kin and strangers alike. They launch a rumor and the next day they quote it as the truth.
81.	The most salient element of deception is the myth of a "Soviet threat". It is repeated endlessly, to the point of stupefaction, day and night. In this manner it is easier to confuse people and extort money for armaments. In these conditions decisions are taken on a huge, increase in military expenditures such as history has never before known.
82.	The urge to expand their military presence wherever possible has now acquired the element of a real Bacchanalia, with half a million United States troops stationed in more than a dozen countries.
83.	Today the policy of the United States is beset by such an obsession, especially in setting up military bases near the borders of the Soviet Union and the areas adjacent to it. Of course, the States against which these bases are aimed have to take all this into account so as safely to protect their security.
84.	Who would believe that it is concern for peace that motivates the accelerated pace of the development of ever new types of weapons, including MX intercontinental ballistic missiles, Trident submarine-launched missiles, the new strategic bomber, various types of cruise missiles and many other things?
85.	What is the purpose of all this? The purpose is to try and upset the established strategic balance, obtain military supremacy and, on this basis, impose one's will upon others.
86.	The Soviet Union condemns this policy as adventurous. The whipping up of the arms race is madness. This has been repeatedly recognized by many political and public figures in the world, scientists and men of culture. Mankind must be saved from it. The present balance of military power is fully in line with the interests of peace and international stability.
87.	Our country has never sought, nor is it now seeking, military superiority. Those who make^ claims to the contrary should not be believed. Leonid Ilich Brezhnev has said this to the entire world many times, and, inter Alia, directly to American Presidents on various occasions. But we shall not permit others to become superior to us. We shall of course adequately meet any challenge so as to maintain the balance of power.
88.	However, the Soviet Union has not done, and is not doing, anything beyond what is absolutely necessary to ensure a peaceful life for its people and the security of its allies and friends. We believe that the ruling circles of NATO know all that. Yet, they do not want to admit that there is no Soviet threat whatsoever, nor do they want to give up practicing deception.
89.	Indeed, what would then be left of exhortations about the need for the notorious "additional armament of the West"? Nothing would remain. That is the reason why use is made of incomparable indicators and of .falsified data on strategic arms, on medium-range nuclear systems in Europe, on armed forces strength of the two sides in Central Europe or on any other aspect of the correlation of forces.
90.	If, by any chance, some NATO official happens to concede that the Soviet Union has really never overtaken the United States and that parity is still there, there immediately follows a tongue lashing from above. And then the record of "Soviet military superiority" is played again in order to support another increase in military appropriations and to substantiate some freshly baked militaristic doctrine.
91.	In some capitals such doctrines pop out as if rolling off the assembly line. Things may well reach the stage where any bureaucrat, especially if he is in the spotlight, will, once installed in an executive office, immediately come up with a strategic doctrine of his own concoction. Thus, quite recently, the world was presented with a "discovery" according to which nuclear war in general should not be feared too much, that it is "admissible" and "acceptable". This is a shameless deception designed to mislead the peoples and paralyze their will to struggle against the nuclear threat.
92.	If the arguments of the proponents of the militaristic policy course are left free of deliberate vagueness and intricacy, and of claims to originality, there remains only one thing, namely, the urge to intensify the arms race, in breadth and in depth, without any restraint.
93.	But have the authors of these militaristic doctrines asked 500 million Europeans, 470 million Africans, 360 million Latin Americans, 2.5 billion Asians and finally, their own people whether they want to perish in die flames of war? Certainly not. They just do not care.
94.	The instigators of the arms race would like to discard everything that hampers their plans. If to this end it is necessary to renege on the obligations already assumed, that is what they do. Thus, the United States refuses to ratify the SALT II Treaty.
95.	Negotiations had been under way for many years before the Treaty was finally agreed upon and signed. Now they say that this Treaty is not to the advantage of the United States and that it is inequitable. Of course, this is not true. The balance of interests of the sides was accurately established and preserved in the Treaty. This is known to anyone familiar with its contents. Therefore, that is not the point. The point is that it is this very principle of equality and equal security reflected in the Treaty which is not to someone's liking.
96.	Counting on people's ignorance, they seek to sap the Treaty by alleging that it does not envisage strategic weapons reductions. But this is not true either. The Treaty explicitly envisages such reductions, and on a substantial scale,
97.	It is also obvious that, once agreement has been leached on strategic arms limitation and the initial reduction of their levels, it is easier to solve the task of their more radical redaction so that the balance reflects a lower arms level.
98.	All that convincingly proves that the significance of the Treaty already agreed to and signed is as great today as at the time of its signing.
99.	How numerous were the cases when talks on the limitation of armaments were held both in the period between the two world wars and after the Second World War. Yet any unbiased person will undoubtedly admit that none of those talks produced results that could be compared even to a small extent to the SALT I agreement, which is in force, and especially to the SALT II Treaty, which has not become operative.
100.	Now a question arises: why smear both the treaty and the SALT process itself? Yet exceptionally reckless politicians are now saying that the entire problem is not urgent at all, at least not till the United States implements its most sweeping arms buildup plans.
101.	Just think of the absurdity of such a stand. The nation which claims to be the most powerful in military terms says "Let me first increase by so many times my armaments and then perhaps I shall talk about their limitation."
102.	What is the main factor in such a stand? Is it aggressive designs it) politics, greatPower expansionist ambitions, a striving to impose on the world monstrous plans for an ever greater stockpiling of weapons for the annihilation of people instead of manufacturing things of material goods, or a desire to have an inexhaustible source of excess profits for those who manufacture armaments? It is hard to say. Most likely it is a complex mixture of all these things.
103.	The United States decision to start the production of the neutron weapon aroused great indignation in the world. That decision is a new step towards intensifying the arms race, towards aggravating the world situation.
104.	The peoples clearly say that they strongly oppose the fiendish neutron weapon, rightly considering it to be a particularly inhuman type of mass-destruction weapon. The neutron weapon must be totally banned. A ban must be imposed on both its production and its use.
105.	Washington has long been making attempts to hold back or even to wreck the negotiations initiated earlier on a number of important problems. Unfortunately, quite a lot has already been done to that end. That was the case, for example, with the talks on the Indian Ocean, on limiting conventional arms transfers, on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests, and on the prohibition of the production of chemical weapons and the destruction of their stockpiles.
106.	It is also appropriate to mention here the current efforts to cast aside the results of many years of work by States within the framework of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
107.	Other developments in international life also have their impact on the world situation. Attention is attracted to the ever-increasing closeness between Washington and Peking.
108.	Who would object to the desire of two countries to have normal relations between them? Nobody would, of course. It is the basis on which this is done that matters. In this particular case the basis is openly hostile to many States, above all to the Soviet Union, and hostile to the cause of detente.
109.	It has been proclaimed to the world that the United States intends to sell weapons to China and to help it build up its military potential. And this is done at a time when Peking is pursuing a policy that runs counter to the interests of peace, a policy of hegemonism and aggression.
110.	The establishment of military cooperation between the United States and China with Japan, for reasons that no one knows, getting involved in it will be duly taken into account by the Soviet Union and, we believe, by other States.
111.	For its part, the Soviet Union has repeatedly expressed the conviction it was recently reiterated by Leonid Brezhnev from the rostrum of the Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union that the Chinese people's interests would best be served by a policy of peace. The Soviet Union would like to build its relations with the People's Republic of China on a good neighbor basis. We have repeatedly reaffirmed that our proposals for normalizing these relations remain valid.
112.	These are the main reasons, as we see them, for the recent exacerbation of the international situation.
113.	What is the conclusion that follows from all this? According to the ideologists of militarism, mankind is to expect a pitch-dark night, an endless spiraling arms race, further conflicts and clashes.
114.	The Soviet Union and, we are sure, many other countries hold different views as to the prospects for world developments. Pessimism and a feeling of doom are alien to our nature. We are convinced that to prevent war is not only necessary 'but also possible if this is actively fought for. Hand in hand with all States, our country is prepared to wage the struggle for curbing the arms race, removing the threat of war, settling outstanding problems. In this respect we are not politically allergic to any partner, irrespective of differences in social systems or ideologies.
115.	The immediate and most pressing task today is to struggle for easing world tensions, curbing the arms race, eliminating * threat of war.
/
116.	The Soviet Union proposes that the General Assembly, acting on behalf of all Member States of the United Nations, adopt a declaration solemnly proclaiming that States and statesmen who would be the first to use nuclear weapons would commit the gravest crime against humanity.
117.	There are and can be no grounds or motives, there are and can be no circumstances or situations which would give a State the right to be the first to use nuclear weapons. It would be a crime against all the peoples, against life itself on earth.
118.	It is likewise necessary to warn that there will never be any justification or pardon for statesmen who would make the decision on the first use of nuclear weapons. To proclaim this in a declaration so that these words be heard in every capital, in every part of the world, would be to remind statesmen who, by virtue of their official position, are involved in making decisions on the use of nuclear weapons, that each and every one of them is personally responsible for the destinies of mankind.
119.	We propose that the declaration further state loudly and clearly that any doctrines allowing for the first use of nuclear weapons are incompatible with human moral standards and the lofty ideals of the United Nations.
120.	It is also most important to draw the attention, especially of leaders of nuclear-weapon States, to the fact that their supreme duty is to act in such a way as to eliminate the risk of outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
121.	The declaration should stress that the nuclear-arms race must be stopped and reversed by joint effort, through negotiations conducted in good faith and cc the basis of equality. What is meant here is that the energy of the atom should be used not against life but for the sake of life, not for the production of weapons but for scientific progress, for improvement of the living standards of people, that is, exclusively for peaceful purposes.
122.	This is the essence of the political document that we are proposing for adoption. We hope that this proposal will meet with wide support.
123.	The adoption of such a document may become a major landmark on the path towards complete elimination of the threat of a nuclear conflict. No single country should stand aside from the solution of this problem.
124.	The Soviet Union is in favor of a dialog on all aspects of the problem of ending the arms race, on all controversial international issues, in favor of a bilateral or a multilateral dialog.
125.	From time to time statements are made which seem to express willingness to negotiate. However, attached to this willingness are all sorts of conditions, linkages and unequal approaches of all sorts. If someone really intends to negotiate in this vein, we must say outright: nothing will come of it. Negotiations can be successful only if they are conducted on the basis of Compliance with the principle of equality and equal security.
126.	The Soviet Union is prepared and has been prepared for a long time to resume negotiations with the United States on the limitation of strategic weapons.
Given mutual desire, headway in the solution of this problem can be made, relying on what has already been achieved and preserving the results achieved.
127.	The SovietAmerican negotiations on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe will apparently be resumed unless winds start blowing again in Washington in a different direction. Of course, the question of limiting medium-range nuclear weapons and those of corresponding forward-based nuclear systems of the United States should be examined and settled concurrently and in organic interrelation, with due account of all factors determining the strategic situation on the continent.
128.	Our country has proposed that the moment negotiations begin, a moratorium should be imposed on the deployment in Europe of new medium-range nuclear missile systems of NATO and the USSR. This proposal is based on the existing approximate parity of their respective armaments. The establishment of a moratorium would certainly exert a favorable influence on the climate of the negotiations.
129.	The Soviet Union is prepared to reach agreement on limiting and, what is more, on reducing medium-range nuclear systems in Europe. As Leonid Brezhnev stated at Berlin on 6 October 1979:
"We are prepared to reduce the number of medium range nuclear weapons deployed in western areas of the Soviet Union from their present level, but only, of course, in the event that no additional medium-range nuclear weapons are deployed in Western Europe."
130.	At the same time we must make it quite clear that should the other side artificially drag out the negotiations and start to deploy new medium-range nuclear weapons in Western Europe, the Soviet Union will have to take measures to restore the balance.
131.	For the purpose of strengthening peace in Europe, it is also important to break the deadlock at the Vienna negotiations on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. The socialist countries have done a good deal to ensure progress at the Vienna negotiations. Should the Western partners show a minimum of goodwill, a solution could be found.
132.	Of great significance is the question of convening a conference on military detente and disarmament in Europe. As is known, this question is under discussion in Madrid at the meeting of representatives of the States participants in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
133.	Wishing to contribute to success, the Soviet Union has gone far to accommodate the West and has declared its willingness to include the entire European part of its territory in the zone of confidence-building measures, provided, of course, the Western side makes a corresponding step in turn. What is required now is precisely such a step,
134.	Military detente on the European continent is intended to strengthen and complement political detente. But this does not depend on us alone.
135.	The Soviet Union is prepared to hold negotiations on all areas of limiting the arms race and of disarmament.
136.	Under current conditions, it is becoming increasingly important to prevent military competition from extending to outer space. Each day brings new evidence that outer space can become an arena of the arms race.
137.	At* the request of the Soviet Union, an item entitled "Conclusion of & treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space" has been included in the agenda of the present session [item 128], The Governments of all States represented here have had an opportunity of familiarizing themselves with the Soviet draft of that treaty. The draft takes into account all major aspects of the problem. We would like the exchange of views on the basis of the Soviet Union's proposal and its outcome to be constructive.
138.	With reference to the need to take measures for curbing the arms race and for disarmament, special note should also be made of the importance of efforts to resolve conflict situations in various parts of the world and to prevent the emergence of new hotbeds of tension. States are capable of coping with this problem provided they strive to ensure a more durable peace.
139.	The struggle of Arab peoples to defend their legitimate rights, trampled underfoot as a result of Israel's aggression, elicits understanding and support on the part of an overwhelming majority of countries. If justice has not so far been restored and the situation in the Middle East remains dangerous, it is because those in Israel's ruling circles persist in their expansionist policies and do not stop their brutal terror against the people of Lebanon, while influential forces outside that area actually encourage this policy and seek to follow the pattern of the anti Arab Camp David deal,
140.	Peace and stability in the Middle East can be assured only through a comprehensive political settlement which would not infringe on the rights of any country or people of that region. Such a settlement must envisage the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied in 1967 and the exercise of the national rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including the right to establish their own State.
141.	The Soviet Union consistently comes out in support of the Arabs' rights and stands for the elimination of the consequences of Israeli aggression. There is growing understanding that the path to a Middle East settlement lies through the convening of an international conference with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO].
142.	A political settlement is needed for the situation created around the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, against which an undeclared war is still being waged. The principal role in this is played by the United States, and Peking is not far behind.
143.	Unfortunately. Pakistan, whose territory serves as the main bridgehead for armed incursions, in effect avoids negotiations with the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. Yet, who else but Islamabad should be primarily interested in establishing lasting peace in the region?
144.	There has been some talk recently about the proposal by certain Western countries to convene an international conference on Afghanistan. But what is striking is that, while the conference is to be on Afghanistan, the main party concerned, the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, has been forgotten. This forgetfulness conceals the attempt to have the internal affairs of Afghanistan, a sovereign nonaligned State, examined in a forum composed of other States, without even the participation of the Afghan Government. Of course that approach is unacceptable.	. ,
145.	There is a basis for a political settlement; it is simple and, given goodwill, can be translated into reality. A constructive program to this effect was set forth in the statement by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan on 24 August of this year [see AI36/457].
146.	The political settlement must ensure the termination and non-resumption of armed or other interference in the affairs of Afghanistan. Such a settlement, including reliable international guarantees, would permit the establishment, by agreement between the Afghan and Soviet sides, of modalities and timing for the withdrawal of the limited contingent of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
147.	In SouthEast Asia, too, there is no other way but negotiations to reduce tensions in the area. We support the well-known proposals by Viet Nam, the Lao People's Democratic Republic and Kampuchea [see A/36/86, annex I, para. 4], including the proposal to hold a regional conference with the participation of the. countries of IndoChina and the States member's of the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations.
148.	However, no one should assume that the maneuvers under way around the nonexistent Kampuchean question can result in anything but harm. It is inadmissible that, under the cover of some pseudo-conferences, executioners overthrown by the people of Kampuchea or former princelings should be imposed once again on that people. They have already made their choice.
149.	Also doomed to failure are the attempts to cast a shadow upon the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which extended a helping hand to the Kampuchean people in their struggle for freedom and independence.
150.	Attention is drawn to the fraudulent allegation put forward in typical Washington wrappings that someone somewhere in SouthEast Asia used toxic chemical substances said to be of Soviet make. It is quite obvious that at work here are those who are themselves guilty of such crimes. Now they are trying to cover their traces.
151.	The situation in the Far East, too, offers possibilities for positive political action. One such could be an agreement on the application of confidence-building measures in the region. The implementation of such measures on a collective or a bilateral basis would make a useful contribution to the cause of detente in that region. The Soviet proposal on this question has been communicated to all the States concerned. We expect that in this regard they will display the required sense of responsibility.
152.	The Korean question still unsettled and thus an old source of tension in the Far East can and must be solved by peaceful means. In our opinion, a suitable basis for solving the problem is provided by the proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea presented by its President Kim II Sung at the Sixth Congress of the Workers' Party of Korea.
153.	Recently the Mongolian People's Republic has taken a timely initiative by proposing a convention on mutual nonaggression and renunciation of force in relations between the States of Asia and the Pacific [see A/36/388]. Our country supports that idea.
154.	The Republic of India is making a major contribution to maintaining stability and peace in Asia and ensuring international security. We value highly its peaceful constructive policy. SovietIndian relations, which rest on the solid basis provided by the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation, are in the interest of our two peoples and positively serve the interests of peace.
155.	Political means can also be effective in settling other dangerous situations and controversial problems, including the conflict between Iraq and Iran, the Cyprus problem, the situation in Western Sahara and that in the Horn of Africa. The indispensable requirement in this regard is that nobody be allowed to pit one State against another and to capitalize on conflicts between them. There should be no room for imperialist intrigues in those areas.
156.	As is well known, the South African racist regime and its accomplices are engaged in maneuvers aimed at thwarting the decolonization of Namibia. It is a matter of honor and is the immediate duty of the United Nations to help the people of Namibia gain their freedom. The racists and all those on whom they rely must realize that the time or colonialism is past.
157.	An end must be put to South Africa's aggressive gangster-like actions against the People's Republic of Angola and a number of other African countries. It is necessary to condemn those actions, to demand that South Africa cease its armed intervention and to adopt international sanctions against it. It is precisely this approach that has recently been manifested by the overwhelming majority of members of the Security Council in voting on a draft resolution submitted by Mexico and other countries.3 However, the United States has prevented the United Nations body from taking inappropriate decision, thus openly defying the African peoples and world public opinion.4
158.	The United States support for South Africa constitutes direct assistance to the aggressor. Such a course must be resolutely condemned. The United Nations should do everything that is needed to put an end to the aggression and call the aggressor to order. The resolution recently adopted by the General Assembly at its emergency special session on Namibia [resolution ES8/2] is a step in the right direction.
159.	The nonaligned movement, which has recently marked its twentieth anniversary, has become an important factor in world politics.* The Soviet Union expresses its solidarity with the anti-imperialist orientation of the nonaligned movement and supports its activities in the interest of strengthening peace.
160.	Much is now being said about the problem of relations between the industrialized and the developing
States. Various bodies, narrow and broad, of the North South type are being proposed. It is obvious, however, that nobody will produce positive results unless developed capitalist States radically change their approach to developing countries, cease discrimination in economic relations with them and renounce the economic plundering of those countries,
161.	Our country will continue to give developing States the necessary support in their struggle for economic independence and for the restructuring of international relations on a genuinely equitable and democratic basis.
162.	The activities of the United Nations cannot be assessed in terms of standard units of measurement. A formal one-dimensional assessment cannot be applied to them. There are, however, grounds for saying that the United Nations has done quite a lot to enable the peoples of the world to live with greater confidence in their future.
163.	Working actively with other socialist countries in all areas of international politics, the Soviet Union continues to make proposals aimed at strengthening peace.
164.	No problem, no matter what its magnitude, can or should overshadow the principal purpose for which the United Nations was created, that is, to preserve peace. It is the individual and collective duty of all States and the duty of every statesman to do for this purpose everything within the capability of human beings, of their intelligence, of their energy and of their dedication to life and its most noble ideals.
165.	It is clearer now than ever before how enormous are the challenges confronting the peoples to meet the rapidly growing needs in the fields of energy, food, health and education, to explore the oceans and outer space, to preserve nature. These problems can be solved provided mankind saves itself from war.
166.	Everything should be done to ensure that in the remaining two decades of the twentieth century people can live in conditions of peace and can cross the threshold of the third millennium of our era, not with fear for the future of our civilization, but with confidence in the boundless prospects for its development. All nations, large and small, that work towards this end will always find the Soviet Union at their side.The United Nations, this parliament of man, offers us a unique opportunity to examine the human condition. We are each called upon to declare our national purposes. We are all obligated to address those problems that obstruct the vision of the Charter.
158.	Let us begin with the vision. The Charter of the United Nations reflects cherished dreams of a world distinguished by peaceful change and the resolution of international disputes without resort to force.
159.	The United States believes in these dreams. They offer the best chance of justice and progress for all mankind. They promise a world hospitable to the values of our own society, including a certain idea of man as a creative and responsible individual, democracy and the rule of law.
160.	The ideals of the United Nations are therefore also American ideals. The Charter embodies American principles. It will always be a major objective of our statecraft to make the United Nations an instrument of peace.
161.	We all know that the realization of our dreams cannot depend on hope alone. Obstacles to progress must be overcome through united efforts. The threats to peace are many; suspicions persist; and the price of inaction is great. Truly we face a most difficult agenda.
162.	As 1 make these comments I am reminded that an observer once said of this annual debate: "Every year ... a great and sacred orator . . . preaches before the assembly of nations a solemn sermon on the text of the Charter". Today, however, 1 would like to focus instead on an issue of compelling interest: international development.
163.	International development reflects the worldwide search for economic progress, social justice and human dignity. Short of war itself, no other issue before us will affect more people, for good or ill, than this search. And peace itself cannot be truly secured if the aspirations of mankind to a better life are frustrated.
164.	Development is therefore an enduring issue. It has preoccupied the United Nations from the beginning. It will survive the agenda of this Assembly and every Assembly far into the future. And although great progress has been made we face today a crucial choice of strategy that will dramatically affect the prospects for future success.
165.	Since the Second World War the progress of development has been uneven but none the less widespread. Enormous economic growth has been registered: for example, in the last three decades average incomes have actually doubled. There have also been great advances in health. Life expectancy has increased dramatically even in the poorest countries and infant mortality has been reduced.
166.	This experience, however, has not been fully shared by all countries and the prospect for the future is now clouded by recent trends.
167.	The pattern of increasing economic growth, critical for development, has been slowed by inflation, high energy prices, severe balance of payments problems, heavy debt and slower growth of markets. Political turmoil and instability have diverted precious resources into arms and conflict. The necessary synthesis of traditional values and modernization, never easy to achieve, has grown more difficult under the impact of accelerating change.
168.	Let us dispense with illusions. We must choose today between two futures: a future of sustainable growth, an expansion of world trade and a reduction of poverty; and a future of economic stagnation, rising protectionism and the spread of poverty. As the World Bank has put it, "By the end of the century, the difference between the two cases amounts to some 220 million more absolutely poor people" .
169.	Clearly, our task is to give a fresh Impetus to development by devising a new strategy for growth. Such a strategy begins by recognizing the highly Complex and difficult situation we face.	'
170.	The poorest developing countries require longterm and generous concessional aid from developed and other developing countries to raise productivity through broadly based education and training, improvements in health and nutrition and better infrastructure. They also need sound economic policies, particularly in the agricultural sector. Ultimately, the objective must be to involve them in the international economic system, thereby strengthening opportunities and incentives for self-sustaining growth.
171.	The middle tier developing countries have made significant progress. Nevertheless, they still suffer from widespread poverty. They are also acutely vulnerable to any economic downturn, especially in volatile commodity markets, because of their narrow range of exports. These countries need foreign capital and assistance in developing the experience and creditworthiness to borrow on international capital markets. Technical support and manpower training are important to ensure that their populations are both productive and competitive. They also need an open international trading system to encourage export development.
172.	The more advanced of the developing countries are able to maintain living standards and economic performance comparable to what some of today's industrialized countries achieved less than a generation ago. Their further development is sustained best by a strong international economy with an open capital and trading system. They must be able to pursue national policies that take advantage of the international opportunities and foster domestic adjustment. These countries also play a key role in helping poorer nations, both directly and as policy models.
173.	The capital surplus oil exporting countries need a stable and prosperous international market for their oil exports and a favorable environment in which to invest their financial assets and to develop their domestic economies. The international system must continue to evolve to reflect the growing importance of these countries as they assume increasing responsibility for the management of that system and for assisting poorer nations.
174.	Finally, the industrialized countries are today suffering from low rates of growth and high rates of inflation. They are trying to increase savings and investment in order to create employment, improve the environment, eliminate pockets of poverty and adjust to the changing competitiveness of their exports. They must sell more abroad to pay for the increased cost of imported energy.
175.	In a slowly growing world these complex and diverse requirements would become potent sources of conflict. But the struggle for the world product can be avoided. The international economy can help all countries to achieve their objectives through a strategy of growth which creates the resources and the employment needed for progress. This cannot be the task of a single nation. As die report of the Independent Commission on International Development Issues, chaired by Willy Brandt, has pointed out: "Above all, the achievement of economic growth in one country depends increasingly on the performance of others".4
176.	It is on this view of a differentiated and interdependent world that we must build a new strategy for growth; but our strategy must also be informed by the lessons of the past. Such lessons, extracted from hard experience, offer the basis for principles to guide us through these austere and difficult times.
177.	First, development is facilitated by an open international trading system. Developed and developing countries together face the challenge of strengthening GATT and the international trading system to create mutual export opportunities for all.
178.	Today the trading system is under enormous stressrising protectionist pressures, new and subtle types of import barriers, restrictive bilateral arrangements, export subsidies and investment policies which distort trade. These are especially troublesome in a period of slow growth. Unless they are reduced or eliminated the international trading system will be seriously weakened. Such a setback to the world economy would inflict the most suffering on the developing countries.
179.	The industrialized countries have a special responsibility to work for a more open trading system with improved rules. We also look to the more successful developing countries to play a fuller role in strengthening the trading system. It will be difficult for each of our countries individually to open markets further unless we are committed to doing so collectively.
180.	For our part, the United States has long supported open markets. Despite current complications, America remains a strong advocate of free trade. Although our gross national product is only one third of the Western industrialized group's total, the United States imports roughly one half of all manufactured goods exported by developing countries. Earnings of developing countries not members of OPEC from exports to the United States amount to some $60 billion more than double the foreign aid coming from all Western developed countries.
181.	We call upon all members of the international community to join in resisting the growth of protectionism. Developing nations must have the greatest possible opportunity to sell their commodities and manufactured products. Let us also work together to achieve a successful conclusion of the multi-fibre agreement.
182.	A dynamic and successful trading system requires a smoothly functioning international financial system. We must therefore continue to work with other countries to encourage their support for IMF and their constructive participation in the Bind's programs to facilitate adjustment. We will continue to cooperate with our developing country colleagues to strengthen the Fund. We share the view that the responsibilities of the developing countries should be increased to keep pace with their growing economic importance.
183.	Secondly, foreign assistance coupled with sound domestic policy and self-help can facilitate the development process. The United States has long believed in assistance as an effective tool in helping to promote development. Over the last three decades the United States has given more than $130 billion in concessional assistance; over the last decade alone the total has exceeded $50 billion; In 1980 the American people provided $7.1 billion, almost twice as much as any other donor.
184.	The United States has also been a major force in the creation and support of the multilateral development banks. The banks represent an important and to many countries an essential feature in the international financial system. In the last five years the United States has authorized and appropriated an average of $1.5 billion per year for support of the multilateral banks. There is no question about their value as development institutions. As intermediaries they help to mobilize the resources of international capital markets to lend to developing countries. The banks' loans for key projects are important catalysts for productive domestic and foreign private investment.
185.	We recognize that many of the poorer developing countries must continue to rely heavily on concessional assistance for some time to come. Moreover, certain kinds of vital development programs will not pay the quick and direct financial returns needed to attract private capital. For this reason a continuing bilateral assistance program and continuing support for the multilateral banks will be essential.
186.	Given today's economic conditions and the limitation on aid budgets in many countries, it is especially important that concessional assistance be utilized as effectively as possible; that it focus on countries which need it most and which use it best; and that it be a more effective catalyst for mobilizing other foreign and domestic resources. We must also recognize that a strategy for growth that depends on a massive increase in the transfer of resources from the developed to the developing countries is simply unrealistic. *
187.	Thirdly, regional cooperation and bilateral consultations can be effective in promoting development. The United States is working with other regional States to promote economic progress in the Caribbean area. We are convinced that the example of the recent multinational cooperation in the case of Jamaica and the broader Caribbean Basin initiative holds promise for other regions.
188.	We are already committed to a close working relationship with the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations [ASEAN]. We have benefited considerably from a better understanding of ASEAN's views on multilateral issues and on ways to strengthen our bilateral commercial ties. The United StatesASEAN Business Council is a model of how our private sectors can work together for mutual benefit.
189.	In Africa we look forward to a close working relationship with the Economic Community of West African States as it attempts to strengthen economic ties within the region. Constructive consultations on trade and investment issues have already occurred. We believe that mutually beneficial cooperation can be strengthened to our common benefit. Similar consultations with the developing countries of southern Africa are desirable. We have a strong interest in the economic health and stability of those nations. Commercial relationships, along with foreign assistance, will help us to attain that objective.
190.	The United States has also worked with the capital surplus members of OPEC on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis. We have been able to combine resources to attack development problems of common interest, such as food production. This cooperation should be continued and expanded.
191.	Finally, we plan to make bilateral consultative groups between our Government and those of developing countries more effective and to give full support to similar private sector arrangements. The United States Chamber of Commerce and its counterparts in many developing countries have developed particularly good relationships. We fully support these efforts and those of the private voluntary agencies. We are searching for means to work more closely with them.
192.	In all of these cases the United States recognizes the need to be sensitive to the diverse character of the societies involved and to the international circumstances in which development must occur.
193.	Fourthly, growth for development is best achieved through reliance on incentives for individual economic performance. The individual is the beginning, the key element and the ultimate beneficiary of the development process. The greatest potential for development lies in the hard work and ingenuity of the farmer, the worker and the entrepreneur. They need incentives to produce and the opportunity to benefit from their labors.
194.	Suppression of economic incentives ultimately suppresses enthusiasm and invention, and the denial of personal freedom can be as great an obstacle to productivity as the denial of reward for achievement.
195.	History cautions against regimes that regiment their people in the name of ideals, yet fail to achieve either economic or social progress. Those Governments that have been more solicitous of the liberties of their people have also been more successful in securing both freedom and prosperity.
196.	The United States can offer what it knows best from its own experience. We have seen that policies which encourage private initiatives will promote better resource allocation and more rapid economic growth. Within a framework basically hospitable to market incentives, foreign private investment can supplement indigenous investment and contribute significantly to development.
197.	But our goal is not to impose either our economic values or our judgments on anyone. In the final analysis, each country's path to development will be shaped by its own history, philosophy and interests.
198.	Fifthly, development requires a certain measure of security and political stability. Political insecurity is a major barrier to development. Fear and uncertainty stifle the productivity of the individual. Scarce resources are squandered in conflict.
199.	The close relationship between security and development cannot be ignored. We are therefore committed to maintain and, where possible, to increase programs essential to deter international aggression and to provide the domestic security necessary to carry out sound economic programs. We have no intention of providing foreign assistance, moral comfort or the prestige of international platforms to countries that foster international violence.
200.	The United Nations has a key role to play in resolving conflict and promoting international stability. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral's efforts to promote inter communal talks and a just settlement on Cyprus. We support a continuing role by the SecretaryGeneral's representative in the IranIraq conflict And South Korea's attempts to initiate a dialog with the North epitomize the search for a peaceful settlement that is at the heart of the Charter.
201.	One of the greatest dangers to the Charter today and to development itself is the willful violation of the national integrity of both Afghanistan and Cambodia by the Soviet Union and Viet Nam. Their behavior challenges the basic rights of all sovereign States. The world's hopes for peace, for security and for development will be jeopardized if "might makes right" becomes the law of nations.
202.	The United States will continue to support security and stability as essential to progress. This is the basis of our active and continuing efforts to strengthen and expand the ceasefire in southern Lebanon. We shall also assist the negotiations specified by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) in order to bring a just and lasting peace to the Middle East. Our policy is to remain a credible and reliable party in the negotiations to bring independence to Namibia on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and in a fashion acceptable to both the nations concerned and the international community.
203.	The United States also believes that efforts to control arms either among regional States or between superPowers can make an important contribution to the security that facilitates development. But these efforts do not occur in a vacuum. The international community has tended over the years to overestimate the beneficial effects of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] in dampening regional conflict. We have also tended to underestimate the impact of such conflict on the negotiations themselves.
204.	The United States is strongly committed to balanced and verifiable arms control. We are equally committed to the peaceful resolution of regional disputes. Clearly the restraint implied by arms control must become a more widespread phenomenon if such agreements are to survive and to make their proper contribution to a more secure environment for development.
205.	The United States is confident that a strategy for growth guided by these principles can succeed. We believe that three areas of action deserve immediate international attention.
206.	The first is a global expansion of trade. Plans could be formulated for the 1982 GATT ministerial meeting with special concerns of growth in mind. A major priority should be to integrate more fully the developing countries into the international trading system on the basis
of shared responsibilities and shared benefits.
207.	The second area is an increase in investment. Our common objective should be to stimulate domestic and international private investment. We must encourage and support the individual investor.
208.	The third is stronger international cooperation in food and in energy. The recent United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy recommended that the developing countries be assisted in assessing their energy resources and determining the best way to exploit them.3 The United Nations Development program and the World Bank have important follow-up responsibilities. We must all work to engage more effectively private participation in exploration and production in oil importing developing nations.
209.	Domestic and international action must also go hand in hand to achieve food security. The United States continues to be the largest donor of food aid and places a paramount emphasis on its bilateral program to help developing countries increase food production. Greater attention should also be given to scientific and technological research that will yield more bountiful food supplies.
210.	I have outlined today the broad principles that guide America's approach to a new strategy for growth. In the immediate future, and prior to the Cancun meeting, we will announce specific proposals to deal with this and other issues of development.
211.	These broad principles reflect our view that the United States can and indeed will continue to make an essential contribution to the process of development. We do not claim to have all the answers, but we believe that our collective responsibilities for the future allow no more time to be lost in sterile debate and unrealistic demands. The time has come for a reasoned dialog with promise for the future,
212.	The search for economic progress, social justice and human dignity has been supported by the American people, themselves an example of successful development. Our initiatives and resources, through bilateral programs, the United Nations and other multilateral agencies, have made major contributions to the process of modernization throughout the world. For the United States, support of development constitutes a practical imperative.
213.	At the Ottawa meeting the United States reaffirmed its willingness to join its partners in exploring all avenues of consultation and cooperation with developing countries. In October President Reagan will go to the meeting in Cancun. He looks forward to a genuine and open exchange of views on questions of economic development and international cooperation. That meeting offers a novel opportunity to gain fresh understandings of the problems we face together. The United States will join in a constructive and cooperative spirit. Our objective is to bring about a new era of growth. But the purpose of both growth and development goes beyond simple materialism. As Winston Churchill said: "Human beings and human societies are not structures that are built, or machines that are forged. They are plants that grow and must be treated as such".
214.	Despite the difficulties of the moment, we should go forward in a spirit of optimism. We have the vision bequeathed to us by this Charter. We have the potential of all the peoples represented in this Hall. Let us go forward together to achieve a new era of growth for all mankind.
Allow me, first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of this session of the General Assembly. I should also like to take this opportunity to express warm congratulations to the people of Belize, who have attained independence after a long period of efforts, and to extend a cordial welcome to the Republic of Vanuatu, which has been admitted to membership in the United Nations.
127.	In the past year, the people of various countries have waged effective struggles against imperialism, hegemonism, colonialism and racism and have increased their mutual support and assistance, thus contributing significantly to the maintenance of world peace. However, the world is still fraught with tension and turbulence. While old issues remain unsettled, new problems keep cropping up. Outrageous violations of the norms of international relations have not been stopped and the third world countries have been the major victims. The world is still faced with the danger of war.
128.	We cannot ignore the fact that the Soviet Union is trying hard to consolidate and increase its military strength and is stepping up its global deployment for war. On the one hand, it continues to occupy foreign territories and massacre the local inhabitants by the use of force and to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries by the threat of force. On the other hand, it has been paving the way for further expansions by carrying out political and economic infiltrations and stirring up troubles wherever possible. AN this shows that the Soviet Union has not given up its bid for world hegemony and that the corollary strategy of a southward drive remains unchanged.
129.	However, because of repeated setbacks and its own vulnerabilities, the Soviet Union, while adhering to a policy of aggression and expansion, has increasingly resorted to political tricks. It has launched a new peace offensive by putting forward so-called proposals regarding disarmament, political solutions and so on in order to confuse public opinion, to^ disguise its own hegemonism and to deceive or lull the people of the world. In these circumstances, it would be contrary to the objective realities of the international scene to suggest that the Soviet Union is harmless and on the defensive or that its deep predicament is forcing it to consider a retreat. Aggression and expansion by Soviet hegemonism continue to be the major threat to world peace. Hence, the struggle against hegemonism remains the primary task for the maintenance of world peace.
130.	The events in Afghanistan and Kampuchea major instances  which threaten the peace and security of the world and grossly violate the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations.
131.	The Soviet armed invasion of Afghanistan and the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea with Soviet support are both aimed at totally subjugating and occupying a neighboring country by force. If such lawlessness is not firmly stored, but instead accepted as a fait accompli, it will only  the appetite of the aggressors and convince them the they can go on practicing the law of the jungle unimpeded In that case, what would be left of justice and the code of conduct for the international community? How, then, can there be any security for the States Members of the United Nations, particularly the weaker third world countries?
132.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and its support for the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea are not only aimed at subjugating the two countries, but also at using them as springboards for further expansion, so as to close the ring around the oil-rich region of the Middle East, push towards the Strait of Malacca and increase the threat to the surrounding countries and to the peace and security of the rest of the world. Many mo. countries will corns to grief if the aggression against Afghanistan and Kampuchea is not checked and if the Soviet Union is allowed to press forward with its strategy of a southward drive.
133.	Meanwhile, as the Soviet Union is going ahead steadily with its global strategic deployment, the risk of war will increase. Only by firmly putting an end to the aggression against Afghanistan and Kampuchea will it be possible to salvage the independence of these two nations, and to blunt or check the momentum of the Soviet Union's southward drive, curb its expansion in other parts of the world and upset its global strategic plan. The heroic struggles in the past three years of the Kampuchean people under the leadership of the Government of democratic Kampuchea and the widespread resistance movement of the Afghan people have made brilliant contributions not only to the defense of their own independence and sovereignty but also to the maintenance of world peace and the security of all countries.
134.	It is obvious that Afghanistan and Kampuchea are die priority issues in the overall world situation and that a fair and reasonable settlement can only be achieved by waging unremitting struggles. We trust that all justice upholding and peace-loving countries and peoples will continue to be deeply concerned with these issues and will strengthen their fighting will in view of the protracted nature of the struggle.
135.	It is understandable that quite a few countries have called for a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues. But the question is: on what principles should the political settlement be based? The resolutions on Afghanistan and Kampuchea adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, the declarations adopted by the Third Islamic Conference, held last January, by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non Aligned Countries, held last February, and by the International Conference on Kampuchea, last July, have all stressed that all foreign troops should be withdrawn from both countries and that any settlement of these issues must be based on the principles of respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all States and the right of all peoples to determine their own destiny free from any foreign interference.
136.	China is in favor of such a political settlement and is ready to work with other Member States towards this end. However, the withdrawal of all foreign troops is the primary condition for any political settlement. The Soviet Union and Viet Nam backed by the Soviet Union adamantly refuse to leave Afghanistan and Kampuchea, respectively. This is the basic reason why the Afghan and Kampuchean issues have remained unresolved till now. Under these circumstances, the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples are bound to carry on their sacred war in defense of their own countries. Lately, the patriotic forces of both countries have been closing their ranks in order to fight more effectively against the aggressors. For its part, the international community is duty bound to continue to support and assist in various ways the just struggles of the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples.
137.	Only when the aggressors have suffered heavier and heavier blows on the battlefield and have been subjected to mounting pressure from the international community will they be forced to consider pulling out their troops. Therefore, to increase the pressure on die aggressors from all sides is precisely the way towards creating conditions for a political settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues. Conversely, any attempt to weaken or break up the armed struggle against aggression or to strike a deal at the expense of the victimized peoples in exchange for concessions from the aggressors would only embolden the hegemonists and hurt the chance of a genuine settlement.
138.	The recent proposals offered by the Soviet Union and Viet Nam for settling the Afghan and Kampuchean questions are all based on the acceptance of the fait accompli created by their armed aggression. A compromise on such a basis' would be tantamount to accepting a new Munich agreement by allowing the aggressors to gain easily at the negotiating table what they have failed to get on the battlefield. That is obviously impermissible. The
Chinese Government maintains that all foreign troops must be withdrawn from Afghanistan and Kampuchea immediately and unconditionally, that these two countries must be restored to their independent and nonaligned status, and that the Afghan and Kampuchean peoples must be free to choose their own political systems and governments.
139.	TJie Chinese Government reiterates its position that following the settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean questions in accordance with the aforementioned principles, the countries concerned should join in an international guarantee that there shall be no interference whatsoever in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and Kampuchea and that their territory shall not be occupied or used for encroachment on the independence and sovereignty of other countries in either region. We hope that the General Assembly will adhere to the principles set forth in the resolutions adopted at its previous sessions and make renewed efforts towards a settlement of the Afghan and Kampuchean issues.
140.	In the past year the situation in the Middle East, rather than improving, has become more tense. Israel is still clinging obstinately to an expansionist position. It has not only continued to obstruct a reasonable settlement of the Middle East question, but has become more reckless by committing fresh atrocities against the Arab countries and peoples in violation of the Charter and the norms of international relations. It flagrantly raided Iraq's nuclear reactor, repeatedly invaded Lebanon and frequently bombed Palestinian refugee camps in open defiance of the relevant resolutions adopted by the United Nations. Israel's lawlessness is intolerable and must be stopped. The Chinese Government and people sternly condemn these Israeli acts of aggression and firmly support the just struggles of the Arab people. We maintain that Israel must withdraw from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem; that the Palestinian people must regain their national rights, including the right to return to their homeland and the right to self-determination and establishment of a state; that the PLO, as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, is entitled to participate on an equal footing in a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question; and that all countries in the Middle East have the right to independence and existence. We are pleased to note that many Arab countries, the European Community and others, have been making positive efforts to bring about a settlement of the Middle East question. Our attitude is that we welcome all initiatives that are conducive to a comprehensive and just settlement of the Middle East question and to peace and stability in the region.
141.	In southern Africa, the white racist regime is becoming more and more unbridled in trampling upon the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations. Not only does it continue to occupy Namibia illegally in defiance of United Nations resolutions and to strengthen the system of apartheid in South Africa, but it has launched repeated armed attacks against the front line States. Not long ago it even carried out a large-scale invasion of Angola. These outrages constitute a flagrant provocation to the African people and to the people of the entire world. In our view, Namibia should attain genuine national independence immediately on the basis of territorial integrity and national unity and in conformity with the aspirations of the Namibian people and the relevant United" Nations resolutions; the system of apartheid in South Africa must be completely abolished; and the international community should apply, without reservation, comprehensive sanctions against South Africa. We firmly support the solemn resolution adopted at the emergency special session on the question of Namibia [iES8/2]. Security Council resolution 435 (1978) must be fully implemented without further delay.
142.	The Middle East and southern Africa are two important regions rich in strategic resources. The Soviet Union has always regarded them as important targets for its aggression and expansion. Masquerading as a supporter of national liberation movements, it has long since infiltrated these regions in an attempt to expand its influence there. The crimes committed by Israel and South Africa have not only brought untold sufferings to the countries and peoples of those regions, but have also provided the hegemonists with more opportunities and pretexts for infiltration, thereby posing a greater threat to peace in the Middle East, southern Africa and the rest of the world.
143.	It must be pointed out that the arrogance and defiance of Israel and South Africa are attributable, in large measure, to United Stales support and protection. The United States has repeatedly expressed its willingness to improve its relations with the third-world countries and to join them in safeguarding world peace. But what is the sense of expressing such sentiments when Israel and South Africa are being condoned and given support instead of being denounced for their flagrant breaches of die norms of international relations? This only antagonizes the hundreds of millions of Arab and African peoples and a large number of third-world countries.
144.	The situation in the Caribbean region merits our attention. The peoples in some of the countries there have long been subjected to imperialist and colonialist exploitation and oppression and unbearable domestic, political and economic conditions. It is their inalienable right to uphold their national independence and State sovereignty, develop their national economy and carry out democratic reforms. This should be recognized in the first place. On the other hand, it must be noted that another superPower and its proxies have been meddling in the internal affairs of those countries and trying hard to infiltrate the region under the guise of supporting the progressive movements. In our opinion, the people of the region should be left alone to solve their own problems. We are opposed to all outside interferences no matter where they come from.
145.	The situation in NorthEast Asia is also not tranquil. The United States has thus far failed to withdraw its troops from South Korea. The peaceful reunification of Korea continues to meet with obstructions from the authorities in South Korea. In October 1980, President Kim II Sung of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea put forward a new formula for the establishment of a Democratic Confederal Republic of Koryo, which would incorporate both North and South Korea. This reflects die fervent hope of the broad masses of the Korean people for the reunification of their fatherland and provides a practical way for its realization. We maintain that resolution 3390 ft (XXX) on the question of Korea, sponsored by 43 countries and adopted by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session, should be implemented expeditiously so as to create. favorable conditions for the independent and peaceful reunification of Korea.
145. Over the past year, the world has not only witnessed a series of major political events, but has also been faced with serious economic problems. The economic conditions of many developing countries have further deteriorated and the economic contradictions between the North and South have become more acute. Faced with worsening terms of trade, the developing countries are plagued with greater deficits in their international balance of payments and heavier burdens of foreign debts. They basically remain powerless in international economic relations. Certain developed countries are clinging to the old international economic order and trying to shift the consequences of the economic crises onto others, thus creating greater obstacles for the developing countries to build independent economies and making it more difficult for them to achieve the objectives of their, development strategies.
147.	The efforts of the developing countries to achieve economic independence after winning political independence represent an irresistible trend of our time. The major developed countries, however, refuse to go along with this trend by changing their unequal and unfair relationship with the developing countries. This is the root cause for the ever sharpening economic contradictions between the North and South.
148.	The economies of nations are closely interrelated. The developed countries are increasingly dependent on the developing countries for their economic growth. From the longterm point of view, the prolonged impoverishment of the latter will not be in the economic interests of the former. A number of developed countries have come to realize that their own economic "stagflation" may be alleviated as a result of the economic growth of the developing countries. We are of the view that the principle of equality and mutual benefit, which is the norm of international relations, should also apply to the economic field.
149.	Moreover, one must not lose sight of the fact that the economic difficulties of the developing countries and the resultant domestic political turmoil, as well as the worsening NorthSouth contradictions, will provide the hegemonists with opportunities to stir up troubles. To support the developing countries in building their independent economies and to promote appropriate reforms in the international economic order so as to establish step by step a new international economic order is therefore not a purely economic matter but a vital political question that affects the maintenance of world peace and stability.
150.	It is pure hope that the major developed countries, proceeding from the overall situation of the world, will give serious consideration to the legitimate desires and demands of the developing countries, promptly come to an agreement at the current session or at the forthcoming Cancun summit to launch the global negotiations, and take practical and feasible measures to meet the urgent needs of the developing countries and improve North South relations.
151.	The political and economic situation of the world today is grim indeed. The maintenance of peace is the common aspiration of the people of the world. However, We have to struggle for peace; we cannot beg for it. To
defend world peace it is imperative to oppose hegemonism. To this end, the peoples of all countries should unite and coordinate their actions, taking into account their respective situations. In order to achieve greater unity against hegemonism it is necessary for all parties to respect each other's sovereign rights and interests and to treat each other as equals. On the eve of the Second , World War certain countries failed to discern in time the source of the threat and failed to unite effectively to oppose it. The people of the world ended up paying a heavy price and the world learned a bitter lesson.
152: China has consistently pursued a foreign policy of peace. Having suffered enormously from foreign aggressions and wars in the past, the Chinese people know only too well how precious peace is. Today, as the Chinese people are engaged in building China into a modernized socialist country, they need all the more a lasting peaceful international environment. However; in pursuing the policy of safeguarding world peace and opposing hegemonism, China is motivated not simply by its own interests, but also takes into account the interests of the people of the whole world.
153.	China is a developing socialist country; it belongs and will always belong to the third world. China is ready to work together with other third-world countries as well as all countries that uphold justice and love peace and to contribute all it can to the defense of the purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of international relations and to the cause of opposing hegemonism and maintaining world peace.
53.The English version of his statement was supplied by the delegation. *Mr. President, I should like, first of all, to take this opportunity to convey to you the congratulations of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany on your election to this high office. We see in you a man of distinction who, in his long and active involvement in the work of the United Nations, has shown exceptional qualities. We see in you the representative of one of the leading members of the non aligned movement, a country with which we have had good, longstanding relations.
54.	I should also like to express my country's gratitude to the President of the thirty-fifth session of the General As sembly, Mr. Riidiger von Wechmar. He discharged the du ties of his office with a sense of awareness of the new reality of global interdependence. In so doing he was able to count on the full approval and support of the Federal Republic of Germany.
55.	At the same, time, I wish to thank the Secretary General for his dedicated work over the past 12 months on behalf of the Organization, and thus also on behalf of peace.
56.	On behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany, I extend a warm welcome to Vanuatu as a new Member of the United Nations.
57.	For a decade now, the world economy has been in a critical phase of readjustment: inflation, recession and unemployment in the industrialized countries, but, above all, stagnating indeed, declining per capita incomes in many developing countries. The want and distress of the poor in the third world are increasing. At the same time, the world population continues to grow rapidly: over the next 20 years it will increase from 4.5 billion to approximately 6.5 billion people. This means that food, clothing and housing, schools and jobs have to be provided for 2 billion people. That is equivalent to the population of 2,000 completely new cities, each with 1 million inhabitants. This shows that mankind as a whole is faced with great and global challenges.
58.	Yet and this is the disturbing part of it is not these problems that are the focal point of world politics and of world interests: the headlines of the international press tell us, rather, about an arms race and tensions between nations, about war, civil war and intervention. At a time when global interdependence and global cooperation have become a question of survival, the human race is in danger of once again pitting its strength against itself.
59.	Now, at a time when we ought to be concentrating our material as weK as our intellectual resources on the task of bringing the world economy out of its structural crisis, on development in the third world and on preserving the conditions of life on our planet, $500 billion is being wasted on arms. But our children and grandchildren will judge us solely by whether we have succeeded in setting me world on the road to peace, development and survival, or whether we have declined into confrontation, an arms race and, ultimately, catastrophe.
60.	We can preserve world peace and master the great challenges to mankind only if all countries act in accordance with principles that are commensurate with the provisions and the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. This calls for renunciation of force, that is to say, renunciation of the use and threat of use of force, since conflicts must be settled by peaceful means; for no aspiration to domination over others, no interference in the internal affairs of other coun tries and respect for the right of self determination of all nations; for responsible action with an awareness of global interdependence, using moderation and restraint in pursuing one's own interests; for readiness for dialogue, negotiation and cooperation; for no aspiration to superiority, but rather a desire for balance at the lowest possible level of arma ments, adhering to an active policy of preserving peace through cooperation on issues of international security and, in particular, of arms control and disarmament; and, finally, for elimination of the NorthSouth confrontation as part of a policy of worldwide partnership and the safeguarding of peace.
61.	In the search for a solution to these global problems, very great importance attaches to the development of East West relations. At the beginning of the 1970s we all hoped that the efforts increasingly to reduce the differences between East and West and to expand cooperation would prove successful, and considerable progress in the development of East-West relations was indeed achieved in the first half of that decade. But of late the East-West confrontation has intensified yet again. It threatens to push the North South dialog to the periphery of world affairs once more. Indeed, the East-West confrontation threatens to spread to the South.
62.	That must not be allowed to happen. East and West must do everything possible to pull themselves back onto a course leading to stability in their relations and to cooperation. On no account must East and West allow the third world to become a theater for the continuation of their conflict. The countries of the South have problems enough and should not also be made the scene of the contest be tween East and West.
63.	Negotiations on arms control and disarmament with the aim of establishing a balance at the lowest possible level are more urgent than ever. There must not be another arms race.
64.	In the 1970s the Soviet Union made extraordinary efforts in all fields of armaments. They were not matched by comparable efforts on the part of the West; quite the contrary.
65.	The West has noted with great concern how the Soviet Union has not only increased its superiority as regards conventional forces but has at the same time stepped up its medium-range nuclear weapons and given them new quality, in particular with the SS20 missile and the "Backfire" bomber. Our concern about these developments can only be dispelled if the current and proposed East-West negotiations are successful. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany will contribute all it possibly can to the achievement of that aim.
66.	We hope that the meeting between Secretary of State Haig and Foreign Minister Gromyko will mark the beginning of a new, constructive phase in the dialog between the United States and the Soviet Union, which is of such importance for the whole world. The importance and weight of the United States and the Soviet Union give both countries a special responsibility for world peace. Dialog, negotiation and cooperation between East and West must 'be intensified and further developed. This also includes the continuation of the SALT process.
67.	We also hope that the meeting between the United States Secretary of State and the Soviet Foreign Minister will above all give a signal for the start of negotiations on medium-range nuclear weapons. We have advocated such negotiations for quite some time. We have been involved in the preparations for them with our allies, and we will continue to follow them in the future. We want medium-range nuclear missiles on both sides to be limited to equal ceilings at the lowest possible level, and the more the Soviet Union reduces its arms buildup, the lower that level can be. If that arms buildup is eliminated altogether, there will no longer be any need for the West to deploy medium-range weapons as envisaged.
68.	The Government and people of the Federal Republic of Germany long for nothing more dearly than a result of that kind, which to us would be the ideal result. But it is not only a question of nuclear weapons. In the Vienna Talks on Mutual Reduction of Forces, Armaments and Associated Measures in Central Europe, we are resolutely pursuing the aim of achieving a balance of forces in central Europe by means of mutual reductions, in order to improve military stability and to rid the peoples of central Europe of the fear of possible surprise attack.
69.	As a result of the Madrid review session of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, we want a conference or disarmament in Europe as a forum for agreement on concrete confidence building measures for the whole of Europe, from the Atlantic to the Urals.
70.	It is not only East and West that have to tackle the task of arms control and disarmament. That task is universal and applies to all regions and to all countries.
71.	The United Nations already proclaimed the 1970s the United Nations Disarmament Decade, but we are all pain fully conscious of the scant success of our efforts to stop the worldwide arms spiral.
72.	My country has put forward as its contribution to the General Assembly's second special session devoted to disarmament, to be held in 1982, a draft comprehensive pro gramme or disarmament.4 Its purpose is to facilitate world wide disarmament negotiations, to describe the conceptual framework for such negotiations, to define the criteria and principles, and thus to carry out important preparatory work for concrete negotiations and results.
73.	1 wish to mention four principles in particular: balance, openness, verifiability and confidence building.
74.	Disarmament negotiations can only prove successful if they enhance the security of all concerned. Whoever seeks one sided "advantages in disarmament negotiations or tries to hold on to those already gained will create a deadlock. The aim must be balance at the lowest possible level. Superiority of one side causes instability and this in turn poses a threat to peace. Balance and parity constitute the recognized central principle of the SALT negotiations.
75.	But that principle must not be restricted to the SALT process. In their joint declaration of 6 May 1978, General Secretary Brezhnev and Federal Chancellor Schmidt said that "both sides deem it important that no one should seek military superiority and that they proceed on the assumption that approximate equality and parity suffice to safeguard defense".
76.	It is now necessary to ensure that in the disarmament negotiations between East and West this principle is translated into practical, concrete policies.
77.	Disarmament presupposes transparency of the force relationship. Each side must openly give information about its own force strengths and armaments. Anyone trying to evade this is sowing the seeds of mistrust and casting doubt upon his intentions. The United Nations has elaborated a standardized reporting system with a view to making military budgets comparable. My country, like some other Western and nonaligned countries, has submitted a report on its defense budget in line with that system. All other countries should follow that example.
78.	I repeat my proposal that the United Nations should set up two registers: first, one which records how much each industrial country spends per capita on armaments and how much it spends on development assistance; and secondly, another register which lists worldwide exports and imports of weapons. This would be an important first step. The international community cannot look on indifferently as military spending in East and West and in the third world continues to increase while development aid budgets stagnate.
79.	The obligations assumed in disarmament negotiations must be verifiable. The verification procedure must in each individual case be tailored to the treaty to which it is to apply. We can do some important preliminary work in that respect in the United Nations if we develop procedures and instruments of verification which have been internationally agreed upon and, where possible, also tried out in practice.
80.	Anyone who opposes on site inspections or refuses to accept verification in other forms will be open to the suspicion of wanting to hide something and deceive others; he will be destroying confidence rather than building it.
81.	The Geneva Committee on Disarmament is discussing a comprehensive prohibition of the manufacture and stock piling of chemical weapons. Here, too, the most difficult problem still to be solved is that of verification. We hope for an early agreement on the verifiable prohibition of chemical weapons.
82.	Real disarmament can be achieved only through mutual confidence among States. Concrete confidence building measures are therefore indispensable for successful dis armament. The Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, signed at Helsinki on 1 August 1975, makes provision for initial confidence building measures. The proposed conference on disarmament in Europe could be a new qualitative step in the process of confidence building. confidence building measures can al$oNbe conducive to stability and arms limitation in the third world. It was with that in mind that, during the thirty-fourth session, we launched an initiative with a view to giving a global dimension to efforts to achieve confidence building meas ures.
83.	We hope that the SecretaryGeneral's study now before us [At36/474 and Corr. 1] will generate effective impulses for concrete measures to speed up the confidence building process all over the world. We need a code of confidence building.
84.	Those four principles for disarmament negotiations balance, openness, verifiability and confidence building are four prerequisites for success. They can serve as four cornerstones for the construction of a comprehensive security partnership around the world.
85.	The foremost objective of my country's foreign policy is actively to safeguard peace. We want peace and freedom. But to us, peace means more than the mere avoidance of war. We want a world of cooperation based on partnership among nations.
86.	Together with other European democracies we have formed the European Community in order to shape our common future together. By developing the European Community into a European union, we shall be able to work even more effectively as a force for peace and progress in Europe and in the world.
87.	We have united with our European allies and the United States of America and Canada in the North Atlantic Alliance. That alliance rests on the common values of free dom, human dignity and self determination. Its sole pur pose is to preserve common security and safeguard peace. It derives its strength from the friendship and trust between Europeans and Americans.
88.	On the basis of the European Community and the North Atlantic Alliance we, the Federal Republic of Germany, have, by means of our Ostpolitik, made an important contribution to the stabilization of peace in Europe. We shall continue that realistic policy of dialog, of reducing tensions and of strengthening cooperation.
89.	The line that divides East and West also divides the German nation. Consequently, no one is more severely affected by any deterioration of the East-West relation ship than the Germans; no one has a more direct interest in improving East-West relations. There must be no re lapse into the cold war.
90.	The policy of the Federal Republic of Germany of concluding treaties with its neighbors in the East the Moscow Treaty, the Warsaw Treaty, the treaty with Czechoslovakia and the Basic Treaty with the German Democratic Republic are testimony to our longterm policy of cooperation and detente. We abide by those treaties. It is our wish that General Secretary Brezhnev's visit to Bonn in November will strengthen our bilateral relations and will favourably influence East-West relations as a whole.
91.	The developments in Poland are of particular importance for the situation in Europe and in the world. It is up to Poland alone to determine its path. We expect all other signatories of the Final Act of Helsinki, like ourselves, to refrain from any interference in the internal affairs of the Polish People's Republic.
92.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its conviction that the two German States bear special responsibility for peace in Europe. Never again must war originate on German soil, as stated by Chancellor Helmut Schmidt and Chairman of the German Democratic Republic State Council, Erich Honecker.
93.	Especially in the present difficult phase of East-West relations, the following must be axiomatic to both German' States: we must carefully preserve what we have achieved between us and what we have contributed to peace in Eu rope over the past decade; in our mutual relationship and in relations with all our neighbors we must exercise restraint and consideration; the GermanGerman relationship must never be an additional cause of strain on the East West relationship; we must continue the dialogue at all levels without any preconditions; it must be our common goal to achieve the largest measure of progress in implementing all parts of the Final Act of Helsinki,
94.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany intends to promote cooperation between the two German States, and we want to provide more opportunities for contacts between Germans on both sides. Those and other improvements which make life easier for the Germans in their mutual relationship are not only a dictate of humanity but are an indispensable contribution to peace and cooperation in Europe.
95.	Our aim is and will remain to work for a state of peace in Europe in which the German nation will recover its unity in free self determination. The wall which divides the Germans will not prove durable. The will of the people is not to preserve, still less to deepen, the division between them, but to remove it.
96.	The Quadripartite Agreement on Berlin has helped to calm the situation in and around Berlin. That must remain so. Each side must realize that the Agreement can produce a stabilizing effect on Berlin and favourably influence East-West relations only if all sides strictly observe and fully implement it.
97.	Another impressive testimony to United States solidarity with Berlin was the visit by the American Secretary of State Mr. Haig on 13 September 1981.
98.	As in our bilateral policy, we are also striving within the multilateral framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to improve East' West relations in Europe. The Final Act of Helsinki is a document which manifests the will for cooperation in Europe, and it should be consistently implemented by all signatories to make Europe a region of lasting peace based on respect for human rights.
99.	We are acutely aware how much still remains to be done in that respect. Together with om Western partners, we are making every effort to ensure that the follow-up to the Conference, in Madrid, will produce a final document which, in all fields covered by the Final Act, will bring progress for cooperation among the countries of Europe and make for better relations among their citizens.
100.	The process of the Conference on Security and Co operation in Europe must be continued. It is the great hope of many people, not only in Europe. The Madrid Conference must issue a concrete mandate for a conference on disarmament in Europe if it is to meet the need for security in Europe.
101.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany also wishes to contribute to peace and the peaceful settlement of conflicts outside Europe. The agenda for this session of the General Assembly includes items on four major international conflicts: the Middle East, southern Africa, Afghanistan and Kampuchea.
102.	At the previous meeting, the President of the European Community also spoke on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany. Following.his statement, let me say that we have a vital interest of our own in lasting, comprehensive and equitable peace in the Middle East. Israel's right to live within secure and recognized boundaries is just as indispensable for such peace as is recognition of the right of self determination of the Palestinian people. The efforts to achieve a comprehensive, lasting and equitable peace settlement must be intensified. The starting point for this must be the renunciation of force by all sides.
103.	It is with a sense of concern for world peace and deep sympathy for the suffering of the people that we watch events in Lebanon. All efforts undertaken by the Lebanese Government to bring about national conciliation and to restore Lebanon's sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity have our full support.
104.	In the context of the initiative of the five Western States, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is emphatic that Namibia should at long last gain independence through free elections on the basis of Security Council .resolution 435 (1978). This must happen in 1982. The independence of Namibia must not be delayed any longer. We acknowledge the constructive contribu tions of the OAU towards a settlement of the Namibia question. The remnants of colonialism and racism in southern Africa must be eliminated.
105.	We condemn South Africa's intervention in An gola; the Republic of South Africa has taken a grave responsibility upon itself.
106.	My country stands side by side with the non aligned and Islamic countries in an effort to terminate the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and to achieve a political solution which will restore to that sorely tried people self determination and independence and reestablish Afghanistan's status as a genuinely nonaligned State. The European Council has proposed a conference on Afghanistan with the aim of achieving that goal in two phases. The continuing occupation of Afghanistan is a heavy strain on international relations.
107.	The Federal Republic of Germany actively sup ports the efforts of the international community, and especially the ASEAN countries, to restore the political in dependence and territorial integrity of Kampuchea.
108.	We are following with concern developments in Central America where, in El Salvador, and also else where, the use of force and bloodshed are on the in crease. The people of that region must be enabled to determine their own destiny free from direct or indirect intervention from outside. 
109.	All democratic forces in those countries should act in awareness of their common responsibility and dissociate themselves from the forces of violence. Like the whole of the third world, like the whole of Latin America, Central America, too, must be kept out of the East West conflict. Political and social reforms must create a more equitable and stable order, and with it the conditions which will allow Central America to become a region of peace. The European Community can be a good partner to such a Central America.
110.	At its thirty-fifth session, the General Assembly included in its agenda a new item entitled "International cooperation to avert new flows of refugees". In resolution 35/124, it expressed the conviction that the refugee issue is no longer a humanitarian one only, but also affects world peace. As the resolution stated, the flows of hundreds of thousands, indeed millions, of refugees '"jeopardize the stability of entire regions and thus "endanger international peace and security".
111.	We, the Federal Republic of Germany, favour general guidelines for the conduct of States, as well as practical measures which will make it possible to prevent any fresh flows of refugees, and ws propose that this be discussed by an ad hoc committee.
112.	The General Assembly is commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the Conference of Heads of State of Government of NonAligned Countries held at Belgrade in 1961. The nonaligned countries constitute a powerful movement in the world of today, but their goal has not yet been fully attained.
113.	Colonialism is almost everywhere a thing of the past, but the independence that has been gained by for mer colonies is threatened by attempts to dominate them in other ways. In 1979, in fact, the world witnessed an ideologically motivated attempt to make the nonaligned movement itself, as it was called, the "natural ally" of one of the two systems of the North. That attempt failed. It had to fail, because the wheel of history cannot be turned back. There is no longer any future in hegemonic aspirations, nor in interventions in the internal affairs of other countries, but they can still be a threat to peaceful relations between nations.
114.	With its model of a pluralistic world of nations who have chosen their own destiny, the nonaligned movement is a force_working for the cause of progress. It is at the same time a force working for the cause of peace and stability because today both these aims can be achieved only within an international order in which nations cooperate with one another in partnership and on the basis of free self determination and equality. The Federal Republic of Germany stands side by side with the nonaligned countries in the pursuit of this goal.
115.	The desire for independence also manifests itself in the regional groupings which are being formed and are growing in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
116^ After the European Community, there is now an other association, ASEAN, which has already developed extensively. A powerful influence for peace and liability in Asia emanates from that organization.
117.	Regional cooperation is also progressing elsewhere in the third world. Cooperation among the Gulf States, the groupings that have been formed in Latin America, and those already established or to be established in Africa, which were all molded into a grand design by the Conference of Lusaka, are proof of this. These groupings also provide small and medium-sized countries with an opportunity to shape their independence and their future
together.
118.	Together with the other members of the European Community, we promote this development towards plurality and partnership based on equality. Stable economic and social development in the third world is indispensable for lasting international peace;
119.	The common goal of the industrial and developing countries in the 1970s was to accelerate growth in the developing countries in the context of constant global economic growth, but it did not turn out that way. Today, at the beginning of the Third United Nations Development Decade, the growth of per capita incomes has stopped in many oil-importing countries of the third world. Indeed, real per capita incomes in most of the poorest countries are even declining. We view with concern this crisis of development.
120.	We also view with concern the fact that the North South dialog has lost momentum. In spite of the progress achieved in many individual areas, it is marking time on the major issues. That is why we look towards the forthcoming International Meeting on Cooperation and Development, to be held at Cancun. An important idea of the Brandt Commission becomes a reality. The great opportunity afforded by this unprecedented Cancun meeting must be seized. We want it to generate a new resolve to settle the urgent problems of the world econ omy and development by means of solidarity and global cooperation. Lastly, we want it to pave the way for the beginning at long last of global negotiations. We want to work for a global energy strategy which will create security among both producers and consumers. We want to work for a global food strategy in order to guarantee food security and thus eliminate hunger.
121.	The outcome of the twelfth session of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, to be held in 1982, will be crucial. Its importance for the future of the North-South dialog Can hardly be overestimated because, as the SecretaryGeneral has emphasized, it is a question of whether we in the United Nations are capable of negotiating solutions for global problems which strike a fair balance between the elementary and basic interests of all nations and at the same time serve the world as a whole,
122.	A return to world economic growth and development calls, first and foremost, for energetic efforts on the part of all countries. The industrial countries must break the back of inflation and thus restore the basis for constant growth and the elimination of unemployment. The nations of the third world, on the other hand, must adopt development strategies that involve the masses of the poor in the growth process. Labor intensive agricultural production and industries, coupled with an effective population policy, must form the nucleus of development plans. But if they are to be successful, the efforts of the developing countries themselves need adequate support from outside. All countries in a position to do so should contribute their share. The Communist industrial countries must no longer shirk their duty to help the nations of the third world in a spirit of solidarity.
123.	The Federal Republic of Germany gives high priority cooperation in the field of development. This means, first, that in spite of our own economic difficulties we shall not relax our efforts to provide financial and technical assistance. Even our budget for 1982, which is one of self-restraint for our citizens, allows our development aid to grow at a greater rate than that of the budget as a whole. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany welcomes the programme of action adopted at the United Nations Conference en the Least Developed Countries, held recently in Paris, because these countries are the ones that depend most on official development aid.  
124.	Secondly, we are still strongly in favor of markets in industrial countries being kept open and widened to take in the exports of developing countries. There must be no lapse into protectionism. We do not try to solve our problem of unemployment by erecting trade barriers, but by promoting structural change with the necessary supporting social measures. Only with free world trade can North and South advance.
125.	Thirdly, to many developing countries, exports of raw materials are still the main source of foreign exchange. These countries in particular are suffering as a result of the decline in the growth of the world economy, a situation which has lasted for several years now and which has checked demand for raw materials and caused prices to drop. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany attaches great importance to the problems confronting commodity-exporting developing countries. We have just decided to make a substantial voluntary contribution to the Second Account of the Common Fund for Commodities.
126.	Fourthly, the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy has, for the first time, made energy issues a subject of negotiations within a global framework. We must continue along this path. The steep, abrupt increase in the price of energy has placed a heavy burden on the industrial countries. To the oil-importing developing countries, it has become a question of their very existence. We need partnership and cooperation between the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries [OPEC], industrial countries and oil-importing developing countries. This is the only way the world can come through the transition to the post-oil era intact. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany also advocates the establishment of a World Bank affiliate for energy which could help considerably to resolve the energy problems of the third world.
127.	We must not allow national egoism to gain the upper hand in the process of NorthSouth cooperation. We are called upon to play our part the industrial countries of the West and of the East and the developing countries. The NorthSouth problem is not merely the global social issue; it is a task of world peace which we shall have to accomplish if we want to ensure the survival of mankind.
128.	To the Federal Republic of Germany, respect for and protection of the dignity aild the rights of man are fundamental to all policies. Efforts to secure the exercise of human rights throughout the world are therefore one of the central elements of our participation in the work of the United Nations. We deem it the responsibility of the Organization to raise its voice whenever fundamental human rights are violated, irrespective of where and by whom.
129.	The United Nations has created procedures and institutions to foster respect for human rights all over the globe. These procedures are still relatively weak, but they are having a growing effect. It is important to continue this work with determination and to develop further the possibilities open to the United Nations for protecting human rights. The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany continues to support the idea of an international court of human rights.
130.	We have rioted with satisfaction that our initiative regarding a convention on the ultimate abolition of the death penalty has met with a favorable response from many countries. The draft convention takes the form of a second optional protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. This form should make for constructive discussion leading to progress in this field.
131.	The Government of the Federal Republic of Germany is aware that other legal traditions, religious convictions and historical experiences have led many countries to take a different view of the death penalty. But no one can overlook the frequent abuses of the death penalty in the world of today and the growing incidence of executions without regard for the due process of law. Equally depressing is the fact that people are still subjected to torture. This makes the struggle to abolish the death penalty and torture more urgent than ever.
132.	Mankind has reached the highest point to date in its level of knowledge and in its capabilities. It can use that knowledge and those capabilities to resolve the problems vital to its survival, but it can also use them to destroy the earth's civilization and, perhaps, even the human species.
133.	Only if we act in awareness of our responsibility for the safeguarding of peace and respect for the dignity of man, and only if we act with the desire for global solidarity, will we find the way to a good future. This is the foremost task of the Organization. The Federal Republic of Germany reaffirms its trust in the United Nations.

My first words are addressed to the delegation of Vanuatu on the occasion of the admission of that country to membership in the Organization. France is tied with the people of Vanuatu in many ways and we therefore welcome this one hundred and fifty-fifth Member of the United Nations into our midst.
2.	The Assembly's decision to entrust to you, Sir, the presidency of the thirty-sixth session is one that we find fully justified, and I should like to express to you my delegation's warmest congratulations. You are well aware of the ties that bind our two countries. Your personality and experience in international affairs guarantee that our work will be conducted with all necessary vigor and authority.
3.	My next remarks are addressed to you, Mr. Secretary General. All of us here are familiar with your political acumen and your commitment to international order. We have had many occasions to meet and to become acquainted over the years. To my Government's tribute to your qualities I should like to add my own personal expression of friendship and high esteem.
4.	We also know that we can count on the competence and active participation of the Secretariat. We can be sure of its invaluable support, however onerous the tasks imposed by the successful operation of a session such as this. I wish to express my congratulations and thanks to them for this.
5.	A radical political change recently occurred in the political life of my country, France. On 10 May, a new President of the Republic was elected. On 21 June, by sweeping a majority of the left into power in a most spectacular way, the people of France reaffirmed their will to turn over a new leaf and to enter a new era. The world of today arid of tomorrow is not and cannot be build in the image of the world of yesterday.
6.	For many years now, a majority of the States of the world have been heralding in this very forum the new international economic order. This order will not be solely economic nor will it be exclusively international. My country is aware of this change and the Socialist Government of France has embarked upon a definition of this new order, an order which will be more just and more equitable for the least privileged, the weak, those who languish on the periphery of society, those who for too long have been ignored. These people form the most important element of our majority in France; they also form the majority here in this hall. To all of them we wish to propose a future, an ideal consisting of progress and hope.
7.	The message of which my Government feels itself to be the bearer therefore transcends our own frontiers. Of course there is no question of proposing to others solutions that must be defined and adopted only by each people according to its own constitutional authority. The right of each people to define its own destiny is sacred. But there are principles and aspirations that our national community intends to assert and ^defend, and which we . believe have universal value, since they will form the international order.
8.	After those preliminary remarks, it goes almost without saying that our conduct in its entirety is devoted to man himself. Man is the fundamental value. Man is the starting point and the ultimate objective of all policies. France denounces all forms of totalitarianism and authoritarianism. We denounce and will fight discrimination in all its forms, whether religious, sexist or racist. France declares war on contempt.
9.	Our common fight in this Organization therefore must be waged resolutely to ensure respect and freedom for men. It is inconceivable that a State should base its strength and prosperity on the oppression of its citizens, or, worse still, on the humiliation and rejection of a part of its population who are denied the status of citizenship.
10.	Some will object that the Charter of the United Nations, like the rules of international law, prohibits interference in affairs falling within the national jurisdiction of a State. But in this context I should like to make two comments.
11.	The first which hardly needs to be made in this Assembly is that the very practices of our Organization testify to a significant evolution in this regard. Little by little, massive and flagrant violations of fundamental human rights appear to be falling within the competence of the international community, as one can judge from conventions and other international agreements adopted in recent years at world and regional levels.
12.	Who today still doubts that apartheid and other manifestations of racism can and should be denounced be fore the principal United Nations bodies? Who has not welcomed the progress inadequate as it may be brought about thanks to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, held at Helsinki? With regard to violations less broad in scope, they are, as representatives are aware, the object, particularly within the Commission on Human Rights whose tenacity we admire of procedures which are often discreet but which gradually are permitting certain practices to be corrected.
13.	I would add that in the field of human rights the actions of international institutions truly complement those of nongovernmental organizations. I should like to pay a tribute 19*, them today, as well as to the associations, labor unions, political parties, youth movements, religious groups and, of course, to the mass media, the audiovisual medium in particular, which have helped so much to arouse public opinion and mobilize it in express sing its indignation when shocking situations have arisen that need to be condemned.
14.	Human rights are inseparable from the rights of peoples and nations. I have already emphasized the right of each people to decide its own destiny, in total independence, and therefore to choose its political regime, its economic system, its social structures and its friendships; freedom to enter into a network of alliances or to prefer neutrality or nonalignment. France has always been and remains conscious and jealous of its independence. Its geographical situation, its cultural affinities and the fact that the world is, unfortunately, a dangerous place have prompted France to adhere freely to the Atlantic Alliance, to which it brings a loyal contribution in the defense of values that are common to all members of the Alliance  the values of freedom and civilization.
15.	However, France reserves the right to make its sovereign judgment of the threats and dangers that could lead to the gravest decisions. It hopes, too, that negotiations between the greatest Powers will make it possible to reduce the growing threats resulting from recent over-armament. Further, it reaffirms its determination to contribute to establishing confidence building measures from the Urals to the Atlantic. The relations that it has maintained for many years with the Soviet Union and the people's democracies of Eastern Europe allow it to express itself clearly, to let its convictions and worries be known directly, without going through intermediaries, and to contribute in this way to establishing between the countries of Western and Eastern Europe relations promoting the fullest development of all peoples.
16.	The right which we claim to determine our own future is something which we believe it is only fair that other States, both small and large, weak and strong, peoples of the South and of the North, should be allowed to possess, too. France will therefore be on the side of those who fight for the recognition of the rights of their people or for the independence of their nation.
17.	We have the greatest sympathy for those who, still remaining outside the mainstream of East-West confrontation, wish to escape from spheres of influence. We salute the nonaligned movement and wilt be happy to lend our support to genuine efforts at nonalignment, whenever that nonalignment is proposed fry an authentic member of that movement. The world is not inexorably condemned to be divided into two enemy camps. The tensions which sometimes exist between neighbors must not be artificially transformed into duels between champions of the East and West. The sole object of a recent Franco-Mexican statement on El Salvador was to serve as a reminder of the need to let each people settle its own affairs by political and democratic processes.
18.	Faithful to its principles, France condemns outside interference and therefore denounces all undertakings .of force against any people and any State. Violence cannot create right. This elemental truth must not be forgotten, whatever the circumstances, the status or reasons of those who occupy territories against the will of the population that has been invaded and subjugated. Without comparing the occupying Powers, their reasons or their methods, condemnation must be applied equally to the Republic of South Africa, when it sends its tanks into Angola and ignores United Nations resolutions on Namibia; to Viet Nam, when it continues its occupation of Kampuchea; and to the Soviet Union, when it intervenes with its troops in Afghanistan.
19.	In the Middle East, it is not through violenceof which our Ambassador to Lebanon, Mr. Louis Delamare, recently became an innocent victim that peace will finally return to this part of the world, which was the cradle of so many civilizations and which has become the crucible of so much suffering!. The people and cultures of this region, who through the centuries have been caught in the web of historical evolution, victims of contempt and hatred, have a right to peace; their States should be able to develop in security; their peoples should be allowed to build their future in justice.
20.	Violation of the resolutions of the Organization is not the way to ensure the necessary security for the countries in the Middle East, for all the countries, including Israel. War is not the way for the peoples of this region, all the peoples, including the Palestinian people, to see all their rights recognized, including the right to a homeland and a State.
21.	There, as elsewhere in the world, negotiation among all the parties concerned is the only acceptable means of dealing with the reasons that have led one or another of them to act by sword and fire. Negotiation is the golden rule of the Organization. If this rule is broken once, just once, how can its observance be required elsewhere and in all cases?
22.	Let those here who are tempted to justify violence in one instance reflect on the fact that one day they may themselves be the victims of some other violence and be destroyed by it. Justice for peoples, security for States, respect for international decisions, negotiation: these are the principles that will guide France in the position it takes on the Middle East and throughout the world.
23.	Here then are quite a number of situations characterized by attacks on the principles of self determination and national sovereignty. All of us together in this room must agree to maintain the necessary pressure. Let us proclaim our willingness to resort to dialog, to discussion, to objective analysis of the concerns and motivations
of all parties. We are convinced that such an approach is
valid in the case of most of the crises that the world community has to face,
24.	Let me remind you forcefully that in the case of many of these crises it would be sufficient if the provisions of resolutions already adopted by the United Nations were respected. Think, for example, of southern Lebanon, occupied, torn asunder and removed from the legitimate Lebanese authority; think of Namibia, whose independence and sacred right to sovereignty are endlessly delayed. The time has come solemnly to affirm from this rostrum and I do so now in the name of France that every possible means must be brought to bear to ensure that Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 435 (1978) are applied in full without delay. My country is ready to make a contribution to this effort on whatever lines are decided on by this Organization.
25.	In certain situations we must go even further, and here again the United Nations has a significant role to play. Once Namibia has finally gained its freedom and independence through the implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978), it must be helped, and probably guaranteed, in its first few years. Angola, which has suffered so much from war, must be assured of all kinds of support during its reconstruction. Kampuchea, already rescued from famine by international efforts, must be able one day to determine its future freely and democratically, and it too, of course, will need guarantees and assurances of every kind. Afghanistan, if it is not to run the risk of interference which has recently been denounced in some quarters, and if it is to put an end to the interference now made evident by the bloodshed of the battlefield, will need some guarantee of the status it seeks. In many quarters, and in the face of threats of quite different kinds, the same idea has been advanced, namely, to accept, acknowledge and guarantee the wishes of a people to be freed from the tensions that surround it and threaten its independence and its desire for nonalignment. France believes that this similarity of ideas about very different areas and situations provides material for consideration and a common approach at the international level.
26.	I am often surprised to note that in most circles the true dimension of NorthSouth problems is not understood. Some talk of charity for unfortunate starveling of some devastated country, others demand higher prices for their products or a transfer of some special technology. But how often do you hear it acknowledged, as it has rightly been acknowledged by the members of the Brandt Commission,  that the progress of the NorthSouth dialog is a prerequisite for world progress and perhaps even for world peace?
27.	The South has become part of the life of the North. How much longer will it take for people to understand this? This is an essential aspect of the new age that is upon us whether we like it or not. What position will the South occupy and what part will it play? Those are questions that must be asked.
28.	From the political standpoint, I have already mentioned cases where the fundamental principles of the life of our people and our societies are being threatened or violated. Obtaining respect for such principles in southern Africa, the Middle East and Latin America is essential for those who believe in those principles. The French Government considers itself to be one of these countries. 1 will not return to this point, except to remind you how much our young people, the moving spirit of our so cities, are concerned with these problems, with which they are more familiar today, now that the media are tel ling them what is really taking place in the South, which was not the case a few decades ago,
29.	However, solidarity and interdependence transcend the political and moral realm. The world is riven by crisis, causing the number of unemployed to soar and condemning the most unfortunate to despair. Who can claim that this crisis will be set to rights or brought under control solely by the forces and mechanisms of the market place, and solely within the framework of the most advanced economies?
30.	Economic revival, which we all need urgently and this is particularly true of the most underprivileged countries requires the development of the countries of the South. This is not just a matter of a few hundred million dollars, but of tens of billions of dollars, which must be injected wherever they are most desperately needed and where their effect will be almost immediate in improving purchasing power and, as a result, in expanding markets. Elsewhere I have spoken ? a planetary "new deal" in order to recall this obvious truth which President Roosevelt, when confronted with America's great depression, identified in his day.
31.	It is important, therefore, for all of us together to tackle the issue of financing development and indeed the issue of the very survival of those who are most deprived. Where can the available resources be found? How can we organize the use of those resources? Where should we channel them? What kind of link should be established between the funds that all those who can should contribute, the lending capacity and administrative supervision of competent institutions, and the rightful concern of lenders and investors to guarantee the security of their investments? A few answers are ready and have been proposed. They must no longer be delayed or distorted. But they will not be enough, so let us strive to see how we can do more and better.
32.	Naturally, since the resources to be shared are unfortunately inadequate, our thoughts should turn first to those who are suffering most, sometimes to the point of death. My country was very happy to host in Paris the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.

33.	My Government notes with satisfaction that commitments were entered into by the international community and we are pleased that the countries of the European Community decided to commit 0.15 per cent of their total gross national product to help the least developed countries. France, for its part, as the President of the Republic has said and I repeat, will attain the United Nations aid target of 0.7 per cent of its gross national product, excluding the French overseas departments, before the end of Mr. Mitterrand's seven-year term. This in fact commits us to doubling in real terms our aid to the developing countries. France's effort will, starting in 1982, give priority to increasing its voluntary contributions on a multilateral basis and to aid countries with which it has special ties, particularly in Africa. 
34.	As we are all aware, it is not enough just to increase financial aid. So I ought to say something now of special aspects that should take priority: food, energy and trade. However, the time allotted for these remarks will not sufficed Allow me to focus on two aspects of the new international order that I believe to be essential.
35.	Predictability has now become an essential feature of tomorrow's order. Without 'it, how can one plan, organize, formulate and invest in a rational manner? But never before in history have the principal factors of economic life been so unpredictable. You only have to think of the prices of basic commodities imported by countries in the South, the prices for raw materials exported by the developing countries, the exchange rates and interest rates that influence all transactions. We are living in a world with out order, a chaotic world, an insane world. We the European countries without significant natural resources are suffering along with the countries of the South. In the face of speculation and uncertainty, our interests are those of the South; in this debate, we are with the South.
36.	It is important therefore gradually to introduce a system of law in world economic relations. We must seek contracts, treaties and international agreements. One of the innovations of the Lome Conventions between the European Community and 61 developing countries is to make the relations they embody predictable and reliable.
37.	Another feature of those Conventions is their comprehensiveness. Even more so at the world level, all of the economic, financial and technological problems should be discussed and negotiated simultaneously and jointly. The foregoing is justification enoughs France and its European partners are resolved that global negotiations should be started at the United Nations at the earliest possible time. We shall exert all our influence to see that no further delay is imposed. This is to be confirmed in a month at Cancun, at the International Meeting on Cooperation and Development.
38.	The global nature of NorthSouth problems seems evident to almost all of us. But have we given sufficient thought to the interaction between those external problems and our domestic problems? The new order will include major structural changes in each of the industrialized countries. The overall progress made possible by this renewal will be reflected in certain sectors by a decline in activity that will be more than compensated for in other sectors. New directions will be taken, and they will come up against resistance.
39.	These things will not be done if in the industrialized countries discussions are limited to diplomats, bankers, administrators and other experts. It is important to involve public opinion, the workers who are directly concerned and the young people whose future is at stake. The media have a key role to play here, and they can do so. There are times when strong feelings are aroused in towns and in the country side, when the misery and suffering of a downtrodden people give the more fortunate television viewer a moment of discomfort and indignation, or when despair in a crisis becomes unbearable.
40.	I have just mentioned the NorthSouth dialog in its worldwide framework. But we must also consider it in the regional framework.
41.	The region is in fact the natural context in which peoples can express their special identity; the similarity of problems, cultural affinities and sometimes even rivalries, as well as common threats, make it possible to multiply ties within a region or subregion. The more highly structured and grouped a region is, the less outside influences come into play there. This is an important way to avoid the contagion of East-West division in areas that are not directly involved. In the economic domain also, the cooperation that is so desirable among the countries of the South can .be encouraged in a rational manner, as was so clearly demonstrated at the very interesting HighLevel Conference on Economic Cooperation among Developing Countries, held recently at Caracas.
42.	It is premature to try to take stock of the activities of the major regional organizations because their responsibilities and importance continue to grow. As a Frenchman, however, I am sure I will not surprise the Assembly when I say something about the European Community. It is still far from perfect, but its results are already evident in a number of different areas agriculture, the monetary system, the Lome policy, the generalized system of preferences and its authority is growing rapidly in the world. The French Government is planning to launch soon a number of new and exciting programs industrial, social and others within the Community.
43.	In the economic sphere, reference should also be made to the United Nations regional commissions. The role of the Latin American countries as precursors in identifying a regional image and regional pride should be noted. We should mention the various regional groups such as the Association of South East Asian Nations [ASEAN], and quite a number of African regional organizations. I should like to pay a tribute to the most important of them, the Organization of African Unity [OAU], which at its recent Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held at Nairobi, dealt in a masterly fashion with some of today's most difficult problems. Thanks to the OAU we now have some hope of seeing a united and independent Chad, free from foreign interference, resume its place in Africa's concert of nations. And it is of course thanks to the OAU that we are hoping to see a referendum of self determination take place soon among the peoples of Western Sahara.
44.	The development of regional cooperation has been so convincing in some parts of the world that we are tempted to set new goals. For historical and cultural reasons disputes may exist between neighbors, sometimes going back several centuries. There are many of us in this Assembly who are worried that East-West rivalry may be superimposed on those differences. Mutual distrust between two neighbors may indeed lead to an arms race. The risk then becomes great that they will all come to depend on increasingly sophisticated and therefore more costly arms supplies. What will then remain of self determination, independence and nonalignment, to which both parties are entitled?
45.	Can we not rather imagine that the group of countries most concerned by a confrontation of this kind among two or more neighbors might have the wisdom to limit the effects of the dispute, to establish a regional or subregional system for the evaluation of military forces, and even to conclude a genuine regional agreement on self-limitation of armaments, accompanied, of course, by appropriate means of control and verification?
46.	France has been shocked, as have so many others, by the disproportionate efforts that so many third-world countries must devote to arms and defense. We are disturbed by the growing dependence that this evolution inevitably en tails, and we fervently hope that the attempts that have already been made to slow this trend will be encouraged by our Organization and supported by world public opinion.
47.	Whatever the interests in a regional approach to arms limitation, the effort should, of course, culminate in this Organization. Nothing durable or solid can be built without the endorsement of an institution whose role it is to be universal. There is hardly a domain that is outside its jurisdiction, and the wholly democratic structures it possesses serve to guarantee the value of its decisions. On this rostrum from which I am speaking, every speaker and therefore every country is equal.
48.	The fact that emphasis should generally be placed on the unique role of the United Nations in the most dangerous crises is only normal, because one immediately thinks of Cyprus, southern Lebanon, Namibia and also UNHCR, UNICEF and so many other organizations which, in tragic circumstances, have so well demonstrated human solidarity. But we know that the United Nations has other functions and that, in meeting places that figure less often jn the major international press, ideas are compared that gradually lead to a consensus that will generate progress. I have in mind also the arms limitation talks, where gains have been made and where decisive steps are still to be taken among others, the establishment of an international satellite monitor ing agency.
49.	Other ideas, still more ambitious, direct our attention well beyond the immediate future. Next year the special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament will give all of us an opportunity to shoulder our responsibilities. My country will play its part, and we will make a loyal and far-reaching contribution to the search for ways of defining conditions for a just and sure limitation of arms.
50.	Nor do 1 forget that in many ways this Organization and the specialized agencies play an operational role, whether in terms of technical or humanitarian aid, or in more general regulations. In this regard, I should like to emphasize my country's special interest in the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The convention that that Conference is busy drafting will soon define how these riches of the world should be rationally organized in the future. It will mark extraordinary constitutional progress and will leave its imprint on the history of the world. The United Nations can and should be proud of it. Consequently, and in spite of a few reservations on details, the French delegation believes it essential that the work of the Conference on the Law of the Sea be concluded as soon as possible. We appeal to one and all to cease the maneuvers which have had the effect of jeopardizing the progress made over so many years of persevering effort.
51.	My last remark should confirm what has already become obvious from my observations namely, France's commitment to the United Nations, from which the world expects so much.
52.	Our status as a permanent member of the Security Council, our human and economic resources, the independence of our policy towards all, whether States or great corporations, and our sympathy although that is too weak an expression our feeling of fraternity with the weakest, most deprived peoples, assure us, we believe, of special relations with most of the world. But they also create for us special obligations. At the global level, as indeed in France itself, the Government of which I am a member knows what is expected of it. We are ready.


The United Kingdom currently occupies the presidency of the European Community. My statement this year is therefore made on behalf of the Community and its member States and in the interests of brevity I shall not make the customary remarks on a national basis.
59.	In this capacity, it is a particular pleasure to convey to you, Mr. President, at the outset of the thirty-sixth session of the Assembly, our very sincere congratulations on your election to the presidency at this session. I know that with your distinguished career and your considerable experience in the Organization you will guide our proceedings with skill and authority.
60.	I should also like to convey my warmest congratulations and admiration to the outgoing President for his efficient and capable conduct of the proceedings of the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly and also the eighth emergency special session.
61.	The 10 members of the European Community also wish to express their gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for a further year of strenuous efforts in the cause of peace, and I should like tojoin with my other colleagues who have congratulated the Republic of Vanuatu on its independence and its membership of this body.
62.	Three principles are fundamental to the European Community and underlie its activity in the world today and the role it seeks to play in the United Nations. First, the community was born from a determination to avoid the recurrence of war and from a desire for permanent and fruitful reconciliation. Secondly, it looks to partnership and collaboration between neighbors as a way to stimulate social and economic progress. And thirdly, it is based on a belief in the fundamental importance of human rights.
63.	The first principle, its commitment to international reconciliation, explains why the European Community feels a duty to help where it can with the problems that afflict the world. AH conflicts, local, regional or global, adversely affect the possibilities for peace and progress throughout the world. All of them add up to the sum of human misery.
64.	The conflict which perhaps poses most dangers is the ArabIsrarl dispute. The European Community believes that it has a distinctive role to play in the , search for a negotiated, comprehensive settlement which must be both just and lasting. The Community's view of the principles according to which a settlement can be devised, starting from Security Council resolution 242 (1967), was set out in the Venice and Luxembourg Declarations.of 13 June and, 2 December 1980 respectively. The starting point must be the right to existence and security of all States in the area, including Israel, and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination. Acceptance of these principles by the parties concerned would remove a major obstacle to progress.
>
65.	The members of the Community will pursue their efforts to promote a peace settlement energetically. Nevertheless, we must be clear about what the European Community can and cannot achieve. Ultimately it is for the parties to negotiate a lasting settlement themselves. In our view, a comprehensive settlement can only be negotiated if all the parties concerned, including the Palestinian people and the PLO, which will have to be associated with negotiations, accept the principles which we set out in the Venice Declaration and play their full part. One of Europe's main aims is to facilitate such negotiations, complementing the efforts of others towards the same objective. These thoughts underlay the Venice Declaration and the subsequent diplomatic efforts of the Community, notably the contacts made by Britain's predecessors in the presidency.
66.	If a settlement is to be possible a climate of confidence must first be built up between the parties. Both sides must refrain from words or acts, particularly acts of violence as in recent months, which only complicate the search for a settlement The Community members are bound to repeat that the Israeli policy of settlements is contrary to international law and a major obstacle to progress towards peace. While pursuing its efforts in every other possible way, the European Community will work to encourage a climate of confidence as a contribution to a comprehensive settlement. The Community therefore welcomes all clear statements of interest in a peaceful settlement, including that made last month by Crown Prince Eahd of Saudi Arabia.
67.	I should like to put on record the European Community's sympathy for human suffering in Lebanon and our support for the efforts of the Lebanese Government to promote security and national reconciliation. We believe that the unity, independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon can only be assured if all concerned uphold the authority of the legal Government and avoid all actions tending to undermine it. In this context, the Community values the work of the Quadripartite Committee of the Arab League. In south Lebanon, the ceasefire has been a valuable achievement and we hope it will be possible to reinforce it and build upon it. The Community members welcome and support all diplomatic efforts to this end. In .particular, they believe that UNIFIL should be enabled to carry out in full the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council and, we applaud the courageous and responsible work of the Force and express our sympathy for its losses; arid I take this opportunity to reaffirm the Community's support for the valuable peacekeeping work of the United Nations in other areas.
68.	If history and traditional and geographical proximity make the Middle East of particular concern to Europe, we are no less concerned about the other crises which strike at the very basis on which international peace and stability must rest.
69.	The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which constitutes a grave breach of the Charter, is one such crisis. It is an affront to international opinion that the Soviet military occupation there should continue. It has brought untold suffering for millions of Afghan people and untold problems for the countries to which large numbers of them have fled. It is to seek relief for that suffering and to contribute to international peace and stability that the European Council put forward its plan for a two-stage conference on Afghanistan.7
70.	The Council's proposal for such a conference has received widespread support. It is therefore a great disappointment that the Soviet Union's response has so far been negative.
71.	If the Soviet Union is sincere in its stated desire to withdraw its troops in the context of a political solution, then the proposal of the Council offers a way for negotiations to begin. If, however, the Soviet Union's only real concern is to obtain the acquiescence of the international community in its occupation of Afghanistan, and increased status and recognition for a regime which is rejected by the Afghan people and world opinion, then the outlook for any negotiations is grim indeed.
72.	The members of the European Community support any efforts which will bring foreign intervention in Afghanistan to an end and allow that country to return to its traditional independence and nonaligned status. It is essential that the principles of the resolution of the Assembly should be observed. We support the efforts of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral to find a way to a peaceful settlement in accordance with those resolutions.
73.	Another country which has been invaded and then occupied by a more powerful neighbor is Kampuchea. Thanks to the admirable efforts of the international emergency relief operation Jed by UNICEF and the International Committee of the Red Cross, the physical condition of much of the population of Kampuchea has been transformed in the last two years. The European Community and its member States have played a major part in the financing of the relief.
74.	But now that the immediate cause of suffering has been removed, it is time to turn to the political problems that still afflict that country. As with Afghanistan, the aim of the international community must be a comprehensive political settlement. The basis of that settlement should be an independent and neutral Kampuchea with"' a genuinely representative Government. The position of the European Community was set out fully in the statement which, as President of the Community, I made to the International Conference on Kampuchea held here last July.
75.	The Declaration on Kampuchea adopted by that Conference puts forward a reasonable and practical basis for a settlement of the Kampuchean problem. The Community endorsed that Declaration, which we believe would protect the legitimate rights of all concerned. We call on Viet Nam to agree to withdraw its forces and join the process of peaceful negotiations set in train at that meeting. The Kampucheans must be allowed to exercise their right to self-determination without disruption, intimidation or coercion.
76.	The Community members are also very concerned at the continuing denial of the right to self-determination which lies at the root of the problem of Namibia. We deeply regret that the settlement leading to the independence of Zimbabwe has not been followed by further progress towards a speedy solution of the problems in that region.
77.	The outcome of the pre-implementation meeting on Namibia at Geneva in January was a great disappointment. We saw no justification for South Africa's prevarication. We hope that the renewed efforts of the five Western States will succeed in finding an acceptable basis for pursuing negotiations on the implementation of the United Nations plan in accordance with Security Council resolution 435 (1978). This provides the only possibility of a peaceful transition to internationally recognized independence for Namibia in accordance with a precise and rapid timetable.
78.	The European Community has condemned the South African incursion into Angola, the violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity which it has involved, and the loss of life and suffering it has brought. We have demanded the immediate withdrawal of South African forces from Angola.
79.	Within South Africa itself, the Community can find little cause for optimism. Virtually none of the expectations of worthwhile change in recent years have been fulfilled. Reforms promised by the South African Government, mostly still not implemented, do not deal with the fundamental problem of the political as well as the social and economic aspirations of blacks, coloreds and Asian South Africans.
80.	Without an early move towards government by consent and the abandonment of the system of apartheid, which we ail abhor, the trend in South Africa can only be one of accelerating conflict and violence. The European Community appeals with the utmost urgency to those in South Africa who can act decisively to face this reality, and to show the imagination, the boldness, and the leadership that are necessary to reach a political solution. In the meantime, the members of the Community continue to press South Africa to bring about peaceful change in that country.
81.	In this catalog of unsolved problems I am glad to be able to mention one small chink of light. The European Community commends the efforts of the Secretary General on the question of Cyprus. Under his auspices the inter-communal talks have been established on a regular basis and conducted in a constructive manner. We have been pleased to note that there have been encouraging developments recently. We earnestly hope that there will be further progress towards a just and lasting solution to this grave problem.
82.	Simply to discuss specific crises does not give an adequate impression of the Community's approach to the problems facing us all. To be faithful to the principle of reconciliation we must work not just for the resolution of conflicts when they occur, but to lessen the tensions that give rise to them.
83.	Europe is fortunate to have been free from war for 36 years, but it is the area where the tension between East and West is felt most strongly. It contains the greatest concentration of military forces in the world. Community members recognize the need to lessen tension by maintaining a dialog between East and West. Efforts must be intensified to reduce the appallingly high level of armaments on both sides, while maintaining undiminished security for all States.
84.	Many of the hopes that we entertained for concrete measures of arms control and disarmament as we entered the 1970's have been cruelly disappointed. Nevertheless, the members of the European Community believe that there can be no substitute for painstaking negotiation resulting in agreements which tackle specific problems of arms control in a way which increases confidence and assures the security of all States.
85.	We strongly support negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on the mutual limitation of nuclear forces, and in particular the forthcoming negotiations on theater nuclear forces. Success will not be easy. Despite the difficulties, we believe that the objective should be to strike the balance at the lowest possible level. Nonproliferation of nuclear weapons remains a vital element for the security of us all.
86.	The control of nuclear forces, in Europe as in the rest of the world, is only one side of the coin. It is equally important to reduce the size of conventional forces. In Europe the negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions continue to work towards that. The members of the European Community have also given their full support to the French proposal for a conference on disarmament in Europe* to negotiate confidence building measures of real military significance, which will be binding, verifiable, and applicable to the whole of Europe. We are seeking agreement on this important proposal at the Madrid review meeting on the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and we remain convinced that confidence-building measures which meet these criteria will make a real contribution to reducing the tensions and dangers of armed conflict. Such an approach could be useful in other regions of the world.
87.	The European Community's second principle is cooperation. Here, duty and inclination point the same way. The Community is the world's biggest international trader. The handling of economic questions in harmony goes to the heart of the Community's interests.
88.	To draw harmony from a variety of existing instruments is a challenge for the whole world community. The International Development Strategy, to take one example, is addressed to developed and developing countries alike, and recognizes their mutual interdependence. The greatly increased assistance provided by IMF and, especially, the World Bank, to take another, deserves acknowledgment and support, and we welcome both,
89.	The current problems of the world economy accentuate the need for cooperation. They do not automatically make it easier. Adjustment to slower or negative economic growth, higher energy prices and weaker demand is taking time. Inflation, unemployment and interest rates remain high, and exchange markets volatile. The shoe pinches very hard for many countries, especially in the developing world. As was stressed at the European Council at its meeting last June, the Community is of the opinion that cooperation with developing countries and the intensification of international economic relations serve the interest of all concerned, and that they are necessary not only to strengthen the economies of the developing countries, but also to promote the recovery of the world economy.
90.	We in the Community see no room for defeatism. I shall examine some issues which are getting our active attention.
91.	Trade is vital if the developing countries are to achieve sustained economic growth. This concept underpins the close and friendly ties we have with the developing countries, reflected in the Lome Convention 10 the generalized system of preferences and the Community's other arrangements. The Second Lome Convention" has further improved the trade Advantages extended by the Community to the African, Caribbean and Pacific signatories. It has also made available substantially increased amounts of aid.
92.	Meanwhile, the Community stands firm for the maintenance of an open trading system and continued resistance to protectionism. GATT has served the international community well. The Community attaches importance to the full implementation of the Tokyo Round. It endorses the broad agreement within GATT that the contracting parties should envisage a ministerial meeting in the coming year to consider the overall condition of world trade.
93.	Let there be no doubt, equally, about the importance we attach to official development assistance. We welcome the intense diplomatic activity surrounding the problems of development. Despite real budgetary difficulties, we in the Community remain committed to the target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national product and have accepted the target of 0.15 per cent as aid for the least developed countries. The Community and its member States individually already provide development assistance worth over $12 billion a year. This is 39 per cent of all aid given to the developing countries, more than half the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development total and six or seven times that given by the countries of Eastern Europe. We see room for a matching effort here. 
94.	The Community was pleased to see the progress made at the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy at Nairobi last month. This was the beginning of a long but vital road. We were closely involved in the preparation of the Program of Action, and we welcome its adoption. The Conference will be seen as a milestone in the search for global solutions to energy problems that affect developed and developing countries alike.
95.	We in the Community know full well that the problems of the world economy, which affect us all, create a particular hardship for developing countries, and especially the poorest among them. That is why we welcomed the successful conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries held at Paris and will do our best to ensure that it is followed by positive and concrete results which will help the least developed countries to overcome their fundamental problems.
96.	No discussion of the international economy would be complete without a tribute to the efforts of the outgoing President of the General Assembly to bring all sides together in order to launch a new round of global negotiations. Last June the European Council expressed the view that preparations for the new round of global negotiations should be completed as soon as possible and called on the summit conferences in Ottawa and Cancun to give a positive impetus to those preparations. The Community wants to see relations between developed and developing countries take a new and constructive course.
97.	In this connection, we were happy to note that those countries attending the Economic Summit at Ottawa declared themselves ready to participate in a mutually acceptable process of global negotiations in circumstances offering the prospect of meaningful progress. We welcome the recognition at the Ottawa summit of the importance of making increased resources available for the purposes of accelerated food production and food security in the developing world.
98.	The Cancun summit will provide an exceptional opportunity, and we hope that the exchanges there will be imaginative and spontaneous. A twoday summit cannot achieve miracles, but the discussion could mark an important step forward in mutual understanding and provide a political impetus in the NorthSouth dialog. The atmosphere of the preparatory meeting for Cancun was an encouraging augury.
99.	The third principle which governs the European Community's activities on the international stage is the defense of human rights. The Community is a group of States founded on a commitment to democratic principles. Our citizens participate in a political system which guarantees and respects the fundamental freedoms of the individual. Inevitably, therefore, the defense of human rights is a matter of concern to them.
100.	We stand for the promotion and protection of all categories of human rights: civil and political as well as economic, social and cultural. We especially condemn cases of torture, detention without trial or arbitrary execution. We think it deplorable that there should still be situations where people disappear without trace, or where they are persecuted on grounds of race or religion, or for defending human rights.
101.	It is now accepted that these and other violations of human rights are a subject of proper and necessary concern for discussion at the United Nations. As States Members of the United Nations we all have the obligation to promote the protection of human rights in our own countries and in the international community as a whole. We shall continue to speak out against violations of human rights in appropriate United Nations forums and also at the Madrid review meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
102.	Too often in the past the United Nations has been unable or has failed for reasons of political expediency to respond to flagrant violations of human rights. This undermines the credibility of the United Nations. We must not overlook such violations of human rights no matter where they occur. Rather, we should work together to protect the victims and to strengthen the capacity of the United Nations to promote respect for human rights.
103.	I hope that I have demonstrated that the European Community is a force for peaceful progress in a turbulent and troubled world. We threaten the security of no one. We have no ideology or system that we wish to impose on those of other cultures and traditions. We respect the right of all nations to self-determination and freedom from foreign interference, and we wish to help them in their pursuit of stable economic growth. It is our conviction that among the vast majority of the members of the Assembly there is an enormous potential for common understanding and cooperation which could only be for the benefit of all mankind.
I convey to you, Sir, the warm felicitations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly. It was a memorable election, not without its drama. We have every confidence that under your dynamic and competent leadership the General Assembly will be able to deal effectively and comprehensively with the many tasks before it.
2.	I would also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation of the resolute and efficient leadership provided to the Assembly during its thirty-fifth session by your predecessor, Mr. Rudiger von Wechmar.
3.	The tolerance and patient diplomacy of the Secretary General are well known. I would like to place on record our sincere appreciation of the statesmanlike manner in which he has carried the awesome responsibility of his post.
4.	On behalf of the people and Government of India, I have great pleasure in welcoming Vanuatu and Belize, which have recently achieved their independence and joined the United Nations.
5.	The contours of the world landscape have indeed changed within the past year to such an extent that the shifts and turns make some of us wonder whether international peace and security can at all be preserved intact if the present slide continues. The tension around us is very palpable. Confrontation has become acceptable for bolstering up otherwise sagging egos. Meanwhile, those who are weak and small in terms of defense capability and economic muscle worry about their very survival as free nations. Additional weapons are being injected on a large scale into fragile regimes and areas where tensions are already high. There is a conscious and declared attempt to make relations with the developing countries function of the EastWest variable and to evaluate these relations in terms of the utility factor in the EastWest game. Considerations of the material wellbeing, peace or stability of a country are being subordinated to those of strategic superiority and containment.
6.	The grim international situation is perhaps both the cause and the consequence of the vast inequities and disequilibrium of the world economy. Tfe present structure is so designed and managed as to preserve and perpetuate its oases of privilege and affluence amidst a desert of dearth and deprivation. There is a strange scenario consisting of the economic problems of the developed world caused by what has been called a "system overload" arising from the divergent pulls of economic surplus, deceleration of demand, inflationary spirals and exiguous unemployment on the one hand, and of the grim problem of diminishing economic opportunities faced by the developing countries on the other. It is this dramatic contrast which is in part responsible for the mood of frustration and desperation in the world today. But what is most surprising is that there is an increasing tendency to tackle economic problems through political means. Obviously this will not work in the new context of a world composed of States having sovereign equality but steeped in gaping economic inequalities. No, it is time to realize that there can no longer be political solutions to economic problems.
7.	The pursuit of such a strategy for development can at best be described as misguided and unfortunate. We do not presume to prescribe panaceas to others, but we cannot possibly accept a denial of our own experience, namely, that an unbridled play of the forces of profit and acquisition can lead to concision and anarchy in economic relations. In structurally weaker economies it leads inevitably to an unbalanced allocation of priorities, distorting the social fabric by widening disparities, heightening tensions and leading ultimately to destabilization. Particularly in the developing countries, the State is the main instrument of change and almost the sole repository of power. It would be very unfortunate indeed if State power were employed to support those who are already powerful in the society, resulting in a disequilibrium which inevitably would generate centrifugal forces that would tend to destroy the society itself-. This is already threatening a number of recently emancipated societies. Such societies therefore need a structure wherein State power uncompromisingly stands by the powerless and maintains a balance between the underdog and those who have a long enough reach and strong enough hands to help themselves, no matter what. Within this overall structure there ought to be full scope for individual initiative, entrepreneurship and & civilized, as opposed to anarchic, interaction of market forces. I have no doubt that this logic holds good in international economic relations as well.
283
A/36/PV. 15
8.	The Charter of the United Nations is based upon the yearning of mankind for peace and prosperity: peace 
which is not merely the absence of a shooting war and prosperity that is not the enrichment of one at the expense of others. We cannot remain indifferent witnesses to the crumbling of detente. The great Powers have long sought security through a balance of mutual vulnerability. Raising the level of deterrence is not going to add any further to their sense of security. Hence a search is on for new strategic partners and allies. I would like to be optimistic, but true optimism invariably has to be based on a realistic and, objective assessment. The determined quest for new political and strategic arrangements on a global scale, with an almost callous disregard for the longterm interests of mankind, does not really leave much room for optimism.
9.	We in India have asked ourselves some basic questions and found some answers to them. The philosophy behind the answers is a simple one and was beautifully articulated by Jawaharlal Nehru in a broadcast he made to the United States of America on 3 April 1948 from New Delhi. It was entitled "The Age of Crisis". He said:
"Today, fear consumes us all fear of the future, fear of war, fear of the peoples of the nations we dislike and those who dislike us . . . But fear is an ignoble emotion and leads to blind strife. Let us try to get rid of this fear . . . and then gradually the crisis of the spirit will be resolved, the dark clouds that surround us may lift and the way to the evolution of the world based or. freedom will be clear."
10.	It is against this background that we see the destiny of India, both within, and in the world, more especially in our own region. Within India the reaffirmation of the policies set out by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi has been accompanied by a renewed dedication to national reconstruction and the consolidation of a secular and pluralistic political system. The stresses and strains of the international economy have impinged upon various aspects of our own economic growth but have not shaken the self- confidence of our people. Our dedication to our chosen objectives, especially to self-reliance, remains undiminished. If the successful inauguration of the APPLE geostationary satellite by our scientists represents one frontier of India's efforts and achievements, the harnessing of animal power through redesigning the bullock cart or the grinding wheel is symbolic of another equally relevant application of technology.
11.	Our self-reliance consists in trying to find solutions to our problems primarily according to our own genius. Our problems are basically simple food, clothing, shelter, health and education. It is their sheer magnitude that is baffling, not their complexity. There are no psychosomatic ailments, no paranoia of any kind afflicting us. We will therefore persevere, in our massive effort to lift ourselves up as a whole mass and not piecemeal, using methods and technology most relevant to our situation, ringing from the most sophisticated to the most simple, neglecting nothing useful because of its plainness, taking nothing irrelevant because of its dazzle. I am sure that many more developing countries now accept this pattern and that some of them have arrived at it by the circuitous and hard route of disillusionment arising from inappropriate models.
12.	India's relations with its neighbors are based on a recognition of the fact that the interests of the countries are so linked that there is no reason for us to be on any terms other than friendly. These relations are based on sovereign equality, a recognition of mutuality of interests and mutuality of perceptions to the extent possible. Where this mutuality does not obtain there is no undue keenness whatsoever to impose unwanted identities on one another. Whatever the depth of relationship at a given time, our sole interest is in promoting an environment of peace and stability that will enable all countries of the region to engage in fruitful development endeavors, avoiding outside influences.
13.	Some constructive steps in the direction of strengthening regional cooperation among the States of South Asia have been considered. We are confident that, given a sense of realism and the requisite political will, such cooperation would be feasible in advancing the development of the countries in this region. I would like to pay a special tribute to the wisdom and foresight of former President ZiaurRahman of Bangladesh for his dedicated efforts in this direction.
14.	All countries in our region face similar economic problems, and we should devote our energies towards development and development alone. India wants to have strong and self-reliant neighbors, since we are convinced that this alone is in our interest. We are, however, gravely concerned by the deteriorating security environment in our region. While India does not find itself- helpless in any way, we view with deep concern the possibility of the strategic calculations of outside Powers engulfing countries in our region.
15.	We are committed to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We are committed to the principles of nonalignment. Our twin commitments in the field of foreign policy are based on the objective necessity to contribute in a positive manner towards the creation of a peaceful and cooperative world. In India today, I am glad to say, there is complete unanimity regarding the content and relevance of the policy of nonalignment and the principles of Pancha Shila. Our commitment to nonalignment has made us unafraid to stand by ourselves, if need be, on our own conviction, whenever a point of principle is involved.
16.	More than two decades ago Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru spoke of the threat of the cold war coming to our doorstep. After a slight letup, this threat seems once again to have come back today. IWenty years since its inception, the nonaligned movement once again faces a situation which calls for the utmost ingenuity and pure purposefulness. However, despite the changes in the environment tending to exert pressure on the movement itself-, the nonaligned countries can still bring a semblance of sanity in international relations. No one has claimed or should ever claim that the nonaligned movement is a monolith. Its resilience and effectiveness, which unfortunately seem to be lost on some, are being recognized by more and more countries. It is not for nothing that every new independent nation promptly joins the nonaligned; the delicate plant of nascent freedom needs a nonaligned climate in order to grow and find its identity. Alignment saps it; alliances spell blight for it. It is a happy augury, both for the movement and for humanity as a whole, that on an increasingly large number of issues, such as decolonization, rejection of apartheid, the Middle East question, more equitable international economic relations, global interdependence and, we hope, many others that will emerge in due course, there has come about an identity of views between the nonaligned and several non non-aligned countries. We fervently hope that both the trend and the tribe will increase to a point where alignment ceases to be either fashionable or profitable.
17.	I shall now briefly refer to some of the world's unresolved problems, whose number unfortunately tends only to increase with each succeeding session of the General Assembly. The most important of the problems is, of course, the very survival of mankind.
18.	Nothing proves the unreality and mockery of international politics today so much as the failure of all attempts at disarmament. Despite this unreality, the world cannot afford to ignore the fateful implications of the arms race, particularly in its nuclear aspects, for the very future of life on this planet. Along with increasing levels of sophistication, new claims are being made regarding the possibility of waging "winnable" wars. On top of everything, we now have the neutron weapons. This development will set the stage for a qualitative jump in the nuclear arms race. While the Governments of the nuclear weapon States ostensibly practice deterrence, the choice which they are presenting their own people with seems to be one of death by their own bombs or by those of the enemy. Most certainly, it is not a choice between death and survival. I have no doubt that in spite of the intense psychosis created by these Governments in a variety of ways the people of the nuclear weapon States themselves feel disaster in their bones all the time. It is time that this feeling finds increasing articulation and leads to active opposition before it is too late. It goes without saying that for the rest of mankind this is a matter of the greatest concern. The world cannot afford to permit any State or States to endanger the survival of a)I mankind. peace-loving States should assume, in a more strident manner, the moral responsibility to urge nuclear disarmament on a high priority basis.
19.	The nonaligned countries have clearly and consistently stressed the primacy of their concern about nuclear issues. We are aware that each time there is a move to modernize a weapons system on one side, a corresponding mirror image action is taken by the other, resulting in the escalation of fear, anxiety and suspicion in the whole world. Each upward spiral in the arms race becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. It is our sincere belief that this vicious cycle of action and response can be broken. We hope that the dialog between the United States and the USSR which has just started will result in genuine and practical measures to give a fresh start in this respect. Meanwhile the world waits with bated breath, teetering on the brink of disaster.
20.	The Indian Ocean is another theater witnessing a great accumulation of sophisticated military hardware. This is in flagrant violation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace adopted in 1971 [resolution 2832(XXVI)], in which the General Assembly expressed opposition to the military presence of the great Powers in the context of their rivalry and calls for its elimination. There is an effort to divide the littoral and hinterland States. Arguments are being improvised to justify greatPower presences in the Indian Ocean area. There is a need for determined efforts to stop these moves, which ruin our security environment. Further, it needs to be reiterated that greatPower presences in the
Indian Ocean are unacceptable not only in the context of their rivalry but under any circumstances whatsoever. Were they to agree among themselves to stay put in this Ocean they would still be equally unwelcome. Together or separately, we want them out.
21.	India has consistently expressed its disapproval of all kinds of outside intervention and interference in any country. We have unequivocally opposed the presence of foreign troops in any country and all countries. For us this includes Afghanistan, whereas, presumably, to some other countries this should apply only to Afghanistan, A running argument has ensued on this question, and those who started with condemnatory polemics have now come round to prefer a political solution on the lines of the New Delhi Declaration adopted by the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries last February [see AI36I116 and Corr.l, annexJ, The Secretary-General is now considering the question and is currently engaged in removing the cobwebs to enable a dialog between the countries concerned. We wish him well in this quest. Meanwhile, the people of Afghanistan can only hope devoutly that the SecretaryGeneral's efforts may succeed; they have such a large stake in his success.
22.	The people and Government of India are saddened by the continuation of the conflict between Iran and Iraq. This conflict has taken a heavy toll in life and property, leading inevitably to the retardation of developmental activities of both these nonaligned countries. On their part, the nonaligned have attempted to find an acceptable solution to the conflict and will continue their efforts in consonance with the mandate of the New Delhi Declaration.
23.	India's ties with the countries of SouthEast Asia are based upon the closest social, cultural and intellectual links developed over the centuries. Having supported them in their struggle for independence, we cannot but be deeply interested in the developments in this region, particularly those affecting international peace and security in our own neighborhood. We continue to be prepared to join in all constructive efforts aimed at seeking a peaceful solution to the problems of the region.
24.	The people of Kampuchea have only just begun to emerge from the holocaust visited upon them by the Pol Pot regime in addition to the privations they had to endure earlier during the struggle of the peoples of IndoChina for national liberation, independence and sovereignty. They have just begun to look to the future with a semblance of hope and expectation. The prospects of famine and disease have receded. At this stage, the effort of the outside world should be to reassure the Kampuchean people that the process they have embarked upon will not be reversed and that their erstwhile persecutors will never be allowed to return and unleash once again a reign of terror upon them. It is, therefore, a great irony of the times that the same despotic regime should bring the stench of their genocidal acts into this august chamber in order to represent, as it were, their own victims in a bizarre inversion of the principles of the Charter. We still hope that before long wiser counsels will prevail. Indeed, at the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs at New Delhi, it was clearly underlined that a comprehensive political solution should be found, providing for the withdrawal of all foreign forces and ensuring full respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all 
States in the region, including Kampuchea. The interference and intervention of outside Powers in the region have exacerbated tensions and must be eliminated. We are convinced that this can be achieved only through a dialog between the countries of the region.
2$. The political situation in West Asia continues to smolder as a result of Israel's adventurism and intransigence. If anything, it has been rendered more serious by IsraeKs arrogation to itself- of the right to launch "preemptive" attacks against its neighbors, as happened recently in southern Lebanon, on the spurious pretext of safeguarding its own security. Similarly, the 7 June attack on and destruction of the Osirak atomic reactor by Israel F16 aircraft a reactor known to have been intended entirely for peaceful purposes was an example of blatant aggression.
26.	A just and comprehensive solution of the West Asian problem can be achieved only by ensuring the total and unconditional withdrawal by Israel from Arab territories occupied since 1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem, and the exercise by the Palestinian people of their inalienable national right to self-determination, including the establishment of an independent Palestinian State, as well as the recognition of the right of all States in the area to live within recognized and secure boundaries. Such a peaceful solution cannot be attained without the full and equal participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO], the sole and authentic representative of the Palestinian people, in any settlement or negotiating process. We have already seen convincing evidence of the failure of a partial solution undertaken without the participation of the PLO.
27.	The recent emergency special session on Namibia has served to focus the attention of the international community on the grave situation in southern Africa. The credibility of the United Nations will be seriously eroded if it is unable to secure freedom and justice for the people of Namibia. Only through an early implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) could the peaceful decolonization of Namibia be achieved. All attempts to dilute, modify or attenuate the details of the United Nations plan to which that resolution refers for any further purpose are unacceptable to the overwhelming majority of world opinion. The Government of India reiterates its full solidarity with the South West Africa People's Organization [SWAPO] as the authentic representative of the Namibian people and will continue to extend moral and material support to it in its struggle for national liberation.
28.	We had all hoped last year that the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea would successfully finalize a comprehensive, convention. However, the Conference has since met twice and our hope has not yet been fulfilled. The Government of India is deeply concerned that the efforts of the Conference have been frustrated, creating uncertainty about its future. Some 150 countries have labored hard for over eight years to arrive at an acceptable compromise package relating to the law of the sea which, in our opinion, serves the best interests of the community of nations as a whole. In this era of multilateral interdependence, national interests of one country cannot override the overwhelming interests of the entire international community. The resources of the international seabed area have been proclaimed the common heritage of mankind. An orderly and safe development and rational management of these resources for the benefit of mankind as a whole are imperative necessities. We do hope that the Conference will successfully complete its task at Caracas in September 1982, without reopening any of the issues already settled.
29.	All of us, each in a different way, have found that peace is stable only when prosperity is equitably shared. Mutatis mutandis, the same is equally true in the context of our global village, this little earth of ours. What are the mechanisms to be evolved so that the worthwhile things in life are within everyone's reach? That is what all of us are striving for in building a new international economic order in which production expands, labor is shared, and the products of labor are available to all, without pockets of misery or wasteful pockets of surpluses.
30.	While there may be no simple solution to the global economic crisis, the erosion of a multilateral framework will certainly make the situation much worse. A withdrawal from the processes of international cooperation is bound to lead to increasing recourse to bilateralism. This was not the vision of the founding fathers of the Charter of the United Nations, to which every speaker before me has expressed an unqualified commitment. Total bilateralism at the expense of multilateral cooperation would run into alliances that may not be in the interest of harmonious relations and relaxation of tensions.
31.	The attempts to erode the multilateral framework of economic cooperation appear even more indefensible in view of the rapid and continuing aggravation of the economic situation of most developing countries. Their terms of trade have further declined, and their exports have faced the rising walls of protectionism erected by several powerful industrialized countries. Food and energy have become more scarce. Balance of payments deficits are growing alarmingly, and external debt is assuming unmanageable proportions.
32.	Developing countries are unable to improve their terms of trade when the wall of protectionism keeps rising in one form or another in response to every innovation that they make. Access to capital markets is practically blocked through artificially inflated interest rates. The result of all these phenomena, which are manipulated by a few centers of economic power and over which the developing countries have no control, becomes manifest in sluggish economic activity at home and further aggravates balance of payments and debt burdens. 
33.	Closely linked to this process is the role of the international financial institutions. Only a few months ago, at the second regular session for 1981 of the Economic and Social Council, we welcomed the many innovative mechanisms evolved by these institutions, making it possible for larger financial resources to become available to developing countries. I must note with some regret, however, that even while more rigorous conditionality has been maintained some of the progressive mechanisms of lending by these institutions have come into question in recent months. After the tremendous effort during the past decade to impart a greater and more effective developmental role to these institutions, this retrograde trend is most unfortunate. I would like to express my strong conviction that the achievements of the past decade and the progress made in making these institutions more responsive to the needs of the developing countries should not be reversed or eroded.
34.	I would also hope that the United Nations system will sincerely take serious measures to implement the policy measures defined in the International Development Strategy so that the goals and objectives of the Third United Nations Development Decade [resolution 35/56] are attained. The Strategy was adopted by consensus, and its goals and objectives are modest. If there is sincerity about interdependence, these modest goals should not be difficult to achieve.
35.	The Caracas high level conference of the Group of 77 made progress in a pragmatic manner in the field of economic cooperation amongst the developing countries. The attitude of the developed countries towards technical cooperation amongst the developing countries has not been negative, though not exactly enthusiastic. In both the SouthSouth and the NorthSouth context a number of proposals designed to alleviate the burden of oil-importing developing countries have been under consideration. It is necessary to devise an early action oriented program to solve this important problem in its various aspects. This has perhaps been delayed because of the failure to launch the global negotiations. The energy resources of the developing countries can be developed on the basis of a definitive expansion of the multilateral flow of public finances, about which interesting ideas have been adumbrated, including that of an energy affiliate of the World Bank. Both the objective and the urgency of these steps need to be underscored.
36.	One of the major obstacles to a meaningful North South dialog so far is the widespread impression that on issues of resources and technology transfer it is the South that needs the North, without having much to offer in return. This is not a correct reflection of the situation. The intimate dependence of the economies of the North on world markets makes it impossible for them, as the Brandt Commission notes in its report to put even their own house in order if they forget the rest of the world. This is the lesson of the 1980s, which the North could ignore only at its own peril.
37.	We would like to reiterate, therefore, that the international community should face squarely the reality of interdependence among nations. The benefits of strengthened international economic cooperation and the dangers inherent in the growing tendency towards isolation and protectionism need to be realized more in practice. This should be reflected in the full participation by all developed countries in the process of solving international economic issues in the context of NorthSouth cooperation. There can be no exception or reservations to this process or any ground whatsoever historical, ideological or merely rhetorical. While the task of apportioning blame should now appropriately belong to academic endeavor, all developed countries should put their shoulders to the wheel.
38.	While saying this I am not underestimating the difficulties that willing Governments of the North would face in convincing their own people of the fact of interdependence in terms intelligible to the members of a self-solicitous affluent society. The realization that the purchase of the next automobile by one family in a developed country would be truly dependent on the availability of the next meal to another, starving family in a developing country is not easy to induce. Yet this is precisely the core of the concept of interdependence. The ancient Indian dictum which treats the whole world as one family seems to be on the verge of complete vindication in a very different context which none of the ancient sages had perhaps anticipated. Ancient intuition and modern scientific experience find a strange coincidence at this point.
39.	Let there be no mistake. The United Nations, being the largest multilateral system, must have the capacity to provide the umbrella under which the urgent and complex task of restructuring international economic relations could and should be undertaken. From an almost purely political institution, the system has gradually come to grapple with complex economic issues lying in the bowels of international relations today. A successful launching of the global negotiations on major economic issues and a coherent and integrated framework in the spirit of mutual benefit will constitute the real success of the United Nations system. We reiterate, therefore, that this process should be started without further delay.
40.	We are today on the eve of the International Meeting on Cooperation and Development, to be held at Cancun, which will bring together leaders of some developed and developing countries to enable a better understanding of each other's perceptions, achieve a real meeting of minds and generate the requisite political impetus to make hopefully a determined assault on all questions concerning international economic relations. The growing frustration and cynicism generated over the years by frequent setbacks to every NorthSouth exercise represent a dangerous trend. We, for our part, will continue our serious commitment to work tirelessly and ceaselessly to reverse this trend. We wish god-speed to the Cancun conclave.
41.	In the course of the general debate so far, we have heard several statements which rekindle one's faith in the desire of the North to engage in a mutually advantageous dialog with the South. I was particularly heartened by the question posed by the Minister for External Relations of France in his statement before the General Assembly on 23 September where he said: "But how often do you hear it . acknowledged . . . that the progress of the North South dialog is a prerequisite for world progress and perhaps even for world peace?" [9th meeting, para. 26.] He himself- provided the answer with characteristic finesse: "The South has become part of the life of the North." [Ibid, para. 27.)
42.	I would like to join wholeheartedly in this statement, as well as in similar inspiring statements made by several colleagues from other developed countries. These pronouncements are indeed refreshing trend-setters, inasmuch as they seek to demolish the hitherto impregnable NorthSouth divide. North and South must, therefore, share the same objectives, as their destinies are intertwined. Together, we can make sure that while following our paths, we can contribute to each other's prosperity as well as security, provided we follow the logic of peaceful cooperation and steer clear of the twin mistakes of isolation and confrontation.

150.	At the outset, I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate Vanuatu and Belize on their independence and welcome them on their admission to the United Nations. On behalf of the Government and the people of Israel, I wish them success and prosperity as independent and sovereign States.
151.	The Government and the people of Israel have always upheld the ideals and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It could not have been otherwise, for Israel's intellectual and moral traditions have given birth to some of the most important elements inherent in the shape and meaning of the Organization. The brotherhood of man, social justice, the rule of law both domestic and international the equality of nations, the peaceful settlement of international disputes and the outlawing of war those and other ideals had grown and taken root among the shepherds and peasants of Judea and Israel long before they came to be accepted as principles of current international life.
152.	Unfortunately, these ideals have been honored more in the breach than in the observance in the practice of the United Nations. In recent years the Organization has repeatedly permitted itself to be abused by Israel's adversaries who enjoy a built-in majority in the Assembly on any issue related to the ArabIsraeli conflict. In recent years Israel has more than once been the victim of discriminatory treatment in the United Nations.
153.	It must be stressed that international organizations which allow their fundamental rules to be violated cause severe damage to themselves and thereby undermine their very raison d'etre. Decisions arrived at in disregard of the relevant provisions of constitutional instruments are illegal, however often repeated and however overwhelming the majority that supported them.
154.	The distortions which pervade the United Nations system have also manifested themselves in the attitude of the Organization towards the Camp David accords and the treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel. By any yardstick, the conclusion of peace between two former enemies is surely not only a legitimate but also a desirable development which should have been welcomed by the United Nations, the primary purpose of which is the promotion and maintenance of international peace. No third party, including the Assembly, has the legal or moral authority to question, let alone to deny, the validity of the accords attained or of any treaties deriving from them,
155.	A major issue that has rightly engaged the attention and growing concern of all mankind is that of international cooperation for development and the widening gap between the standard of living of the poor nations and that of the wealthy nations. However, the NorthSouth dialog has remained largely a debate among nations and groups of nations, and, as might be expected, those suffering hunger and deprivation have not had their lot improved by this debate.
156.	For the last 20 years Israel has been involved in the effort to develop ways and means of raising the standard of living in the less developed societies. It is our wish and we believe that it is within our capacity to make a further contribution of our own to joint efforts to tackle specific development problems and advance towards a solution.
157.	Ever since its establishment Israel has had to cope simultaneously with a wide range of grave social, economic and security problems. We have absorbed and integrated hundreds of thousands of immigrants many of them victims of persecution in the Arab countries from which they had come and at the same time set about creating a progressive and rapidly developing society. With all the urgent problems that weighed upon us, we have spared no effort in cooperating with other young developing nations in such fields as agriculture, hydrology, rural development, health and youth leadership. This fruitful process of international cooperation with dozens of countries, regardless of political outlook, has been constantly moving forward.
158.	In their continuous search for solutions to the evolving challenges of development, Israel's experts have recently formulated some new ideas on development, referred to by them as the Transitional Economy Plan. It is a model for empirical dynamic development, well within the means of the countries concerned. I wish to take this opportunity to invite the attention of the General Assembly to document A/36/497, circulated at the request of my delegation, which contains a report entitled "An Outline of Development through Promotion of the Transitional Economy". We do not claim that this plan is a panacea for all the world's economic ills. Rather, it aims at applying a gradual, step-by-step, relatively low-cost program of improvements to the rural sector of society, a sector that so far has not been given sufficient attention. We will be happy to cooperate with any national or international organization for the purpose of putting the concepts contained in this plan into practice.
159.	At the thirty-fifth session [15th meeting], we appealed from this rostrum to the Soviet Government to remove all the limitations and obstacles hindering Jews in the Soviet Union from leaving for Israel. Already at that time there were grounds for fearing that the Soviet Union was going to close its gates to those Jews. Unfortunately, those fears have since been substantiated. Over the past year we have been watching with growing anxiety the steady decrease in the number of Jews leaving the Soviet Union to the lowest number for the last 10 years. The Soviet Union is thus forcibly preventing many thousands of them from living in their homeland.
160.	In parallel, we have witnessed again a regrettable increase in the violation of fundamental human rights in the Soviet Union. Over the past six months the number of prisoners of Zion detained under false pretexts and sentenced by Soviet courts to long prison terms has doubled. The sole crime of these people is their desire to live as Jews in their own land. Ida Nudel, Victor Brailovski, Anatoly Shcharansky and others have been gaoled for that desire, while others who have been refused exit permits have been subjected to pressure to refrain from so-called antiSoviet activity. The Assembly should know that the antiSoviet activity in question consists of the study of the Hebrew language and of the reading of books on Jewish history and Judaism.
161.	From this rostrum I wish to appeal once again to the Soviet Union to reopen its gates for Jews who wish to return to their homeland and to cease the persecution of the Jews in the Soviet Union.
162.. There are also other countries in which Jews have been subjected to discrimination and oppression. In particular, 1 must again express anxiety over the condition of the tortured Jewish community in Syria, whose human rights are severely curtailed and many of whom have been imprisoned and have had their property impounded. I would thus also appeal to the Government of Syria to respect the basic human rights of its Jewish community, which it holds hostage and which it prevents from leaving.
163.	Permit me to turn now to the subject of the nuclear menace posed by Iraq. The item on the agenda of the Assembly dealing with the destruction of the Iraqi nuclear reactor has been formulated in a manner clearly intended to prejudge the outcome of the debate. As has been stated by Israel, the decision to destroy that reactor was taken only when it became absolutely certain that Iraq was on the verge of producing nuclear bombs, the principal target of which would have been Israel. People in all parts of the world, including the Middle East, are sleeping more soundly today, secure in the knowledge that that particular reactor has been removed. Iraq's nuclear reactor had to be destroyed before it became operational in the summer of 1981, for its destruction at a later date would have brought about radioactive fallout, endangering the civilian population of Baghdad.
164.	Ever since the establishment of the State of Israel, Iraq has been conspiring against it, both politically and militarily. Iraq set out to acquire nuclear facilities and expertise and then proceeded to assemble all the ingredients required for the development of nuclear weapons. This indicated a calculated effort on the part of Iraq to embark on a nuclear weapons program, Our concern about the Iraqi nuclear program was shared also by authoritative foreign governmental and professional assessments. None the less, six years of diplomatic and public efforts to bring about the cessation of the Iraqi military nuclear program yielded little more than reference to IAEA inspections under the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to which Iraq is a signatory. Israel has had to conclude that a country which acquired a complete fuel cycle and is openly bent on the destruction of Israel will not balk at going ahead with its program, whether or not it is a party to the NonProliferation Treaty.
165.	Let me take this opportunity to reiterate Israel's policy that it will not be the first country in the Middle East to introduce nuclear weapons into the region. Faced as it is with the stark realities of the Middle East, Israel must insist on distinguishing between spurious and genuine safety. As the case of Iraq has clearly demonstrated, the NonProliferation Treaty cannot effectively prevent such a country from resorting to nuclear weapons so as to achieve what more conventional means have failed to do.
166.	The only genuine way to remove the nuclear threat to the Middle East can be found in the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, freely and directly negotiated among the countries of the region and based on mutual assurances, on the pattern of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America. In the Assembly we shall continue to advocate and support constructive steps genuinely advancing the prospect of a Middle East free of nuclear weapons. At the same time, we shall warn against, and oppose, steps designed to exploit this subject as a tool of antiIsrael political warfare.
167.	The situation in Lebanon has been a source of grave concern in our region for a number of years. That country has been subjected to strife and bloodshed from the mid-1970's onwards, due to the exploitation by Syria and by the PLO of domestic rivalries in Lebanon, followed by outright invasion of the country by the Syrian army. The situation has been worsened by the tightening of the PLO's grip on large parts of the country. Furthermore, in order to promote their regional strategic aims, the Syrians have subjected the Lebanese civilian population to brutal attacks which have brought about the destruction of a large portion of the country. Some 120,000 Lebanese civilians have been the victims of Syrian and PLO atrocities. It is characteristic of the double standard practiced in international relations that these atrocities have never been condemned by the international community, including the United Nations. Arab and Soviet bloc supporters of Syria and the PLO have made any such condemnation impossible.
168.	It is our hope that an independent and free Lebanon will soon reemerge and maintain good relations with all its neighbors, including Israel. But this will be very difficult to achieve as long as the PLO is allowed to nest in Lebanon and to hatch schemes aimed at promoting international terrorism and the mounting of brutal and cowardly attacks against the civilian population of Israel, especially in the northern part of our country. There will be no end to the tragedy of Lebanon as long as the Syrian occupation continues and as long as the PLO maintains its terrorist bases in Lebanon, supported by armaments from foreign Powers, mainly the Soviet Union and Libya. The Government of Israel will at all times support the reestablishment of a truly independent Lebanon, within its internationally recognized boundaries, free of Syrian occupation and PLO terror.
169.	The main cause of the ArabIsrael conflict has always been the refusal of Arab States to accept the existence of an independent and secure State of Israel and their avowed commitment to its destruction. The events of the last four years have brought about a major breakthrough in that respect: after Egypt abandoned the path of war and announced its readiness to negotiate peace, peace inevitably followed. Furthermore, while the winds of war have been constantly blowing in other parts of the region, Egypt and Israel, which not long ago were faced with the imminent danger of war, are now learning to coexist in peace and represent an island of stability in the Middle East. Unfortunately, this is not yet the case with regard to the other Arab neighbors of Israel. These Arab States, which have been invited by the signatories of the Camp David framework for peace to join the peace process, have so far refused to do so.
170.	One of the clearest manifestations of their categorical opposition to the peace process is their continuing and unprecedented military buildup through arms purchases from the Soviet Union and the Soviet bloc nations, as well as from the United States and Western Europe. Since 1978 the major Arab countries, excluding Egypt, have concluded arms deals valued at $27.8 billion, of which $11.6 billion worth has already been delivered.
171.	These acquisitions of arms reflect a formidable quantitative and qualitative military buildup in those countries. These arms are unfortunately intended primarily for use against Israel. Needless to say, the stepped-up arming of the Arab States serves to strengthen their conviction that the ArabIsrael conflict can still be solved by military means. Moreover, it jeopardizes the internal stability of several of the Arab regimes, as well as of the region as a whole.
172.	The Camp David accords have been and remain the only feasible path to peace; no other viable solution appears on the horizon. Just last week we resumed the negotiations with Egypt, with the participation of the
United States, on the establishment of full autonomy for the Palestinian Arab inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district. We hope to bring these negotiations before long to a successful conclusion.
173.	Our people were not handed their State on a silver platter. We fought for liberation against a colonial Power. We then had to fight against a host of Arab armies that sought to prevent the establishment of our State. Subsequently, we have fought four more wars to defend it. We know very well the meaning and the price of combating colonialism, of a struggle for liberation and of fighting for self-determination.
174.	These concepts are now being abused and exploited by a number of Arab Governments in the name of the Palestinian Arabs. The Palestinian Arabs do have a State on a major part of the territory of Palestine. In Jordan, there exists a Palestinian Arab State in everything but name. It is a Palestinian Arab State by virtue of its geography, demography, history, culture, religion and language. It has even been declared as such by an impressive number of Palestinian Arab and Jordanian leaders, There is thus no need to speak further of Palestinian self-determination; their homeland is already in existence. Moreover, in 1964, when the PLO approved the so-called Palestinian National Covenant with a view to "liberating" Palestine, at a time when Judea, Samaria and the Gaza district were still under Jordanian and Egyptian occupation, the real goal of the Arab States was to "liberate" Israel from Israelis, to deprive Israel of its existence. That aim is still fervently pursued today under the cover of the slogan of a "homeland for the homeless Palestinians", which is given immense publicity by Arab propagandists and their supporters.
175.	Israel firmly believes in a vision of peace for our region and will strive towards its realization. The Middle East is rich, not only in history and in spiritual and cultural assets, but also in immense natural resources and manpower. The people of Israel has as much to offer for the development and progress of our region as have the other neighboring peoples, each in its own way.
176.	The Jewish people has reestablished its home in the land of its forefathers, where the Kingdoms of Judea and Israel flourished for centuries. We have now restored our sovereignty over this area after 19 centuries of homelessness, with Jerusalem, which has always been the center and sole focus of the national and spiritual life of the Jewish people, as the undivided and indivisible capital of Israel
177.	We have returned to the land of Israel and have come there to stay. Together all the nations of the Middle East can usher in an era of real peace and cooperation in the region. The opportunity is there. Let us not miss it.
Mr. VicePresident, will you please congratulate President Kittani on his election as President of this Assembly. His long and distinguished service to the international community makes him eminently qualified for that task, and I know that he will guide us with impartiality and skill.
42.	It is a great pleasure to welcome two fellow members of the Commonwealth, Belize and Vanuatu, to this assembly of nations. We are especially gratified that independence has brought one more into the growing family of South Pacific island nations. Their voices, individually and collectively, are going to be heard more and more in the world assembly. The addition to our membership of two more small nations, proud of their independence but limited in resources, brings home to us one of the major issues facing this Assembly the desperate struggle of so many countries simply to reach the most basic level of economic and social development.
43.	The recent United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries sharply focused international attention on this issue. That was useful, but in concentrating on the need for developed countries to raise the level of their official development assistance to a limited number of the poorest developing countries the Conference did not really get to the heart of the matter.
44.	The problems which face the developing countries are well known. They affect some of the developed countries also. They include the soaring cost of imported energy, inflated prices for manufactured imports and fluctuating prices for primary exports. These factors are compounded by increasing protectionist pressures in the advanced economies and a reluctance to contemplate the kind of restructuring which would expand trading opportunities for the developing countries.	^
45.	These problems cannot be solved by financial subsidies alone or even, in itself, by successful internal economic development. Economic self-sufficiency is not a practicable goal for the developing countries, nor is it for most developed countries. Even a modest level of prosperity and economic stability can only be achieved through a continuous expansion of international trade. This, in turn, can only be achieved in a different international climate, in which there is a better balance between access to manufactured goods and access to agricultural products. There is too great a tendency to concentrate on reducing barriers to trade in industrial manufactures and to push aside agriculture as some kind of an exception with which it is too difficult to cope. That cannot be allowed to continue.
46.	It is, surely, self-evident that successful economic development merely creates new problems unless there is a corresponding expansion of trading opportunities. What future is there if the rich countries continue to deny access in order to protect their own agricultures, if prices of agricultural exports fluctuate wildly or are distorted by subsidies and if those prices are far outstripped by the cost of essential industrial goods and services?
47.	The prosperity of my own country depends on the exp<M of a relatively small number of agricultural commodities. That means we share some of the problems faced by developing countries. We know what those problems are. Because we are small, and because we face economic difficulties ourselves, we try in a number of ways to ensure that our development assistance program is efficient and effective. All our aid is given in the form of grants. We make sure it is directed into the kind of projects in which New
Zealand has a recognized expertise. We never embark on a project unless it has been specifically asked for by the recipient Government. It makes sense for us to concentrate our aid efforts in the part of the world that we know best, that is, our immediate neighborhood. Almost 70 per cent of our bilateral development assistance is now channeled to the island nations of the South Pacific.
48.	In our view, the criteria for inclusion in the United Nations list of least developed countries are unduly narrow and rigid. Only one South Pacific country, at present, qualifies for inclusion in that list. A number of others, because they suffer from all the disadvantages of extremely small size, isolation and lack of resources, also deserve the special treatment accorded to the least developed. Indeed, if it were not for the level of aid they do receive, we believe they would qualify even under present criteria. I would certainly like to see those criteria revised and made more flexible.
49.	Because their populations are tiny and because of the poverty of their resources, many of the island nations of the South Pacific are going to have a long and hard struggle to become more viable. And yet their very smallness and isolation, which ought to make the world community more responsive to their special circumstances, has caused them to be overlooked by some of the major donors. Thus there is every reason for New Zealand to concentrate its aid efforts in the South Pacific, and we intend to continue that policy.
50.	External financial assistance, however essential, is not enough in itself to bring about successful development. New Zealand recognizes that the developing island countries need outlets for the goods they produce and has set about meeting that need in a practical manner. Together with Australia, we have joined in a treaty with our neighbors in the South Pacific to give them unrestricted duty-free access, on a nonreciprocal basis, for the great majority of their exports. We have also established an industrial development scheme to promote the growth of the manufacturing sector in the island economies through joint ventures with New Zealand firms. We have given strong support to the establishment of a regional shipping line to ensure that the exports of the island countries reach their markets.
51.	I make no boast that what we have achieved has solved the problems of our developing neighbors. Obviously not, since their economies are still for the most part in a precarious state.
52.	Economic and social development can progress smoothly only in conditions of political stability. Recent history has shown how true that is even in countries which are blessed with great natural wealth, and all the more starkly in others which are not. Sometimes the causes of instability have been internal. Too often they have been made far worse by external pressure, intervention or military invasion. At present there is dangerous instability in several widely separated areas of the world, including SouthEast Asia, SouthWest Asia, the Middle East, southern Africa, eastern Europe and the Korean peninsula.
53.	If I refer first to Kampuchea it is because that is the area of tension nearest to my own land; because New Zealand regards itself as a friend of the Association of
SouthEast Asian Nations [ASEANwhose members are neighbors of Kampuchea, Laos and Viet Nam; and because we believe the continuance of the situation in Kampuchea poses an eventual threat to our own security. External intervention in Kampuchea has been flagrant. There is no excuse for the continued presence of 200,000 Vietnamese troops in that country. New Zealand has consistently urged the need for a political settlement which would free the Kampuchean people from a foreign presence and permit them freely to choose their own Government. Such a settlement would enable Viet Nam to resume its own economic development, free from both the burden of maintaining its military occupation of a neighboring country and its present dependence on a single superPower for economic and military support.
54.	New Zealand cannot and does not condone the past crimes of Pol Pot and his associates. But, as the latest vote on Kampuchea's credentials shows, there is no disposition amongst the majority of Members of this Assembly to replace the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea by one representing a puppet Government propped up by a military occupation.
55.	We welcome the efforts that are being made to form a more broadly based successor to the present Democratic Kampuchean leadership. We expect that the International Conference on Kampuchea will continue its efforts to find a solution to the Kampuchean problem a solution which takes account of the legitimate interests of all sides. We hope that Viet Nam and the Soviet . Union will be persuaded to join in the negotiating process through the mediating efforts of the Ad Hoc Committee and the President of the Conference. The need for a settlement is urgent, for the longer the fighting continues' within Kampuchea, the greater the risk that it will spread beyond the borders of that war-torn land.
56.	Instability in SouthEast Asia is paralleled in SouthWest Asia by military intervention and continuing hostilities in Afghanistan. International concern will continue to be reiterated in this Assembly until Soviet forces are withdrawn. Whether or not the Soviet Union has come to regard that entanglement as a mistake, my Government most earnestly hopes that the Soviet Government will not compound that error and deal a final fatal blow to detente by similar action against the people of Poland.
57.	Almost since it began, this Organization has been trying to find a solution to the problem of a divided Korea. Yet there is still no genuine dialog between the leaders in the North and those in the South. The latest call by the Republic of Korea for a summit meeting between the two Koreas has been rejected. Surely the Korean people as a whole at least deserve that their leaders should talk seriously about the future of their country. It makes no sense for the two sides in that divided peninsula to go on forever pouring so much of their resources and energies into military preparations. My Government hopes that the authorities in the North will reconsider their stand.
58.	It is a matter of deep regret that all our hopes for urgent and positive steps towards a just and durable Middle East settlement should have had so little to sustain them. New Zealand welcomed the steps agreed upon by Israel and Egypt to restore peace between them. But the process cannot be allowed to come to a stop at this point.
During the last 12 months there has been a deplorable readiness to resort to violence. There is a need for a genuine and renewed commitment to the principles of Security Council resolution 242 (1967). There is a need for Israel's neighbors to accept and respect the existence of Israel as a sovereign and independent State. There is an equal need for a corresponding recognition of the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians, including the right to self-determination. That, in our view, means the right to establish a separate State if that is their wish. The annexation of East Jerusalem and the continuing establishment of settlements in the occupied territories are obstructions to a negotiated settlement. A resurgence of terrorism, a buildup of ever more sophisticated armaments, or recourse to preemptive military strikes simply threaten to undermine what has with such difficulty been accomplished so far. Only a genuine will to negotiate fairly and realistically will bring lasting results.
59.	In southern Africa we still see a people denied the right of nationhood. South Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia must end. The Prime Minister of my country said in this forum at the 
thirty-fifth session [109th meeting] that there was no good reason why the few issues that remain outstanding in the search for a settlement in Namibia should not be .settled quickly. We believe that Security Council resolution 435 (1978) provides the basis for that settlement and we support the continuing efforts of those seeking to achieve the early and peaceful independence of Namibia.
60.	We deplore South Africa's aggressiveness against its neighbors and its violation of Angola's territory and sovereignty. In South Africa itself the detestable system of institutionalized racism and injustice apartheid remains entrenched. South Africa's black majority are denied the right to participate in the choice of their Government and are shut out from the full enjoyment of the resources of their own country.
61.	Change in South Africa is inevitable. Whether it will come peacefully or through violence is in South Africa's hands. Time, though, is running desperately short.
62.	We cannot expect international cooperation in bringing about economic and social development to flourish while confrontation and conflict persist in so many parts of the world. Heightened tension threatens not only detente but the orderly development of international law, the negotiation of arms control agreements and the promotion of human rights. ^National security and rearmament become matters of overriding priority for Governments. Legislatures tend to focus more determinedly on domestic political considerations, to the detriment of enlightened foreign policies. The humanitarian and altruistic instincts of ordinary people all too often become dulled. Their natural instinct for peace is overshadowed by a narrower and more belligerent patriotism. Thus is created an international climate inimical to the peaceful settlement of disputes and the orderly conduct of international relations.
63.	All those who have traditionally cherished the rule of law and the fundamental freedoms, of the individual, both at home and abroad, surely have a special duty to resist such dangerous trends and to throw their weight behind the negotiating process by which the United Nations seeks to achieve those objectives.
64.	A prime example is the development of a new law of the sea. A stable order for the oceans, the seabed and coastal waters is essential for world peace. It is most desirable, to say the least, that the major maritime Powers should participate in the new convention. This year the work of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has been slowed down to permit a review of the draft convention by the United States Government. The Conference is now clearly determined to push on to finality in 1982. It is the earnest hope of my Government that, having completed its review, the United States will rejoin the negotiating process and will stand ready with all other nations to make a determined last effort to ensure the adoption by consensus of the draft convention at the next and final negotiating session of the Conference.
65.	In the field of human rights, the United Nations has concentrated, rightly, on the needs of people who are socially disadvantaged or who have been traditional victims of discrimination.
66.	A striking example is the United Nations Decade for Women, now at midpoint. The adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women [General Assembly resolution 34/180] has been one of its major achievements. It is significant that it has come into force so quickly. All nations, whatever their stage of economic development, their cultural traditions or their geographic circumstances, have been reminded not only of the rights of half of humanity but also of the enormous contribution made by women. It was right that the United Nations should lead that world movement, because the discrimination to be eliminated  the discrimination we must "eliminate has been universal. The activities of the Decade have been followed with close attention in New Zealand and its aims have our full support. But the convention will only achieve its aim if it is universally ratified and, more important, given full effect in each country.
67.	Similarly, the current International Year of Disabled Persons has focused attention on the rights of handicapped people. It has provided impetus and the practical framework for action. In my own country, the response has been quite remarkable. A mass fund-raising effort for the disabled resulted in the largest collection of voluntary funds for a charitable purpose in our history. We have been made more aware than ever before not only of the needs of the disabled, but of the contribution they can make to our society as a whole.
68.	Next year we shall be summoned to the second special session devoted to disarmament. Nowhere is the need for a renewed effort to achieve progress in international negotiations more apparent. If we are honest, we must acknowledge that since the first special session the prospects for effective disarmament measures have not advanced. Indeed, they may have receded. Much of the work of the first session has been undercut by the deterioration in the international climate and in relations among the nuclear Powers. I do not consider it unfair to assign to those Powers the principle responsibility for that loss of impetus and to demand that they take the initiative in resuming serious and active negotiations. It is they who have the weapons which, by universal agreement, are the most dangerous and in most urgent need of control and numerical reduction. My delegation's keenest disappointment is that the negotiation of a comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty, a step which could serve to check both horizontal and vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons, still hangs fire.

69.	Only the nuclear Powers can negotiate a test-ban treaty which will work or, for that matter, any agreement designed to reduce the threat of nuclear destruction. But the remaining Members of the United Nations have a duty to their peoples to renew their pressure on the nuclear Powers, who are also the largest manufacturers and purveyors of conventional armaments, to resume movement towards disarmament. In that regard, we welcome the decision of the two principal nuclear Powers to resume discussions on the reduction of nuclear weapons in the European theater.
70.	I referred earlier to some of the obstacles in the path of economic progress, especially for developing countries. There is no greater corisumer of development resources than the armaments industry, and none that is more wasteful. We must never lose patience in pursuing international agreements which will cut the burden and the danger of rearmament and strengthen the fragile fabric of peace.
71.	It is natural that each of us should seek to advance the interests of his own country, that we should work for the wellbeing of our own people. National pride and patriotism are admirable and necessary virtues. But every coin, every medallion, has another side. Nationalism and pride of country are not in themselves enough. All of us North and South, committed and uncommitted, East and West belong to one world. We have got to work together. Our world has become too small and too dangerous a place for any of us to pursue narrow nationalism regardless of the interests of others.
72.	We must move the world community away from the dangerous road it has been following: that is, the course of rivalry, confrontation and the naked struggle for power. It can lead only to conflict. We must learn, more than ever before, to couple national pride with a real commitment to international cooperation. There is, I believe, no other way to move ahead, to achieve a decent life for all our people. That, I suggest, is why we are meeting here. For all our peoples, whether our countries are large or small, have an equal right td peace, progress and justice.

Speaking from this rostrum today, I should like first of all to recall that the United Nations enjoys solid credibility among the peoples of the world as a forum whose principal objective is to serve as an effective instrument for the maintenance of peace.
45.	It is well known that the birth of the United Nations was the result of the peoples' determination to preclude another world tragedy. Its establishment reflected the awareness, deeply rooted in people's minds following the great victory over fascism, of the need for them to unite closely in the name of peace and to prevail over the forces of militarism and aggression.
46.	That is why the very first lines of the Charter proclaimed the goal "to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". These are clear and emphatic words.
47.	I should like to express the confidence that these words will never fade and will never lose their profound meaning. They are a solemn oath taken by the founding States when creating the United Nations. Today that is the duty of all the 155 countries represented in the United Nations.
48.	There, there are some who now try to contend that there are things more important than peace. However, it is obvious that the peoples have never authorized those leaders to say this on their behalf. Peace is a priceless asset of all people oil earth; it is a decisive prerequisite to progress in any sphere of human endeavor. That was true in the past, and it is all the more true now.
49.	AS Leonid Brezhnev has stressed, "The safeguarding of peace no other task is more important now at the international level for our party, for our people and for all the peoples of the world. By safeguarding peace we are working not only for the people who are living today, and not only for our children and grandchildren; we are working for the happiness of countless future generations."
50.	Acting on that fundamental assumption, the twenty sixth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union the highest forum of the Soviet Communists recently put forward a whole series of proposals on the key problems of international life, which have evoked a broad response in the world. They provide for far-reaching steps designed to limit arms, eliminate hotbeds of tension and strengthen confidence among States. They cover both the political and the military fields, deal with nuclear missile weapons and conventional armaments and bear upon the situation in Europe, in the Near, Middle and Ear East and in other regions of the world. Underlying these proposals is one single desire: to improve the international climate, to ward off the threat of war.
51.	In the international arena the Soviet Union stands shoulder to shoulder with other socialist States. Recently, during their meetings in the Crimea, the leaders of the parties and countries of the socialist community had an opportunity once again to harmonize those countries' assessments and actions in the light of the situation taking shape in the world. The same purpose is served by regular meetings" of the Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty and by the activities of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
52.	The foreign policy of the socialist countries has been and continues to be a policy of peace. It follows from the very nature of our social system, of whose advantages we are deeply convinced. It is determined by the fact that under this system there are no social strata which would make profits out of war and war preparations or derive benefits from militaristic policies. Nevertheless, we do not impose our social system on anybody. The peoples themselves determine, and should determine, their destinies. That has always been and remains the cornerstone of the scientific world outlook that guides us in both our domestic and our foreign policies.
53.	In building a society free from social and national exploitation and oppression, the socialist countries are following an unexplored path. This is not always easy; but the laws of social development and the strength of our ideals ensure for the socialist countries a steady advance in all spheres of life.
54.	Futile are the attempts by certain circles in Western countries to interfere in the internal affairs of the socialist States. Such attempts are being made, in particular, with regard to the Polish People's Republic. No small effort is being made to shake loose the socialist foundations of the Polish State. It will be recalled, in this connection, that the leaders of the States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty made die following statement:
"It was reiterated that socialist Poland, the Polish United Workers' Party and the Polish people can firmly count on the fraternal solidarity and support the Warsaw Treaty countries. The representatives of the Polish United Workers' Party stressed that Poland has been, is and will remain a socialist State, a firm link in the common family of the countries of socialism."
55.	The Republic of Cuba is coping with the tasks of socialist development and pursuing a policy of peace in difficult external conditions. The Soviet Union has invariably supported and will continue to support the Cuban people in their struggle to safeguard their sovereignty.
56.	Hostile, criminal intrigues against Cuba on the part of the United States, which have of late been stepped up, must cease. Washington does not like socialist Cuba, but it may well be asked whether the social system of the United States is to everybody's liking. No one has the right to tell the Cuban people how they should manage their internal affairs.
57.	In a bid to besmirch the socialist countries, their social system and their peaceful policies, all kinds of fabrications are being resorted to, and those who resort to them seem to be competing with one another as to who can come up with the most preposterous invention. Some even go so far as to predict an early sunset of socialism. 1 wonder how long it took them to find that word "sunset". These people seem to be endowed with a remarkable gift of inventiveness, but I must say that they do not seem to have a very good idea of the objective processes of historical development. Are they looking for the sunset in the right country? Is that where they should be looking? Are they not looking in the wrong direction?
58.	How many were the prophets who predicted the downfall of socialism, but what of it? Their prophesies have invariably fallen by the wayside, while history has continued inexorably to follow its course.
59.	The Soviet Union has never threatened and is not threatening anybody. Since the days of Lenin, peace and friendship among nations have been inscribed on the banner of the Soviet State, and we have invariably been true to this ideal. Today it is as dear to the people of our country as it was in Lenin's day.
60.	In examining and solving international problems we rely on the ideals of the freedom and progress of nations, on the principles of respect for the independence of all States and all peoples, and aim to consolidate the foundations of life rather than prepare the funeral of mankind.
61.	There exists, however, another trend in world politics, which has quite different goals. It is the course followed in the militarist circles of imperialist States. The sum and substance of that course is to seek domination over other countries and peoples, a domination that means imposing one's will upon them, their economic exploitation and the use of their territories for military strategic purposes. Washington is ever more frequently heard to speak about the American leadership of the world, though no one has entitled die United States to claim such leadership.
62.	The architects of that course see as the main instrument for achieving their objectives, the whipping up of international tensions and the use, as they put; it themselves, of methods of force in politics. Even when they occasionally recognize in words the possibility of a diplomatic alternative they hasten to make it clear that diplomacy, unless it relies on force, does not suit them.
63.	The most typical manifestations of that policy line are: a further whipping up of the arms race; an overt claim to military superiority over the Soviet Union; the setting up of a wide network of military bases and the stationing of American troops on foreign territories; the undermining of the basic principles of SovietAmerican relations worked out earlier as a result of tremendous effort; pressure on other States, particularly in Europe, to curtail their political, trade and economic ties with the socialist countries; and slanderous propaganda against countries adhering to the positions of peace and ejecting claims to world leadership by no matter whom.
64.	And what great pains are taken to drag the North Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO] allies into following that policy. When arguments are lacking and there is a constant lack of them to support such a hopeless and dangerous course crude pressure is brought to bear, so as to give no respite to those who are not always eager to accept militaristic schemes alien to their interests.
65.	It is sometimes said that Washington's present policy does not rule out prospects for developing relations between the USSR and the United States. However, in the same breath it is immediately demanded that our country should change neither more nor less its conduct in international affairs to satisfy American interests. In other words, the Soviet Union must give up defending its legitimate interests, give up its foreign policy.
66.	To put forward such demands is to show a lack of seriousness. The Soviet Union will continue to pursue its course of Leninist peaceful policy. Our country does not intend to deviate from it. We do not encroach on the legitimate interests of others, but nor shall we forgo legitimate interests of our own, including commitments to our allies.
67.	It is to be hoped that Washington will yet be able to take a more sober view of the actual state of affairs, adopt a more realistic approach to international affairs and not overestimate its capabilities while underestimating the capabilities of others.
68.	In order to build policy on a realistic basis one should seek, not clashes and conflicts with other countries, even though those other countries have a different social system, but rather the settlement of controversial problems at the negotiating table.
69.	For our part, we reaffirm once again and the USSR delegation is authorized to say it from this rostrum that the Soviet Union has not sought, nor is it seeking, confrontation with the United States of America. We should like to have normal businesslike relations with the United States. As is known, we are in favor of a dialog in order to seek mutually acceptable solutions to controversial problems. But we are not begging for such a dialog, we are proposing it.
70.	At every session of the General Assembly many States emphasize, quite rightly, that the peoples are greatly endangered by the policy of crude interference in the internal affairs of other countries, support for bloodthirsty dictatorial regimes hated by their own peoples and an all out encouragement of oppressors and hatchet-men of every stripe, including the Pol Pot experts in genocide.
71.	The methods and forms employed in pursuing such a policy are varied. Recently, the United States has all but launched a crusade against international terrorism, leveling accusations against one country after another. These accusations, however, are misdirected. They are utterly false. Terrorism is looked for not where it should be sought and where it really is to be found.
72.	The scheme here is simple to tag the label of terrorism on the struggle of peoples against colonialism and its vestiges. In other words, it is the policy of oppression, cursed by peoples, which is pictured as a struggle against terrorism. At its basis lies unwillingness to take into account the rights of peoples to manage their domestic affairs as they see fit, and refusal to accept social changes occurring in the world.
73.	And surely, the events in El Salvador are a fitting illustration of the policy of imperialist interference in the affairs of other peoples. A real massacre has been committed there before the eyes of the whole world. Patriots defending the independence of their country, thousands of peaceful civilians are being killed. It is well known who is in charge there. And all this goes on at the very moment when we are all sitting in session here in the General Assembly Hall.
74.	What is happening in EI Salvador arouses the legitimate indignation of all honest people on earth. Regrettably, the United Nations has not, yet lifted a finger to assist in putting an end to these crimes against a whole nation.
75.	And how should one view the policy of shameless pressure exerted on Libya and, in particular, the recent armed provocation against that country? Or take the so called rapid deployment force. Apparently, its formation is regarded in Washington as a great invention. But there is nothing great in it. It is nothing but a policeman's club intended to ensure crude interference by the United States in the affairs of independent States and to stifle the freedom of peoples.
76.	At this world forum one cannot ignore either the concept of "American vital interests" cited in justification of such a policy. This concept is importunately repeated in almost every official statement by Washington on the subject of the international situation. It is interpreted in such a way as to enable the United States to declare any part of the world a sphere of its interests and to take any steps there, all the way up to the use of force.
77.	Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Latin America, they are all there. It seems that the only area still missing is the South Pole, but it too may soon be added. Everything is there except the right of the United States to do all this. Neither the United States nor any other country has been granted the right to hold sway over the entire globe. This is nothing but arbitrariness.
78.	As is known, a whole United States naval armada has been assembled in the Persian Gulf. This action is directed against Iran, against the Soviet Union and against a number of independent countries of Asia and Africa. The United States Navy must leave this area. It has nothing to do there, nothing to defend. That would be a sensible act.
79.	Neither the size nor the power nor the resources of this or that State give it the right to impose by force or threat of force its will on other countries and arbitrarily to declare any part of the world as a sphere of its vital interests. If such a right were to be recognized for any country or group of countries, then, apparently, all instruments of international law should be destroyed. Indeed, little would be left then of the United Nations Charter itself.
80.	The ruling circles of a number of NATO countries now worship but one god an unrestrained arms race. Everything that serves this end is acceptable to them. This arms race is invariably accompanied by a torrent of speeches and permeated with militarist frenzy, including speeches by top level statesmen. Those who advocate inflated arms programs resort to any means imaginable. Deception is held in special esteem by them. They deceive one another, they deceive the people, they deceive their kin and strangers alike. They launch a rumor and the next day they quote it as the truth.
81.	The most salient element of deception is the myth of a "Soviet threat". It is repeated endlessly, to the point of stupefaction, day and night. In this manner it is easier to confuse people and extort money for armaments. In these conditions decisions are taken on a huge, increase in military expenditures such as history has never before known.
82.	The urge to expand their military presence wherever possible has now acquired the element of a real Bacchanalia, with half a million United States troops stationed in more than a dozen countries.
83.	Today the policy of the United States is beset by such an obsession, especially in setting up military bases near the borders of the Soviet Union and the areas adjacent to it. Of course, the States against which these bases are aimed have to take all this into account so as safely to protect their security.
84.	Who would believe that it is concern for peace that motivates the accelerated pace of the development of ever new types of weapons, including MX intercontinental ballistic missiles, Trident submarine-launched missiles, the new strategic bomber, various types of cruise missiles and many other things?
85.	What is the purpose of all this? The purpose is to try and upset the established strategic balance, obtain military supremacy and, on this basis, impose one's will upon others.
86.	The Soviet Union condemns this policy as adventurous. The whipping up of the arms race is madness. This has been repeatedly recognized by many political and public figures in the world, scientists and men of culture. Mankind must be saved from it. The present balance of military power is fully in line with the interests of peace and international stability.
87.	Our country has never sought, nor is it now seeking, military superiority. Those who make^ claims to the contrary should not be believed. Leonid Ilich Brezhnev has said this to the entire world many times, and, inter Alia, directly to American Presidents on various occasions. But we shall not permit others to become superior to us. We shall of course adequately meet any challenge so as to maintain the balance of power.
88.	However, the Soviet Union has not done, and is not doing, anything beyond what is absolutely necessary to ensure a peaceful life for its people and the security of its allies and friends. We believe that the ruling circles of NATO know all that. Yet, they do not want to admit that there is no Soviet threat whatsoever, nor do they want to give up practicing deception.
89.	Indeed, what would then be left of exhortations about the need for the notorious "additional armament of the West"? Nothing would remain. That is the reason why use is made of incomparable indicators and of .falsified data on strategic arms, on medium-range nuclear systems in Europe, on armed forces strength of the two sides in Central Europe or on any other aspect of the correlation of forces.
90.	If, by any chance, some NATO official happens to concede that the Soviet Union has really never overtaken the United States and that parity is still there, there immediately follows a tongue lashing from above. And then the record of "Soviet military superiority" is played again in order to support another increase in military appropriations and to substantiate some freshly baked militaristic doctrine.
91.	In some capitals such doctrines pop out as if rolling off the assembly line. Things may well reach the stage where any bureaucrat, especially if he is in the spotlight, will, once installed in an executive office, immediately come up with a strategic doctrine of his own concoction. Thus, quite recently, the world was presented with a "discovery" according to which nuclear war in general should not be feared too much, that it is "admissible" and "acceptable". This is a shameless deception designed to mislead the peoples and paralyze their will to struggle against the nuclear threat.
92.	If the arguments of the proponents of the militaristic policy course are left free of deliberate vagueness and intricacy, and of claims to originality, there remains only one thing, namely, the urge to intensify the arms race, in breadth and in depth, without any restraint.
93.	But have the authors of these militaristic doctrines asked 500 million Europeans, 470 million Africans, 360 million Latin Americans, 2.5 billion Asians and finally, their own people whether they want to perish in die flames of war? Certainly not. They just do not care.
94.	The instigators of the arms race would like to discard everything that hampers their plans. If to this end it is necessary to renege on the obligations already assumed, that is what they do. Thus, the United States refuses to ratify the SALT II Treaty.
95.	Negotiations had been under way for many years before the Treaty was finally agreed upon and signed. Now they say that this Treaty is not to the advantage of the United States and that it is inequitable. Of course, this is not true. The balance of interests of the sides was accurately established and preserved in the Treaty. This is known to anyone familiar with its contents. Therefore, that is not the point. The point is that it is this very principle of equality and equal security reflected in the Treaty which is not to someone's liking.
96.	Counting on people's ignorance, they seek to sap the Treaty by alleging that it does not envisage strategic weapons reductions. But this is not true either. The Treaty explicitly envisages such reductions, and on a substantial scale,
97.	It is also obvious that, once agreement has been leached on strategic arms limitation and the initial reduction of their levels, it is easier to solve the task of their more radical redaction so that the balance reflects a lower arms level.
98.	All that convincingly proves that the significance of the Treaty already agreed to and signed is as great today as at the time of its signing.
99.	How numerous were the cases when talks on the limitation of armaments were held both in the period between the two world wars and after the Second World War. Yet any unbiased person will undoubtedly admit that none of those talks produced results that could be compared even to a small extent to the SALT I agreement, which is in force, and especially to the SALT II Treaty, which has not become operative.
100.	Now a question arises: why smear both the treaty and the SALT process itself? Yet exceptionally reckless politicians are now saying that the entire problem is not urgent at all, at least not till the United States implements its most sweeping arms buildup plans.
101.	Just think of the absurdity of such a stand. The nation which claims to be the most powerful in military terms says "Let me first increase by so many times my armaments and then perhaps I shall talk about their limitation."
102.	What is the main factor in such a stand? Is it aggressive designs it) politics, greatPower expansionist ambitions, a striving to impose on the world monstrous plans for an ever greater stockpiling of weapons for the annihilation of people instead of manufacturing things of material goods, or a desire to have an inexhaustible source of excess profits for those who manufacture armaments? It is hard to say. Most likely it is a complex mixture of all these things.
103.	The United States decision to start the production of the neutron weapon aroused great indignation in the world. That decision is a new step towards intensifying the arms race, towards aggravating the world situation.
104.	The peoples clearly say that they strongly oppose the fiendish neutron weapon, rightly considering it to be a particularly inhuman type of mass-destruction weapon. The neutron weapon must be totally banned. A ban must be imposed on both its production and its use.
105.	Washington has long been making attempts to hold back or even to wreck the negotiations initiated earlier on a number of important problems. Unfortunately, quite a lot has already been done to that end. That was the case, for example, with the talks on the Indian Ocean, on limiting conventional arms transfers, on the complete and general prohibition of nuclear-weapon tests, and on the prohibition of the production of chemical weapons and the destruction of their stockpiles.
106.	It is also appropriate to mention here the current efforts to cast aside the results of many years of work by States within the framework of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
107.	Other developments in international life also have their impact on the world situation. Attention is attracted to the ever-increasing closeness between Washington and Peking.
108.	Who would object to the desire of two countries to have normal relations between them? Nobody would, of course. It is the basis on which this is done that matters. In this particular case the basis is openly hostile to many States, above all to the Soviet Union, and hostile to the cause of detente.
109.	It has been proclaimed to the world that the United States intends to sell weapons to China and to help it build up its military potential. And this is done at a time when Peking is pursuing a policy that runs counter to the interests of peace, a policy of hegemonism and aggression.
110.	The establishment of military cooperation between the United States and China with Japan, for reasons that no one knows, getting involved in it will be duly taken into account by the Soviet Union and, we believe, by other States.
111.	For its part, the Soviet Union has repeatedly expressed the conviction it was recently reiterated by Leonid Brezhnev from the rostrum of the Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union that the Chinese people's interests would best be served by a policy of peace. The Soviet Union would like to build its relations with the People's Republic of China on a good neighbor basis. We have repeatedly reaffirmed that our proposals for normalizing these relations remain valid.
112.	These are the main reasons, as we see them, for the recent exacerbation of the international situation.
113.	What is the conclusion that follows from all this? According to the ideologists of militarism, mankind is to expect a pitch-dark night, an endless spiraling arms race, further conflicts and clashes.
114.	The Soviet Union and, we are sure, many other countries hold different views as to the prospects for world developments. Pessimism and a feeling of doom are alien to our nature. We are convinced that to prevent war is not only necessary 'but also possible if this is actively fought for. Hand in hand with all States, our country is prepared to wage the struggle for curbing the arms race, removing the threat of war, settling outstanding problems. In this respect we are not politically allergic to any partner, irrespective of differences in social systems or ideologies.
115.	The immediate and most pressing task today is to struggle for easing world tensions, curbing the arms race, eliminating * threat of war.
/
116.	The Soviet Union proposes that the General Assembly, acting on behalf of all Member States of the United Nations, adopt a declaration solemnly proclaiming that States and statesmen who would be the first to use nuclear weapons would commit the gravest crime against humanity.
117.	There are and can be no grounds or motives, there are and can be no circumstances or situations which would give a State the right to be the first to use nuclear weapons. It would be a crime against all the peoples, against life itself on earth.
118.	It is likewise necessary to warn that there will never be any justification or pardon for statesmen who would make the decision on the first use of nuclear weapons. To proclaim this in a declaration so that these words be heard in every capital, in every part of the world, would be to remind statesmen who, by virtue of their official position, are involved in making decisions on the use of nuclear weapons, that each and every one of them is personally responsible for the destinies of mankind.
119.	We propose that the declaration further state loudly and clearly that any doctrines allowing for the first use of nuclear weapons are incompatible with human moral standards and the lofty ideals of the United Nations.
120.	It is also most important to draw the attention, especially of leaders of nuclear-weapon States, to the fact that their supreme duty is to act in such a way as to eliminate the risk of outbreak of a nuclear conflict.
121.	The declaration should stress that the nuclear-arms race must be stopped and reversed by joint effort, through negotiations conducted in good faith and cc the basis of equality. What is meant here is that the energy of the atom should be used not against life but for the sake of life, not for the production of weapons but for scientific progress, for improvement of the living standards of people, that is, exclusively for peaceful purposes.
122.	This is the essence of the political document that we are proposing for adoption. We hope that this proposal will meet with wide support.
123.	The adoption of such a document may become a major landmark on the path towards complete elimination of the threat of a nuclear conflict. No single country should stand aside from the solution of this problem.
124.	The Soviet Union is in favor of a dialog on all aspects of the problem of ending the arms race, on all controversial international issues, in favor of a bilateral or a multilateral dialog.
125.	From time to time statements are made which seem to express willingness to negotiate. However, attached to this willingness are all sorts of conditions, linkages and unequal approaches of all sorts. If someone really intends to negotiate in this vein, we must say outright: nothing will come of it. Negotiations can be successful only if they are conducted on the basis of Compliance with the principle of equality and equal security.
126.	The Soviet Union is prepared and has been prepared for a long time to resume negotiations with the United States on the limitation of strategic weapons.
Given mutual desire, headway in the solution of this problem can be made, relying on what has already been achieved and preserving the results achieved.
127.	The SovietAmerican negotiations on the limitation of nuclear weapons in Europe will apparently be resumed unless winds start blowing again in Washington in a different direction. Of course, the question of limiting medium-range nuclear weapons and those of corresponding forward-based nuclear systems of the United States should be examined and settled concurrently and in organic interrelation, with due account of all factors determining the strategic situation on the continent.
128.	Our country has proposed that the moment negotiations begin, a moratorium should be imposed on the deployment in Europe of new medium-range nuclear missile systems of NATO and the USSR. This proposal is based on the existing approximate parity of their respective armaments. The establishment of a moratorium would certainly exert a favorable influence on the climate of the negotiations.
129.	The Soviet Union is prepared to reach agreement on limiting and, what is more, on reducing medium-range nuclear systems in Europe. As Leonid Brezhnev stated at Berlin on 6 October 1979:
"We are prepared to reduce the number of medium range nuclear weapons deployed in western areas of the Soviet Union from their present level, but only, of course, in the event that no additional medium-range nuclear weapons are deployed in Western Europe."
130.	At the same time we must make it quite clear that should the other side artificially drag out the negotiations and start to deploy new medium-range nuclear weapons in Western Europe, the Soviet Union will have to take measures to restore the balance.
131.	For the purpose of strengthening peace in Europe, it is also important to break the deadlock at the Vienna negotiations on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. The socialist countries have done a good deal to ensure progress at the Vienna negotiations. Should the Western partners show a minimum of goodwill, a solution could be found.
132.	Of great significance is the question of convening a conference on military detente and disarmament in Europe. As is known, this question is under discussion in Madrid at the meeting of representatives of the States participants in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
133.	Wishing to contribute to success, the Soviet Union has gone far to accommodate the West and has declared its willingness to include the entire European part of its territory in the zone of confidence-building measures, provided, of course, the Western side makes a corresponding step in turn. What is required now is precisely such a step,
134.	Military detente on the European continent is intended to strengthen and complement political detente. But this does not depend on us alone.
135.	The Soviet Union is prepared to hold negotiations on all areas of limiting the arms race and of disarmament.
136.	Under current conditions, it is becoming increasingly important to prevent military competition from extending to outer space. Each day brings new evidence that outer space can become an arena of the arms race.
137.	At* the request of the Soviet Union, an item entitled "Conclusion of & treaty on the prohibition of the stationing of weapons of any kind in outer space" has been included in the agenda of the present session [item 128], The Governments of all States represented here have had an opportunity of familiarizing themselves with the Soviet draft of that treaty. The draft takes into account all major aspects of the problem. We would like the exchange of views on the basis of the Soviet Union's proposal and its outcome to be constructive.
138.	With reference to the need to take measures for curbing the arms race and for disarmament, special note should also be made of the importance of efforts to resolve conflict situations in various parts of the world and to prevent the emergence of new hotbeds of tension. States are capable of coping with this problem provided they strive to ensure a more durable peace.
139.	The struggle of Arab peoples to defend their legitimate rights, trampled underfoot as a result of Israel's aggression, elicits understanding and support on the part of an overwhelming majority of countries. If justice has not so far been restored and the situation in the Middle East remains dangerous, it is because those in Israel's ruling circles persist in their expansionist policies and do not stop their brutal terror against the people of Lebanon, while influential forces outside that area actually encourage this policy and seek to follow the pattern of the anti Arab Camp David deal,
140.	Peace and stability in the Middle East can be assured only through a comprehensive political settlement which would not infringe on the rights of any country or people of that region. Such a settlement must envisage the withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories occupied in 1967 and the exercise of the national rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including the right to establish their own State.
141.	The Soviet Union consistently comes out in support of the Arabs' rights and stands for the elimination of the consequences of Israeli aggression. There is growing understanding that the path to a Middle East settlement lies through the convening of an international conference with the participation of all the parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation Organization [PLO].
142.	A political settlement is needed for the situation created around the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, against which an undeclared war is still being waged. The principal role in this is played by the United States, and Peking is not far behind.
143.	Unfortunately. Pakistan, whose territory serves as the main bridgehead for armed incursions, in effect avoids negotiations with the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. Yet, who else but Islamabad should be primarily interested in establishing lasting peace in the region?
144.	There has been some talk recently about the proposal by certain Western countries to convene an international conference on Afghanistan. But what is striking is that, while the conference is to be on Afghanistan, the main party concerned, the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, has been forgotten. This forgetfulness conceals the attempt to have the internal affairs of Afghanistan, a sovereign nonaligned State, examined in a forum composed of other States, without even the participation of the Afghan Government. Of course that approach is unacceptable.	. ,
145.	There is a basis for a political settlement; it is simple and, given goodwill, can be translated into reality. A constructive program to this effect was set forth in the statement by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan on 24 August of this year [see AI36/457].
146.	The political settlement must ensure the termination and non-resumption of armed or other interference in the affairs of Afghanistan. Such a settlement, including reliable international guarantees, would permit the establishment, by agreement between the Afghan and Soviet sides, of modalities and timing for the withdrawal of the limited contingent of Soviet troops from Afghanistan.
147.	In SouthEast Asia, too, there is no other way but negotiations to reduce tensions in the area. We support the well-known proposals by Viet Nam, the Lao People's Democratic Republic and Kampuchea [see A/36/86, annex I, para. 4], including the proposal to hold a regional conference with the participation of the. countries of IndoChina and the States member's of the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations.
148.	However, no one should assume that the maneuvers under way around the nonexistent Kampuchean question can result in anything but harm. It is inadmissible that, under the cover of some pseudo-conferences, executioners overthrown by the people of Kampuchea or former princelings should be imposed once again on that people. They have already made their choice.
149.	Also doomed to failure are the attempts to cast a shadow upon the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which extended a helping hand to the Kampuchean people in their struggle for freedom and independence.
150.	Attention is drawn to the fraudulent allegation put forward in typical Washington wrappings that someone somewhere in SouthEast Asia used toxic chemical substances said to be of Soviet make. It is quite obvious that at work here are those who are themselves guilty of such crimes. Now they are trying to cover their traces.
151.	The situation in the Far East, too, offers possibilities for positive political action. One such could be an agreement on the application of confidence-building measures in the region. The implementation of such measures on a collective or a bilateral basis would make a useful contribution to the cause of detente in that region. The Soviet proposal on this question has been communicated to all the States concerned. We expect that in this regard they will display the required sense of responsibility.
152.	The Korean question still unsettled and thus an old source of tension in the Far East can and must be solved by peaceful means. In our opinion, a suitable basis for solving the problem is provided by the proposals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea presented by its President Kim II Sung at the Sixth Congress of the Workers' Party of Korea.
153.	Recently the Mongolian People's Republic has taken a timely initiative by proposing a convention on mutual nonaggression and renunciation of force in relations between the States of Asia and the Pacific [see A/36/388]. Our country supports that idea.
154.	The Republic of India is making a major contribution to maintaining stability and peace in Asia and ensuring international security. We value highly its peaceful constructive policy. SovietIndian relations, which rest on the solid basis provided by the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation, are in the interest of our two peoples and positively serve the interests of peace.
155.	Political means can also be effective in settling other dangerous situations and controversial problems, including the conflict between Iraq and Iran, the Cyprus problem, the situation in Western Sahara and that in the Horn of Africa. The indispensable requirement in this regard is that nobody be allowed to pit one State against another and to capitalize on conflicts between them. There should be no room for imperialist intrigues in those areas.
156.	As is well known, the South African racist regime and its accomplices are engaged in maneuvers aimed at thwarting the decolonization of Namibia. It is a matter of honor and is the immediate duty of the United Nations to help the people of Namibia gain their freedom. The racists and all those on whom they rely must realize that the time or colonialism is past.
157.	An end must be put to South Africa's aggressive gangster-like actions against the People's Republic of Angola and a number of other African countries. It is necessary to condemn those actions, to demand that South Africa cease its armed intervention and to adopt international sanctions against it. It is precisely this approach that has recently been manifested by the overwhelming majority of members of the Security Council in voting on a draft resolution submitted by Mexico and other countries.3 However, the United States has prevented the United Nations body from taking inappropriate decision, thus openly defying the African peoples and world public opinion.4
158.	The United States support for South Africa constitutes direct assistance to the aggressor. Such a course must be resolutely condemned. The United Nations should do everything that is needed to put an end to the aggression and call the aggressor to order. The resolution recently adopted by the General Assembly at its emergency special session on Namibia [resolution ES8/2] is a step in the right direction.
159.	The nonaligned movement, which has recently marked its twentieth anniversary, has become an important factor in world politics.* The Soviet Union expresses its solidarity with the anti-imperialist orientation of the nonaligned movement and supports its activities in the interest of strengthening peace.
160.	Much is now being said about the problem of relations between the industrialized and the developing
States. Various bodies, narrow and broad, of the North South type are being proposed. It is obvious, however, that nobody will produce positive results unless developed capitalist States radically change their approach to developing countries, cease discrimination in economic relations with them and renounce the economic plundering of those countries,
161.	Our country will continue to give developing States the necessary support in their struggle for economic independence and for the restructuring of international relations on a genuinely equitable and democratic basis.
162.	The activities of the United Nations cannot be assessed in terms of standard units of measurement. A formal one-dimensional assessment cannot be applied to them. There are, however, grounds for saying that the United Nations has done quite a lot to enable the peoples of the world to live with greater confidence in their future.
163.	Working actively with other socialist countries in all areas of international politics, the Soviet Union continues to make proposals aimed at strengthening peace.
164.	No problem, no matter what its magnitude, can or should overshadow the principal purpose for which the United Nations was created, that is, to preserve peace. It is the individual and collective duty of all States and the duty of every statesman to do for this purpose everything within the capability of human beings, of their intelligence, of their energy and of their dedication to life and its most noble ideals.
165.	It is clearer now than ever before how enormous are the challenges confronting the peoples to meet the rapidly growing needs in the fields of energy, food, health and education, to explore the oceans and outer space, to preserve nature. These problems can be solved provided mankind saves itself from war.
166.	Everything should be done to ensure that in the remaining two decades of the twentieth century people can live in conditions of peace and can cross the threshold of the third millennium of our era, not with fear for the future of our civilization, but with confidence in the boundless prospects for its development. All nations, large and small, that work towards this end will always find the Soviet Union at their side.The United Nations, this parliament of man, offers us a unique opportunity to examine the human condition. We are each called upon to declare our national purposes. We are all obligated to address those problems that obstruct the vision of the Charter.
158.	Let us begin with the vision. The Charter of the United Nations reflects cherished dreams of a world distinguished by peaceful change and the resolution of international disputes without resort to force.
159.	The United States believes in these dreams. They offer the best chance of justice and progress for all mankind. They promise a world hospitable to the values of our own society, including a certain idea of man as a creative and responsible individual, democracy and the rule of law.
160.	The ideals of the United Nations are therefore also American ideals. The Charter embodies American principles. It will always be a major objective of our statecraft to make the United Nations an instrument of peace.
161.	We all know that the realization of our dreams cannot depend on hope alone. Obstacles to progress must be overcome through united efforts. The threats to peace are many; suspicions persist; and the price of inaction is great. Truly we face a most difficult agenda.
162.	As 1 make these comments I am reminded that an observer once said of this annual debate: "Every year ... a great and sacred orator . . . preaches before the assembly of nations a solemn sermon on the text of the Charter". Today, however, 1 would like to focus instead on an issue of compelling interest: international development.
163.	International development reflects the worldwide search for economic progress, social justice and human dignity. Short of war itself, no other issue before us will affect more people, for good or ill, than this search. And peace itself cannot be truly secured if the aspirations of mankind to a better life are frustrated.
164.	Development is therefore an enduring issue. It has preoccupied the United Nations from the beginning. It will survive the agenda of this Assembly and every Assembly far into the future. And although great progress has been made we face today a crucial choice of strategy that will dramatically affect the prospects for future success.
165.	Since the Second World War the progress of development has been uneven but none the less widespread. Enormous economic growth has been registered: for example, in the last three decades average incomes have actually doubled. There have also been great advances in health. Life expectancy has increased dramatically even in the poorest countries and infant mortality has been reduced.
166.	This experience, however, has not been fully shared by all countries and the prospect for the future is now clouded by recent trends.
167.	The pattern of increasing economic growth, critical for development, has been slowed by inflation, high energy prices, severe balance of payments problems, heavy debt and slower growth of markets. Political turmoil and instability have diverted precious resources into arms and conflict. The necessary synthesis of traditional values and modernization, never easy to achieve, has grown more difficult under the impact of accelerating change.
168.	Let us dispense with illusions. We must choose today between two futures: a future of sustainable growth, an expansion of world trade and a reduction of poverty; and a future of economic stagnation, rising protectionism and the spread of poverty. As the World Bank has put it, "By the end of the century, the difference between the two cases amounts to some 220 million more absolutely poor people" .
169.	Clearly, our task is to give a fresh Impetus to development by devising a new strategy for growth. Such a strategy begins by recognizing the highly Complex and difficult situation we face.	'
170.	The poorest developing countries require longterm and generous concessional aid from developed and other developing countries to raise productivity through broadly based education and training, improvements in health and nutrition and better infrastructure. They also need sound economic policies, particularly in the agricultural sector. Ultimately, the objective must be to involve them in the international economic system, thereby strengthening opportunities and incentives for self-sustaining growth.
171.	The middle tier developing countries have made significant progress. Nevertheless, they still suffer from widespread poverty. They are also acutely vulnerable to any economic downturn, especially in volatile commodity markets, because of their narrow range of exports. These countries need foreign capital and assistance in developing the experience and creditworthiness to borrow on international capital markets. Technical support and manpower training are important to ensure that their populations are both productive and competitive. They also need an open international trading system to encourage export development.
172.	The more advanced of the developing countries are able to maintain living standards and economic performance comparable to what some of today's industrialized countries achieved less than a generation ago. Their further development is sustained best by a strong international economy with an open capital and trading system. They must be able to pursue national policies that take advantage of the international opportunities and foster domestic adjustment. These countries also play a key role in helping poorer nations, both directly and as policy models.
173.	The capital surplus oil exporting countries need a stable and prosperous international market for their oil exports and a favorable environment in which to invest their financial assets and to develop their domestic economies. The international system must continue to evolve to reflect the growing importance of these countries as they assume increasing responsibility for the management of that system and for assisting poorer nations.
174.	Finally, the industrialized countries are today suffering from low rates of growth and high rates of inflation. They are trying to increase savings and investment in order to create employment, improve the environment, eliminate pockets of poverty and adjust to the changing competitiveness of their exports. They must sell more abroad to pay for the increased cost of imported energy.
175.	In a slowly growing world these complex and diverse requirements would become potent sources of conflict. But the struggle for the world product can be avoided. The international economy can help all countries to achieve their objectives through a strategy of growth which creates the resources and the employment needed for progress. This cannot be the task of a single nation. As die report of the Independent Commission on International Development Issues, chaired by Willy Brandt, has pointed out: "Above all, the achievement of economic growth in one country depends increasingly on the performance of others".4
176.	It is on this view of a differentiated and interdependent world that we must build a new strategy for growth; but our strategy must also be informed by the lessons of the past. Such lessons, extracted from hard experience, offer the basis for principles to guide us through these austere and difficult times.
177.	First, development is facilitated by an open international trading system. Developed and developing countries together face the challenge of strengthening GATT and the international trading system to create mutual export opportunities for all.
178.	Today the trading system is under enormous stressrising protectionist pressures, new and subtle types of import barriers, restrictive bilateral arrangements, export subsidies and investment policies which distort trade. These are especially troublesome in a period of slow growth. Unless they are reduced or eliminated the international trading system will be seriously weakened. Such a setback to the world economy would inflict the most suffering on the developing countries.
179.	The industrialized countries have a special responsibility to work for a more open trading system with improved rules. We also look to the more successful developing countries to play a fuller role in strengthening the trading system. It will be difficult for each of our countries individually to open markets further unless we are committed to doing so collectively.
180.	For our part, the United States has long supported open markets. Despite current complications, America remains a strong advocate of free trade. Although our gross national product is only one third of the Western industrialized group's total, the United States imports roughly one half of all manufactured goods exported by developing countries. Earnings of developing countries not members of OPEC from exports to the United States amount to some $60 billion more than double the foreign aid coming from all Western developed countries.
181.	We call upon all members of the international community to join in resisting the growth of protectionism. Developing nations must have the greatest possible opportunity to sell their commodities and manufactured products. Let us also work together to achieve a successful conclusion of the multi-fibre agreement.
182.	A dynamic and successful trading system requires a smoothly functioning international financial system. We must therefore continue to work with other countries to encourage their support for IMF and their constructive participation in the Bind's programs to facilitate adjustment. We will continue to cooperate with our developing country colleagues to strengthen the Fund. We share the view that the responsibilities of the developing countries should be increased to keep pace with their growing economic importance.
183.	Secondly, foreign assistance coupled with sound domestic policy and self-help can facilitate the development process. The United States has long believed in assistance as an effective tool in helping to promote development. Over the last three decades the United States has given more than $130 billion in concessional assistance; over the last decade alone the total has exceeded $50 billion; In 1980 the American people provided $7.1 billion, almost twice as much as any other donor.
184.	The United States has also been a major force in the creation and support of the multilateral development banks. The banks represent an important and to many countries an essential feature in the international financial system. In the last five years the United States has authorized and appropriated an average of $1.5 billion per year for support of the multilateral banks. There is no question about their value as development institutions. As intermediaries they help to mobilize the resources of international capital markets to lend to developing countries. The banks' loans for key projects are important catalysts for productive domestic and foreign private investment.
185.	We recognize that many of the poorer developing countries must continue to rely heavily on concessional assistance for some time to come. Moreover, certain kinds of vital development programs will not pay the quick and direct financial returns needed to attract private capital. For this reason a continuing bilateral assistance program and continuing support for the multilateral banks will be essential.
186.	Given today's economic conditions and the limitation on aid budgets in many countries, it is especially important that concessional assistance be utilized as effectively as possible; that it focus on countries which need it most and which use it best; and that it be a more effective catalyst for mobilizing other foreign and domestic resources. We must also recognize that a strategy for growth that depends on a massive increase in the transfer of resources from the developed to the developing countries is simply unrealistic. *
187.	Thirdly, regional cooperation and bilateral consultations can be effective in promoting development. The United States is working with other regional States to promote economic progress in the Caribbean area. We are convinced that the example of the recent multinational cooperation in the case of Jamaica and the broader Caribbean Basin initiative holds promise for other regions.
188.	We are already committed to a close working relationship with the Association of SouthEast Asian Nations [ASEAN]. We have benefited considerably from a better understanding of ASEAN's views on multilateral issues and on ways to strengthen our bilateral commercial ties. The United StatesASEAN Business Council is a model of how our private sectors can work together for mutual benefit.
189.	In Africa we look forward to a close working relationship with the Economic Community of West African States as it attempts to strengthen economic ties within the region. Constructive consultations on trade and investment issues have already occurred. We believe that mutually beneficial cooperation can be strengthened to our common benefit. Similar consultations with the developing countries of southern Africa are desirable. We have a strong interest in the economic health and stability of those nations. Commercial relationships, along with foreign assistance, will help us to attain that objective.
190.	The United States has also worked with the capital surplus members of OPEC on both a bilateral and a multilateral basis. We have been able to combine resources to attack development problems of common interest, such as food production. This cooperation should be continued and expanded.
191.	Finally, we plan to make bilateral consultative groups between our Government and those of developing countries more effective and to give full support to similar private sector arrangements. The United States Chamber of Commerce and its counterparts in many developing countries have developed particularly good relationships. We fully support these efforts and those of the private voluntary agencies. We are searching for means to work more closely with them.
192.	In all of these cases the United States recognizes the need to be sensitive to the diverse character of the societies involved and to the international circumstances in which development must occur.
193.	Fourthly, growth for development is best achieved through reliance on incentives for individual economic performance. The individual is the beginning, the key element and the ultimate beneficiary of the development process. The greatest potential for development lies in the hard work and ingenuity of the farmer, the worker and the entrepreneur. They need incentives to produce and the opportunity to benefit from their labors.
194.	Suppression of economic incentives ultimately suppresses enthusiasm and invention, and the denial of personal freedom can be as great an obstacle to productivity as the denial of reward for achievement.
195.	History cautions against regimes that regiment their people in the name of ideals, yet fail to achieve either economic or social progress. Those Governments that have been more solicitous of the liberties of their people have also been more successful in securing both freedom and prosperity.
196.	The United States can offer what it knows best from its own experience. We have seen that policies which encourage private initiatives will promote better resource allocation and more rapid economic growth. Within a framework basically hospitable to market incentives, foreign private investment can supplement indigenous investment and contribute significantly to development.
197.	But our goal is not to impose either our economic values or our judgments on anyone. In the final analysis, each country's path to development will be shaped by its own history, philosophy and interests.
198.	Fifthly, development requires a certain measure of security and political stability. Political insecurity is a major barrier to development. Fear and uncertainty stifle the productivity of the individual. Scarce resources are squandered in conflict.
199.	The close relationship between security and development cannot be ignored. We are therefore committed to maintain and, where possible, to increase programs essential to deter international aggression and to provide the domestic security necessary to carry out sound economic programs. We have no intention of providing foreign assistance, moral comfort or the prestige of international platforms to countries that foster international violence.
200.	The United Nations has a key role to play in resolving conflict and promoting international stability. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral's efforts to promote inter communal talks and a just settlement on Cyprus. We support a continuing role by the SecretaryGeneral's representative in the IranIraq conflict And South Korea's attempts to initiate a dialog with the North epitomize the search for a peaceful settlement that is at the heart of the Charter.
201.	One of the greatest dangers to the Charter today and to development itself is the willful violation of the national integrity of both Afghanistan and Cambodia by the Soviet Union and Viet Nam. Their behavior challenges the basic rights of all sovereign States. The world's hopes for peace, for security and for development will be jeopardized if "might makes right" becomes the law of nations.
202.	The United States will continue to support security and stability as essential to progress. This is the basis of our active and continuing efforts to strengthen and expand the ceasefire in southern Lebanon. We shall also assist the negotiations specified by Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) in order to bring a just and lasting peace to the Middle East. Our policy is to remain a credible and reliable party in the negotiations to bring independence to Namibia on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and in a fashion acceptable to both the nations concerned and the international community.
203.	The United States also believes that efforts to control arms either among regional States or between superPowers can make an important contribution to the security that facilitates development. But these efforts do not occur in a vacuum. The international community has tended over the years to overestimate the beneficial effects of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks [SALT] in dampening regional conflict. We have also tended to underestimate the impact of such conflict on the negotiations themselves.
204.	The United States is strongly committed to balanced and verifiable arms control. We are equally committed to the peaceful resolution of regional disputes. Clearly the restraint implied by arms control must become a more widespread phenomenon if such agreements are to survive and to make their proper contribution to a more secure environment for development.
205.	The United States is confident that a strategy for growth guided by these principles can succeed. We believe that three areas of action deserve immediate international attention.
206.	The first is a global expansion of trade. Plans could be formulated for the 1982 GATT ministerial meeting with special concerns of growth in mind. A major priority should be to integrate more fully the developing countries into the international trading system on the basis
of shared responsibilities and shared benefits.
207.	The second area is an increase in investment. Our common objective should be to stimulate domestic and international private investment. We must encourage and support the individual investor.
208.	The third is stronger international cooperation in food and in energy. The recent United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy recommended that the developing countries be assisted in assessing their energy resources and determining the best way to exploit them.3 The United Nations Development program and the World Bank have important follow-up responsibilities. We must all work to engage more effectively private participation in exploration and production in oil importing developing nations.
209.	Domestic and international action must also go hand in hand to achieve food security. The United States continues to be the largest donor of food aid and places a paramount emphasis on its bilateral program to help developing countries increase food production. Greater attention should also be given to scientific and technological research that will yield more bountiful food supplies.
210.	I have outlined today the broad principles that guide America's approach to a new strategy for growth. In the immediate future, and prior to the Cancun meeting, we will announce specific proposals to deal with this and other issues of development.
211.	These broad principles reflect our view that the United States can and indeed will continue to make an essential contribution to the process of development. We do not claim to have all the answers, but we believe that our collective responsibilities for the future allow no more time to be lost in sterile debate and unrealistic demands. The time has come for a reasoned dialog with promise for the future,
212.	The search for economic progress, social justice and human dignity has been supported by the American people, themselves an example of successful development. Our initiatives and resources, through bilateral programs, the United Nations and other multilateral agencies, have made major contributions to the process of modernization throughout the world. For the United States, support of development constitutes a practical imperative.
213.	At the Ottawa meeting the United States reaffirmed its willingness to join its partners in exploring all avenues of consultation and cooperation with developing countries. In October President Reagan will go to the meeting in Cancun. He looks forward to a genuine and open exchange of views on questions of economic development and international cooperation. That meeting offers a novel opportunity to gain fresh understandings of the problems we face together. The United States will join in a constructive and cooperative spirit. Our objective is to bring about a new era of growth. But the purpose of both growth and development goes beyond simple materialism. As Winston Churchill said: "Human beings and human societies are not structures that are built, or machines that are forged. They are plants that grow and must be treated as such".
214.	Despite the difficulties of the moment, we should go forward in a spirit of optimism. We have the vision bequeathed to us by this Charter. We have the potential of all the peoples represented in this Hall. Let us go forward together to achieve a new era of growth for all mankind.
